S/PV.8517

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8517th meeting

Monday, 29 April 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heusgen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Djani
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-12254 (E)
*1912254*

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Expression of sympathy in connection with and
condemnation of the attacks in Burkina Faso
and California
The President: On behalf of the members of
the Security Council, I should like to express our
condemnation of yesterday’s attack on a Protestant
church in Silgadji, Burkina Faso, and of the shooting
that occurred at the Chabad of Poway synagogue in San
Diego, in the United States of America, on Saturday.
I ask those present to now rise and observe a minute
of silence in solemn commemoration of those who lost
their lives in the attacks on their places of worship.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bahrain, Bangladesh, Botswana,
Brazil, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, Hungary, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Japan, Jordan,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco,
Namibia, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, the United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs; Ms. Nada Majdalani,
Co-Director of EcoPeace Middle East; and Mr. Gidon
Bromberg, Co-Director of EcoPeace Middle East.
2/64

29/04/2019

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting:
His Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz,
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to
the United Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Cheikh
Niang, Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: I would like to express condolences
for the attacks at the synagogue in San Diego and at the
church in Silgadji, Burkina Faso, as well as previous
attacks on religious sites in New Zealand and Sri
Lanka. Our sympathy is with the families of the victims
and the Governments in question. The United Nations
condemns terrorism in all its manifestations.
I should also like to pay tribute, on behalf of the
entire United Nations family, to Major General Francis
Vib-Sanziri, the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) Head of Mission and Force
Commander, who passed away suddenly on 19 April. His
leadership, dedication and enthusiasm were invaluable
in commanding UNDOF under difficult circumstances.
He will be remembered for his exemplary career in the
service of United Nations peacekeeping.
We meet today as the United Nations continues to
advance efforts to address the continued humanitarian,
economic and political crisis in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Yet the continuing absence of a
political solution to the broader conflict undermines
and compounds our efforts. Under the pressure of
violence, settlement expansion, unilateral measures,
intra-Palestinian divisions and deepening mutual
mistrust, the prospects for a just and lasting peace
remains ever more elusive.
Hopes for the realization of a two-State solution
continue to be replaced by the rising fears of future
annexation. The possibility of establishing a viable
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and contiguous Palestinian State continues to be
eroded by facts on the ground. The United Nations has
repeatedly warned that the conflict cannot be managed
in perpetuity. The status quo will lead only to further
deterioration of the situation, radicalization on all sides,
more suffering and conflict.
Before addressing recent developments on the
ground, I would like to congratulate Palestinian Prime
Minister Shtayyeh on the formation of a new Palestinian
Government. I wish him every success and urge all
Palestinian factions and political leaders to work
together, in good faith, to unify Gaza and the West Bank
under a single, legitimate Palestinian Government.
I also want to congratulate the Israeli people on their
democratic general election on 9 April. On 17 April,
President Rivlin asked Prime Minister Netanyahu to
form a new Government. We stand ready to continue
working with the new government when it is formed.
The prolonged absence of a political solution to
the conflict has coincided with the steady deterioration
of the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory.
During the reporting period, Israeli authorities advanced
at least 2,100 housing units in Area C settlements and
issued tenders for some 950 additional units. One of
the plans advanced would retroactively regularize,
under Israeli law, the illegal outpost of Haresha by
incorporating it into the existing Talmon settlement.
Settlements have no legal effect and constitute a
violation of international law.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures also continued across the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. Israeli authorities demolished
or seized 37 structures, displacing 49 people, mostly
on the grounds that they lacked Israeli-issued building
permits, which are nearly impossible for Palestinians
to obtain. In addition, on 31 March, the Israeli District
Court rejected three appeals challenging demolition
orders submitted by Palestinian residents of the Silwan
neighbourhood of East Jerusalem.
The situation at Jerusalem’s holy sites has remained
relatively calm in the past month. I would like to take
the opportunity of the overlapping holidays of Judaism,
Christianity and Islam to wish peace and prosperity
for the peoples of Palestine and Israel, but also to urge
sustained calm, particularly in the holy sites, which
can be achieved only by respecting the status quo and
relevant agreements.

S/PV. 8517

Regrettably, elsewhere the cycle of violence
continues. On 30 March, Palestinians in Gaza marked
the first anniversary of the Great March of Return
protests, which was commemorated by 50,000
Palestinians demonstrating at the perimeter fence.
While the vast majority of the protesters remained
peaceful, a small number ignored the calls for restraint
and engaged in acts of violence against Israel and
attempted to breach the fence. During the reporting
period, seven Palestinians, including four children,
were killed in Gaza by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
and 1,316 were injured. I reiterate the previous calls by
the United Nations that children should never be the
target of violence, nor should they be put at risk of
violence or encouraged to participate in violence. I also
reiterate the call on Israel that lethal force should be
used only in response to an imminent threat of death or
serious injury and as a last resort.
During the reporting period. Palestinian militants
fired 30 rockets and mortars from Gaza towards Israel.
The indiscriminate launching of rockets and mortars
towards Israeli civilian populations is prohibited by
international humanitarian law and must immediately
cease. Several incendiary balloons were also launched
from Gaza into southern Israel. These must stop. Hamas
must also ensure that protests remain peaceful and
prevent provocations near the fence, including attempts
to breach it.
Meanwhile, in the West Bank, three Palestinians
were shot and killed by Israeli forces, and 63 were
injured, including 18 children. On 27 March, a 17year old Palestinian paramedic was shot by the Israeli
security forces near Al-Duheisha refugee camp in
Bethlehem, and later died of his wounds. The shooting
occurred during clashes following two arrest operations
undertaken by the Israeli security forces in the camp
earlier that day.
Settler-related violence also continued during
the reporting period. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), one
Palestinian was killed and 19 were injured or had
their property damaged by others. On 3 April, two
Israeli civilians opened fire in Nablus, injuring two
Palestinians, including a 23-year-old man who died
later in hospital. On 24 April, following the arrest,
tying and blindfolding of a 15-year-old Palestinian boy
for allegations of stone-throwing, IDF soldiers shot him
twice in his lower body as he attempted to escape while
still blindfolded. The IDF said that it was responding to

19-122543/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

massive stone-throwing and that one of the the rioters
was shot as he tried to flee after being arrested.
In the same period, OCHA recorded 14 Palestinian
attacks against Israeli settlers and other Israeli civilians
in the West Bank, where Palestinians threw stones at
vehicles traveling on roads near Bethlehem, Hebron
and Ramallah. One injury and damage to 13 vehicles
were reported.
The reporting period also saw a worsening
Palestinian financial crisis. Despite the austerity
measures announced and the recent pledges of support
by Arab States, the risk of a financial collapse of
the Palestinian Authority is growing. A sustainable
resolution of the Palestinian Authority’s funding crisis
is urgently required. Both parties should address the
causes of the crisis through dialogue, implement
their bilateral agreements and avoid taking unilateral
actions that undermine stability and security for both
Palestinians and Israelis alike. I urge the members of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC) to use
its meeting tomorrow in Brussels to work with Israel and
the Palestinian Authority to resolve this crisis, which
threatens the viability of the Palestinian Authority.
I would like to turn to the ongoing humanitarian
and economic crisis in Gaza and begin by highlighting
the plight of women. Seventy per cent of all women in
Gaza today are unemployed. As a result, female-headed
households are more likely to face poverty and food
insecurity. Moreover, we know that poverty and lack of
economic opportunities are key drivers behind violence
against women in Gaza. The United Nations continues
to provide assistance to Palestinian women and girls
across a broad range of areas, but much more needs to
be done to ensure that their needs are addressed.
The United Nations is also making important
progress on the implementation of a package of urgent
humanitarian and economic interventions in order to
stabilize the situation in Gaza, prevent an escalation,
lift the closures and support Egyptian-led reconciliation
efforts. Over the past year, nearly $110 million for fuel,
health, water, sanitation and temporary employment
programmes have been raised. The United Nations
and its partners have mobilized nearly $45 million that
will allow for the creation of approximately 20,000
temporary jobs in 2019. Since September, approximately
$4.6 million in support of the humanitarian response
plan have contributed to the delivery of essential
4/64

29/04/2019

drugs and the performance of some 9,500 emergency
surgeries. I also welcome Qatar’s extension of funding
for the United Nations to procure and deliver fuel to the
Gaza power plant until June.
In a positive development, on 1 April, Israel
extended some areas of the Gaza fishing zone up to 15
nautical miles. I welcome this decision and strongly
urge that the rest of the fishing zone, which remains
limited to 6 to 12 nautical miles, also be expanded.
As we have repeatedly stated, at its core the
crisis in Gaza is political. Significant progress on the
lifting of the closures and advancing intra-Palestinian
reconciliation remains essential. I reiterate my call on
all Palestinian factions to engage in earnest with Egypt
on reconciliation efforts. I also take this opportunity
to thank Member States that have supported the
implementation of the AHLC projects to date and urge
others to contribute to this important effort, including
through critical financial support to the Programme
Management Unit, as well as for the humanitarian
response plan.
Turning to the situation in the region, Lebanon
remains stable, with the continued commitment of
political actors to dialogue leading to Parliamentary
approval of its long-awaited plan to reform the
electricity sector. Discussions continue on the 2019
budget as proposed public sector pay cuts spark protests.
Significantly, Minister of Defence Elias Bou Saab and
Lebanese Armed Forces Commander General Joseph
Aoun visited the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) and southern Lebanon on 24 April,
with Minister Bou Saab stating that the Lebanese
Armed Forces would increase troop deployment in
southern Lebanon.
The situation in southern Lebanon and along
the Blue Line remained calm. On 2 April, UNIFIL
chaired a regular tripartite meeting attended by senior
delegations from the Lebanese Armed Forces and the
Israel Defense Forces. On 17 April, a UNIFIL team
of technical experts assessed the tunnel located south
of the Blue Line near the Israeli town of Zarit, the
discovery of which had been announced by the IDF on
13 January. UNIFIL concluded that the tunnel crossed
the Blue Line and thereby constituted a violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). The following day, the UNIFIL
Force Commander informed the Commander of the
Lebanese Armed Forces and Minister of Defence
Bou Saab of UNIFIL’s findings and requested urgent
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

follow-up. UNIFIL has now confirmed the existence of
five tunnels, three of which it has confirmed cross the
Blue Line and constitute a violation of resolution 1701
(2006).
Turning to the Golan, on 25 March United States
President Donald Trump signed an official proclamation
recognizing Israel’s sovereignty over the occupied
Syrian Golan. As previously noted by the SecretaryGeneral, the United Nations position on the Golan
is clear. It is reflected in the relevant United Nations
resolutions, notably, resolutions 242 (1967) and 497
(1981).
The ceasefire between Israel and Syria has
been maintained, with relative calm and low levels
of military activity in the areas of separation and
limitation on the Bravo side. The United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) continued to
observe and hear a relatively low level of small-arms
firing in the areas of separation and limitation on the
Bravo side. UNDOF assessed that the firing was due to
training activities conducted by Syrian security forces.
UNDOF also continued to observe the presence of
Syrian Arab Armed Forces in different locations in the
area of separation, including in the vicinity of United
Nations positions.
Yesterday, assisted by the International Committee
of the Red Cross, UNDOF facilitated the transfer of
two Syrian men who had been detained in Israel for a
number of years. Also, the remains of an IDF soldier
missing since 1982 were repatriated from Syria to Israel
after being located with the assistance of Russian forces.
With regard to the conflict in Syria, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen,
continues his efforts to find a negotiated political
solution. He is working with all sides and making
steady progress on launching a credible, balanced and
inclusive constitutional committee as a door-opener
to a wider political process that encompasses the full
implementation of all elements of resolution 2254 (2015).
He will brief the Council on those efforts tomorrow.
As we mobilize to address the critical needs of
the Palestinian population, be it in Gaza or the West
Bank, we shall not lose sight of the core political
issue, namely, the prospect of two peaceful and secure
States living side by side in harmony. That imperative
compels us all to work with the parties, bring them
back to the negotiation table and urge them to avoid
unilateral actions that undermine the prospects for

S/PV. 8517

peace. We should also work with both sides to establish
an environment conducive to a return to meaningful
discussions. However, only determined action by the
parties themselves can salvage the two-State solution.
Otherwise, Palestinians and Israelis will continue to
live their lives knowing only conflict, mistrust and
fear, rather than the infinite possibilities that would
come with a just and lasting peace.
Finally, I would like to thank EcoPeace Middle
East for joining us for today’s debate. Its commendable
efforts to promote Israeli-Palestinian-Jordanian
collaboration around shared environmental challenges
are exemplary. I welcome the ongoing commitment
by Member States to generously support and bring
attention to such initiatives.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Majdalani.
Ms. Majdalani: On a hot summer day in 2017,
the family of a 5-year-old boy, Mohammad, decided to
escape the harsh realities of Gaza by going to the beach.
His parents did not realize that the nearby stream
flowing into the sea was full of raw sewage. Later that
evening all of Mohammed’s family fell terribly ill;
within 10 days Mohammad was dead. A virus attacked
his brain after he swam in polluted waters.
As we speak today, 97 per cent of the Gaza’s
groundwater is not suitable for human consumption,
and 30 per cent of illnesses in Gaza are from waterborne
pathogens. With an average of four hours of daily
power supply, wastewater facilities fail to operate,
daily emptying the equivalent of 34 olympic-sized
swimming pools of raw sewage into the Mediterranean
Sea. After more than 12 years of blockade, consecutive
wars and loss of life, including children, and the failure
of internal Palestinian reconciliation, a humanitarian
catastrophe in the Gaza Strip is happening right now,
right before our eyes.
Rather than be negligent, Gidon and I are here
before the Security Council, together with Yana, the
Jordanian Director of EcoPeace Middle East, as part
of a dedicated team that refuses to allow our children
and our environment to remain hostage to the conflict.
We are here to impress upon members that water and
climate security issues are critical for a better future for
all the people in our region. While politicians can speak
of a disengagement policy, the fact is that we cannot
disengage from our shared environment. EcoPeace

19-122545/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

revealed to the public that the Ashkelon desalination
plant, which provides 15 per cent of the drinking water
in Israel, has been intermittently closed due to the
pollution carried by the currents from Gaza beaches
towards the north. That is a big lesson to us all: water
and the environment know no borders or boundaries.
The demise of the Jordan River is another example
of the environmental cost we pay for the broader ArabIsraeli conflict. Amin, the father of an EcoPeace activist,
lived his childhood on the banks of the Jordan River. He
remembers its waters as being clear and fast-flowing.
His family used to fish and pump water from the river
to irrigate their fields. Following the occupation of the
West Bank, in 1967, Amin and his family lost access
to the river’s banks and to their rightful share of its
waters. Amin visited the Baptism Site with EcoPeace
more than 50 years later, and he was in total shock. The
mighty river he recalled had become a trickle.
Like other refugees and residents, when Amin and
his family look at the Jordan Valley they see a complex
political reality that works against even their basic
needs. Restricted access to water, the confiscation of
land for the expansion of illegal settlements and talk of
a looming annexation of Area C makes them even more
determined not to give up on a better future.
For the very reasons I have just mentioned,
EcoPeace has designed an integrated master plan for
the Jordan Valley, which could turn around a valley of
poverty and despair into one of shared prosperity for
all communities from the Sea of Galilee to the Dead
Sea, based on principles of sustainable development
and equal opportunities and in the framework of the
two-State solution along the 1967 borders.
EcoPeace has advocated that solving water issues
cannot wait. We argue that water issues and obtaining
Palestinian water rights can no longer be delayed owing
to a failure to agree on all other final-status issues. The
terms and mechanisms set out in the Oslo Accords on
transboundary water and wastewater management are
today failing Palestinian, and even Israeli, sustainable
development needs.
The impacts of climate change over the past decade
have further brought to the fore the importance of our
argument and the urgency for policy change. The past
20 years have witnessed recurring drought, the deepest
droughts in our recorded history. They have contributed
to wider cross-border implications on increased water
scarcity, political instability and increased refugee and
6/64

29/04/2019

humanitarian crises in our region. If no immediate
action is taken against the Gaza crisis today, the
international community should be ready for more
refugee boats.
As a civil society organization, during our
latest conference we were able to convene senior
representatives from our three Governments, who all
agreed that climate change presents itself as a threat
multiplier in relation to our water security. While most
of the world is fearful of a 2°C increase in average
temperatures, the Middle East is concerned about a
4°C increase.
Building on the examples I have presented, we come
here with a powerful message to our own Governments
and to the members of the Security Council. We
together face a common threat due to conflict and
climate-induced water scarcity. Climate change does
not differentiate between the stronger and weaker side
of the conflict. Action is needed today. A reassessment
of assumptions, a rejection of unilateralism and an
effort to advance cross-border water cooperation is
needed as a matter of national and regional stability
and security.
The President: I thank Ms. Majdalani for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bromberg.
Mr. Bromberg: In my 25 years with EcoPeace
Middle East, my most memorable activity was to jump
into the Jordan River, together with Israeli, Palestinian
and Jordanian mayors. Together we made a big splash
but, like today, we also made an important statement.
To get the mayors to literally jump into the river, it took
us five years of planning. We developed an education
programme called “Good Water Neighbours” — please
remember that — that worked in schools on all sides
of the Jordan River, educating young kids about their
water reality and that of their neighbours. They saw
a river with little flow and full of pollution, and, for
the first time, they began to understand the impact of
conflict on water. Quite innocently, those kids and their
parents started to ask their mayors “Why is the Jordan
River so polluted, and what must we do with the other
side to clean up the river?” Empowered by the youth
and their parents to take action for the benefit of their
communities, the mayors jumped into the river together
not as best friends, but as leaders, advocating to national
Governments on all sides that only a rehabilitated river
would bring economic opportunities to their residents.
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Twentieth-century assumptions that dictated water
diplomacy led us down a path of conflict and competition
over water. We were indeed wholly dependent on
natural water during the past century, and therefore
each side fought over every drop. That was the mindset
that led to the demise of the Jordan River and the drastic
reduction in size of the Dead Sea. That was the mindset
of how water was negotiated in the Oslo Accords in the
mid 1990s. Water was left unresolved as a final-status
issue because coming to an agreement over sharing
scarce natural water was difficult and would produce
winners and losers. But today the advancements in
water technologies this century, much of which is led
by Israeli innovation, present real opportunities. The
utilization of treated waste water for agriculture and
the development of desalination technology means that
water is under less constraints as a resource.
Today 70 per cent of the drinking water in Israel
comes from desalination, and half of the agriculture
grown is grown with treated wastewater. The
availability of large quantities of manufactured water,
complimenting natural water, makes the fair share of
natural water between Israelis and Palestinians attainable
now. Because of climate change, Mediterranean
desalinated water will be pumped by Israel into the Sea
of Galilee to guarantee water quality for the lake and
fresh water supplies to Jordan, and could be part of the
rehabilitation of the Jordan River — a river holy to half
of humankind. Based on Government policies, on the
one hand, of increased desalination and, on the other,
community-led advocacy for the river, for the first time
in 50 years some fresh water flows again out of the Sea
of Galilee into the Jordan River.
In just the past five years, technological advances
in solar power is allowing our region to harness the
sun. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has been the
regional leader in that regard, investing in large-scale
solar energy, owing to its vast desert landscapes. The
combination of manufactured water coming from
the Israeli and Palestinian coast and sold to Jordan,
powered by solar electricity produced in Jordan and
sold to Israel and Palestine, is a potential geopolitical
game changer. Such an exchange can guarantee
water and energy security for all, responds to climate
insecurity and creates healthy interdependencies
between our economies and societies. Last year, with
German funding, EcoPeace led a regional delegation
of decision makers and business leaders to Europe to
advance the project. Thanks to Swedish funding, a pilot

S/PV. 8517

solar project is in the planning stages in Jordan today to
sell green electricity for the first time across the border.
Moving from competition to cooperation over
critical natural resources as a means to help create
political stability is not a new idea. The post-Second
World War coal and steel agreement of continental
Europe, led by former enemies France and Germany,
laid the foundation for stability in Europe. Harnessing
the sea and the sun shared by Israelis, Palestinians and
Jordanians can be our engine for achieving peace and
stability. Nada Majdalani, Yana Abu Taleb, myself
and all of our staff in Amman, Ramallah and Tel Aviv
carry with us the voices of young students, residents
and mayors. Together we have educated ourselves and
the communities in which we work. We have done the
research, and we have shown leadership.
We have partners for peace on all sides. Our 25
years of partnership tell us that good water, and not
necessarily good fences, make good neighbours. In
the spirit of Passover, Easter and the forthcoming
celebration of Ramadan, let us set water free to give
life and hope to our region.
We call on the Security Council to urge
our three Governments — Israel, Palestine and
Jordan — to advance cooperation together on water
and the environment, including the rehabilitation of the
Jordan River and the Dead Sea, meeting Palestinian
water rights and needs, and implement a water-energy
exchange for our shared future in the face of climate
change, all in the context of a two-State solution.
We call on the Security Council to invite all the
relevant United Nations agencies and international
organizations, including the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians, to help facilitate the implementation of
those objectives.
The President: I thank Mr. Bromberg for
his briefing.
I would like to recognize the third member from
the EcoPeace Middle East here today, Ms. Yana Abu
Taleb from Jordan.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank the German
and French presidencies of the Security Council for
their skilful joint leadership over the past two months.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General for Political

19-122547/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and Peacebuilding Affairs Rosemary DiCarlo for her
briefing and able guidance of the Department. We also
recognize the ongoing efforts of Special Coordinator
Nikolay Mladenov and his team, as well as the vital
role and support of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and the efforts of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF, the
United Nations Development Programme and all United
Nations agencies on the ground at this critical time.
I associate myself, Mr. President, with the comments
that you and Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo made in
connection with the loss of lives resulting from attacks
on houses of worship, including those in Burkina Faso.
I also want to thank Ms. DiCarlo for the
congratulations she conveyed to Prime Minister
Shtayyeh on the formation of our new Government. I
also welcome Ms. Majdalani, Mr. Bromberg and their
friend, Ms. Taleb, and thank them for being with us and
their briefings.
We meet at a moment of great uncertainty and
volatility. The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, is rapidly
deteriorating, despair is increasing and the horizon for
peace is being nullified by an occupying Power that
insists upon imposing its illegal agenda at any cost. The
outlook has become even grimmer following Israeli
elections that have further entrenched the extreme right
to rule Israel as a racist apartheid State under Prime
Minister Netanyahu. The absolute support given to
Israel by a permanent member of the Security Council
has only emboldened its flouting of the law, further
fuelling its human rights violations against our people
and the colonization of our land.
Aided and abetted in its crimes, Israel’s expansionist
appetite is growing. Members have only to listen to its
recent cynical statements on the intention to annex the
Israeli settlements illegally constructed in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
demonstrating a blatant dismissal of Palestinian rights.
Such inflammatory rhetoric, let alone the countless
war crimes being carried out every single day in broad
daylight, is shamelessly bragged about by the Prime
Minister and other Israeli officials, in total contempt of
the Council’s authority and the international community
at large.
We have heard the condemnation from around
the world of those provocative statements, incitement
8/64

29/04/2019

and illegal actions. The rejection has been resounding.
We have also heard repeated calls for a halt to Israel’s
illegal and destructive policies and compliance with its
legal obligations. We are grateful for those principled
positions and the solidarity extended to our people
and their just cause. However, condemnations alone
will not suffice; such calls, whether gentle or firm,
will not be heeded by Israel, which continues to
trample international law and make a mockery of the
international system. By now it should be obvious:
appealing to and appeasing Israel have never worked.
Without accountability, how can anyone expect
anything other than the unbridled impunity we have
witnessed for decades and even worse? It is time
to turn words into deeds and solidarity into action.
Serious measures must be urgently taken by the
international community to hold Israel, the occupying
Power, accountable. There must be consequences for
violations; that is the only way to stop the unravelling
of the peace process and reverse course in order to
salvage the possibility of a peaceful and just solution
and spare the Palestinian and Israeli peoples decades
more of confrontation, conflict, suffering and loss.
That is neither a radical call nor a threat. Taking
action is a duty, based on the rules, principles and
demands enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and United Nations resolutions. It is
a responsibility that is consistent with long-standing
international consensus and commitments — repeatedly
made, yet unfulfilled.
The Palestinian people have not suffered for
decades and waited nearly a century for their
freedom — since they were first recognized as ready
for independence — only to resign themselves to
limited autonomy. Those who believe so ignore history,
international law and the resolve of a people to attain
justice and equality. Let me also remind those present
that the Palestinian leadership’s acceptance of a State
of Palestine on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, was a historic and painful compromise,
and not one that should be dismissed or ridiculed by
newcomers to peacemaking.
The Palestinian right to self-determination has
long been recognized and supported globally. The
International Court of Justice has affirmed it to be
a right erga omnes. The Palestinian people hold
steadfast to their legitimate national aspirations for
independence, the right of return and the realization of
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

their full civil, political, economic, social and cultural
rights, as well as their inalienable human rights, and
they will not surrender to a lesser fate.
International consensus in that regard is strong,
just as it is strong for a two-State solution on the 1967
borders as the foundation of a peaceful solution that is
based on international law; the relevant United Nations
resolutions; the Madrid terms of reference, including
the principle of land for peace; the Arab Peace
Initiative; and the Quartet road map. That position
was unequivocally reaffirmed by the Security Council
in resolution 2334 (2016) and remains the core of the
international community’s position, as reflected in the
past weeks, months and years.
Occupation, annexation and human rights violations
can never be accepted as just and moral and can never
be accepted as the new normal, irrespective of spin,
rhetoric or pretext. The wanton killing, injury and
terrorization of Palestinian children, women and men
by Israeli occupying forces and extremist Israeli settlers
and the detention and imprisonment of thousands of
Palestinian civilians, including children, constitute
gross violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights law that amount to grave breaches.
Israel’s 12-year blockade of the Gaza Strip is illegal.
Isolating and imprisoning 2 million people is mass
collective punishment tantamount to a war crime, as
well as the main source of the disastrous humanitarian
crisis and despair in the Gaza Strip, as expressed in
the protests of the Great March of Return. Israel’s socalled withholding of Palestinian tax revenues is blatant
theft that violates bilateral agreements and the Fourth
Geneva Convention, which prohibits the pillaging of
the resources of occupied peoples.
Israel’s colonization of the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, is illegal. Whether
settlements or walls, home demolitions or evictions,
forced transfers, threats to the historic status quo of
Jerusalem’s holy sites or any annexation measures — all
such measures are unlawful, amount to war crimes
and cannot be justified under any pretext, including
on the basis of security claims, biblical edicts or socalled legislation by the occupying Power. All those
illegal policies and practices must end. They will never
be accepted as legitimate, will always be rejected and
resisted and will never lead to peace and security.
An occupation that has existed and entrenched
itself for 52 years through such violations cannot be

S/PV. 8517

considered legal under international law. It is an illegal
occupation, and Israel is an illegal occupant. The
international community must stop normalizing that
occupation and treating it with any deference. It is in
every way illegal and must be brought to an end.
It is strange that, when it comes to Palestine,
calls for action to uphold the law — whether to stop
the colonization, provide protection to the occupied
people or even do something as simple as ban illegal
settlement products — are viewed as delusional rather
than as legitimate tools to remedy injustice. That
flawed approach has to change. After almost three
decades of negotiations and appealing to the occupying
Power — from the Madrid Peace Conference and the
Oslo process to the Quartet efforts, the Annapolis
Conference, the Paris Conference and every other
attempt in between — Israel’s violations, violence
and intransigence have only become more flagrant.
Only accountability can create the necessary pressure
to break that toxic cycle in order to finally end the
occupation and establish the rights of the Palestinian
people — the cornerstone for a peaceful and secure
Middle East.
The Security Council has been patently clear in that
regard. It was explicit in resolution 2334 (2016) in its
determination not to recognize any changes to the 1967
borders, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than
those agreed to by the parties through negotiations,
and it directly called on States to differentiate, in their
relevant dealings, between Israel and the territories
it has occupied since 1967. That is an obligation. I
repeat — the differentiation is an obligation.
To Member States contemplating establishing
missions in Israel, whether diplomatic, cultural or
for trade, and to representatives of Member States
undertaking official visits to Israel, that obligation,
in accordance with resolution 478 (1980), includes
Jerusalem. There are no exceptions. Decisions
and declarations signed by others that depart from
international law and United Nations resolutions cannot
change facts and cannot legitimize what is illegitimate.
The Security Council, in resolution 478 (1980),
unequivocally deemed Israel’s annexation of occupied
East Jerusalem to be unlawful, null and void and
without legal effect. Likewise, in resolution 497 (1981),
it deemed Israel’s annexation of the occupied Syrian
Golan to be unlawful, null and void and without legal
effect. The same applies to any annexation measures

19-122549/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

planned or imposed by Israel over any part of the
territories it has occupied since 1967.
The prohibition of the acquisition of territory by
force stands. Recognition of such annexations by any
country, no matter how large and powerful, is without
legal effect. We therefore reiterate our condemnation
and complete rejection of recent decisions by the United
States, taken in violation of the Charter and Security
Council resolutions and with zero regard for the
inalienable rights and fate of millions of Palestinians.
Similarly, as speculation abounds about the pending
American so-called peace plan, we reiterate that any
initiative detached from international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions and dismissive of
human rights can be neither viable nor just, and will
not succeed.
International law is abiding, and Security Council
resolutions are valid and binding until implemented.
Moreover, States have a responsibility not to recognize
as lawful a situation created by breach of the law,
and a State assisting another State in the commission
of internationally wrongful acts incurs liability. That
is not our personal narrative; those are established
international rules and norms that must be upheld.
Despite the bleak picture, we have not given
up hope. Some may say we are living in denial; we
are not. We recognize the enormity of the crisis
we face — existential, in fact — but we have not
abandoned our belief that international law will lead us
to justice. On the contrary, despite deep worries about
the weakening of the rules-based order and its ability
to withstand current challenges, we are reassured of
its strength and longevity by the firm statements from
across the international community denouncing Israel’s
attempts to annex occupied East Jerusalem and the
occupied Syrian Golan and affirming that positions in
this regard remain unchanged.
We see that strength and longevity also in the firm
commitment to the Arab Peace Initiative, affirmed
again at the Arab Summit in Tunisia last month, as
well as in the strong positions repeatedly reaffirmed
by the European Union, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), the Non-Aligned Movement and
countless capitals around the world. We see it in the
ongoing efforts of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians and in the generous support of donors,
regionally and internationally, who have long assisted
10/64

29/04/2019

in building and strengthening the institutions of
the State of Palestine. We see it in the international
community’s strong support for UNRWA’s mandate,
pending a just solution for the Palestine refugees and in
the response to the Agency’s funding crisis, including
the OIC’s establishment of a waqf for the refugees. We
see it in the resolute efforts of Jordan as custodian of the
Muslim and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem. We see
it in the efforts of Egypt and Russia to help us heal our
painful division and restore Palestinian unity. And we
see it in every principled vote at the United Nations in
support of right and justice, despite immense pressure
and threats.
Of course, as stressed at the outset, more than
words are needed. Business as usual cannot continue.
It is time to act; we cannot continue to decry the threats
to multilateralism and our international system without
seriously acting to protect, restore and revive them
based on our shared values, humanity and future. Only
then can we overcome the challenges and rectify our
course. That is a matter of urgency for Palestine, but
also for the international community, which must seize
the opportunity now.
On our part, we are ready to do so. We remain
committed to a peaceful, political, legal, non-violent
path for realizing our rights and bringing an end to the
conflict, and President Abbas has once again extended
his hand in peace. Prime Minister Shtayyeh, newly at
the helm of the Government of the State of Palestine, has
committed to working with all partners to address the
humanitarian, socioeconomic, security and protection
crises affecting the Palestinian people, despite severe
austerity measures imposed following Israel’s theft
of our revenues. We are coordinating closely with our
regional partners, as reflected in the recent League of
Arab States ministerial meeting in Cairo, to address the
challenges we face.
No one can accuse us of not wanting peace or of
not seeking the best interests of our people. Our only
condition is that any effort or initiative must be based on
international legality and the parameters enshrined over
decades in the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions. That is a minimal ask and should
be respected, not disregarded, by those who seek to lead
peacemaking efforts. We appeal to the international
community to rise now to its responsibilities before it
is too late.
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I thank you, Mr. President, and Council members
for your attention and urge you to act.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): I thank Ms. DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs. I also thank the representatives of EcoPeace
Middle East for their statements.
We come together at a painful time for the Jewish
people. On Saturday, as Jews everywhere were
concluding the holiday of Passover, a gunman ran into
the Chabad of Poway, California, and opened fire. Over
100 people in the middle of prayer were forced to duck
for cover as bullets flew across the room. Lori Kaye
was shot and killed as she jumped into the line of fire to
protect Rabbi Yisroel Goldstein, who had founded the
synagogue and sustained injuries. Despite having been
shot, Rabbi Goldstein continued his sermon. Thirtyfour-year-old Almog Peretz and eight-year old Noya
Dahan were also shot and injured. That is the second
synagogue shooting in six months. It is unacceptable
that we live in a time in which worshippers must be on
guard or look behind their backs while praying, out of
fear of being shot. We pray for Chabad of Poway and
stand with the families affected during this painful time.
When we last gathered in the Chamber under
this agenda item (see S/PV.8449), the President of
the Council, the Ambassador of Germany, asked me
to explain how Israel implements international law,
specifically with regard to the Jewish communities of
Judea and Samaria. Today, I will provide the answers.
But before we discuss international law, we must
understand the context and facts. Today, I will present
to the Council the four pillars that prove the case for
Jewish ownership of the land of Israel.
The first pillar is the Bible. The Jewish people’s
rightful ownership of Eretz Israel, the land of Israel,
is well documented throughout the Old Testament and
beyond. The second pillar is history. The Jewish claim
to the land of Israel is confirmed time and again, not
just through Jewish history, but through the history of
the world. The third pillar is a legal claim. Our rights to
the land are codified in international law, including in
the document that founded this very organ. The fourth
pillar is the pursuit of international peace and security.
A stronger and safer Israel means a stronger and safer
world. It is through those four pillars that I will provide
the Council the answers to its questions.

S/PV. 8517

Let us discuss the first pillar of proof, the Bible.
The Jewish people’s right to the land of Israel is
mentioned over a dozen times in the Tanakh — the
Hebrew Bible — which includes the Torah, the Old
Testament, the Prophets and the Writings. In the book
of Genesis, the very first book of the Old Testament,
God says to Abraham:
“And I will establish my covenant between me and
you and your descendants after you throughout
their generations for an everlasting covenant, to
be God to you and to your descendants after you.
And I will give to you and to your descendants after
you the land of your sojournings, all the land of
Canaan, for an everlasting possession, and I will be
their God.” (The Holy Bible, Genesis, 17:7-8)
That is the deed to our land. From the book of
Genesis to the Jewish exodus from Egypt, to receiving
the Torah at Mount Sinai, to the realization of God’s
covenant in the holy land of Israel, the Bible paints
a consistent picture. The entire history of our people
and our connection to Eretz Israel begins right there.
It is not just the Hebrew Bible or the 15 million Jews
worldwide who accept that right. It is accepted across
all three monotheistic religions: Judaism, Christianity
and Islam. The Qur’an itself accepts the divine deed of
the Jewish people to the land of Israel.
The second pillar is the history of the land of Israel
and the Jewish people over the past two millennia. The
Jewish kingdom in Eretz Israel comprised 12 tribes, the
largest of which — the tribe of Judah — lived in the
area now known as Judea. Everyone is familiar with the
words “Jew” and “Jewish”. They come from the word
“Judea”, a kingdom over which King David and King
Solomon ruled. It was a kingdom with Jerusalem as its
capital. It was home to the first temple, destroyed by
the Babylonians in the year 587 B.C.E. and the second
temple, destroyed by the Romans in the year 70 C.E.
When the Romans destroyed the Jewish kingdom,
they sent our people into a 2,000-year exile that kept
most of us from our land. Even the Romans themselves
admitted that the land was ours.
Those who have visited Rome may recall that
Emperor Titus famously commemorated his victory and
the Jewish expulsion by building an enormous arch on
the Via Sacra in Rome. The arch includes an illustration
of his men carrying away the menorah from the Jewish
temple. Even though the Romans knew that the land
was ours and we belonged in it, they attempted to erase

19-1225411/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

our age-old connection to the land by renaming it Syria
Palestina. Why Palestina? Because they attributed it as
a southern province of the Syrian Empire. That is how
the narrow strip of land in Eretz Israel, nestled between
Egypt in the south and Lebanon in the north, came to
be called Palestine.
For the next 2000 years, the land of Israel was
conquered by the Crusaders, followed by the Ottoman
Empire, but despite centuries of wars and conquest,
the Jewish people never left. A Jewish community
remained in Eretz Israel, the land of Israel, throughout
that entire time. Although most of our community was
forced into exile by the Roman Empire, we knew that
someday we would return to our ancient homeland. For
two millennia, Jews across the world continue to pray
three times every day for our long-awaited return home
to Zion, to Jerusalem. As we just said on Passover last
week, and as we do every year, “Next year in Jerusalem”.
If the Jewish people’s deep and ancient roots in the
land of Israel are not sufficient proof, let us consider
international law, the third pillar. In 1917, Lord Balfour,
Britain’s Foreign Secretary, issued a statement of
British support for the establishment of “a national
home for the Jewish people”. The Balfour Declaration
designated that national homeland in Eretz Israel. The
Balfour Declaration also specifically endorsed the
Zionist cause, as Lord Balfour wrote:
“I have much pleasure in conveying to you on
behalf of His Majesty’s Government the following
declaration of sympathy with Jewish Zionist
aspirations which has been submitted to, and
approved by, the Cabinet.”
After the Ottoman Empire surrendered in the First
World War, the British took legal ownership over the
land of Israel. With that legal ownership, they were
able to issue the Balfour Declaration and commit to
helping establish a national home for the Jewish people
in our historical homeland. In 1922, the mandate of
the League of Nations not only stated its support for
the establishment of a Jewish national home; it also
encouraged and facilitated the return of Jews in the
diaspora to our homeland. It confirmed
“the historical connection of the Jewish people
with Palestine and to the grounds for reconstituting
their national home in that country”.
These documents are Zionist documents by
definition. Zionism is the realization of the right of the
12/64

29/04/2019

Jewish people to self-determination and sovereignty in
the land of Israel. That is what Zionism means — no
more, no less. It appears in international law, in essence
and word for word.
In 1945, the Charter of the United Nations, drafted
in the wake of the Holocaust, was adopted. It guaranteed
the right of people to exercise self-determination. It also
refers to “the inherent right of individual or collective
self-defence if an armed attack occurs against a
Member of the United Nations”. One people’s pursuit
of self-determination could not undermine the safety
and security of another nation.
Two years later, the United Nations Partition Plan
for Palestine called for the establishment of a Jewish
State and an Arab State in the land of Israel. What did
we do? We accepted it. But the Palestinians did not.
Instead of peace, they chose war and opened fire on
the Jews. Our small, tiny, newly declared nation was
suddenly under attack. In 1948, on the last day of the
British mandate, Israel declared independence and was
immediately attacked by five Arab armies that joined
the Palestinians, hoping to destroy it. Israel won that
war, and the hope and future of the Jewish people
was saved.
But the war of 1948 did not end with peace. It
ended with armistice agreements between Israel and
its neighbours. The armistice lines between Israel
and Egypt, Jordan, Syria and Lebanon were never
considered international borders. They were simply
lines designating the end of the first battle in the
Arab war against Israel. Jordan maintained control
of Judea and Samaria, and Egypt controlled the Gaza
Strip. Those agreements were formed in the absence of
permanent peace treaties, which would only be signed
decades later.
It was the Arabs who insisted that the armistice
lines would not be permanent borders. As stated in the
Jordanian-Israeli agreement of 1949, those lines “are
agreed upon by the parties without prejudice to future
territorial settlements or boundary lines.” Because
those lines are not borders, the Jewish communities
in Judea and Samaria to this day have not crossed any
international borders; they are built on strategic land for
Israel’s security, which, as agreed by the parties in the
Oslo Accords, would be classified as final-status issues.
To support the right of Israel to exist in our
homeland is therefore essential to international peace
and security — the final pillar. For decades, many Arab
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

leaders have chosen the sword over the olive branch,
long before even one of these so-called settlements was
established. Do those here know when the Palestinian
Liberation Organization was established? It was
established in 1964, three years before 1967. Does that
make any sense? What did they need to liberate before
1967? In 1964 not a single settlement existed in Judea
and Samaria, and our right to exist was still rejected.
To blame the Jewish communities of Judea and
Samaria for the lack of peace between Israelis and
Palestinians would be to deliberately overlook the
historical facts at best. The Arabs have rejected
opportunities for peace time and again: the 1937 Peel
Commission report was rejected by the Arabs; the 1947
United Nations partition plan was rejected; the 1948
Israeli offer for a truce was rejected; at the 2000 Camp
David Summit, peace was rejected; at the 2001 Taba
Summit, peace was rejected; at the 2007 Annapolis
Conference, peace was rejected; we are still waiting for
an answer on the 2008 offer from Israeli Prime Minister
Ehud Olmert; in considering the 2014 peace initiative
of Secretary of State Kerry, Abbas chose Hamas; and
today, as to the upcoming United States peace plan, the
Palestinians say that it is dead on arrival.
It weakens the mandate of this body, which is
charged with the task of making our world more
peaceful and secure, to continue blaming the side that
offers solutions and reward the side that rejects them. It
is dangerous to praise the side that encourages hatred
and bankrolls terrorism. Palestinian rejectionism is
chronic. Palestinian leaders refuse to acknowledge the
right of the Jewish people to self-determination in the
land of Israel and insist on having their people return to
the land in droves. This behaviour directly contradicts
all four pillars of the past and keeps us locked out of
forging peace in future. There should be no reward for
rejectionism. There should be no prize for aggression.
Real peace will be possible when the four pillars
of the past are accepted and realized, but real peace
will come when the four pillars of the future are put
into action. These are the four pillars of the future:
first, the Palestinians must accept and recognize the
Jewish State of Israel. No Palestinian leader has ever
said those words. Secondly, the Palestinians must end
the campaign of incitement. Enough is enough. How
can the international community expect us to make
any concessions to a leader who pays his people to kill
ours? Thirdly, in terms of regional cooperation, we are
already working together with many of our neighbours

S/PV. 8517

on security, common goals and building relationships.
We want these relationships to flourish and present
themselves in the open. And fourthly, we will never
do or agree to anything that compromises our security.
We want a peaceful future with our neighbours, but our
security is non-negotiable, and we will decide where to
draw the line.
We are ready to work together, we are ready to
talk and we are ready to create a better future for our
children. It is only when the four pillars of the past and
the four pillars of the future are accepted that peace
will come.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Security Council who wish to make
statements, and afterwards to representatives of other
Member States. I would like to remind colleagues that
there are more than 50 countries that wish to take the
floor. I would therefore ask speakers to respect the
time limits, insofar as possible. I will be using the
hourglass here.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): We agree
with EcoPeace Middle East that the road to stability in
the Middle East will be paved by regional cooperation
on many levels, and water and energy security are
certainly essential for peace in the region. It is indeed
heartening to hear that Israelis, Palestinians and
Jordanians are working together — sometimes even
making a splash, as Gidon said — to address the
shared challenges in energy and water. The EcoPeace
Water-Energy Nexus project is a great example of
this cooperation. It harnesses Jordan’s potential as a
large-scale renewable energy provider and utilizes both
Israeli and Palestinian expertise in desalinization.
The success and sustainability of projects such as
this clearly demonstrates that Israelis and Palestinians
can and do work together at the community level every
day to improve their lives. A large part of why these
projects are so successful is because they focus on what
is best for the communities. And while we hear a lot
about Israel’s responsibilities, the real culprit depriving
the communities of a better life is Hamas. The work of
non-governmental organizations like EcoPeace is all the
more challenging in Gaza because of Hamas’ insistence
on placing its own interests ahead of those of Gaza’s
residents. Would Hamas ever permit local communities
to band together to form energy-producing cooperatives
free of its control and profit-taking? Would Hamas ever
allow Israeli desalinization experts to work side by side

19-1225413/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with people in Gaza? And, more broadly, will Hamas
ever cease the needless attacks on Israeli communities
and stop its morally bankrupt war at the expense of
the Palestinian people? It is a war that has succeeded
only in provoking conflict and leading to poverty
and hopelessness, while hampering the ability of the
international community to help.
I think we all know the answers to those questions.
The future of Gaza cannot be addressed and the people
of Gaza cannot be helped in any meaningful way
until Hamas is no longer in the picture, or makes the
necessary choices for stability and eventually peace.
The United States appreciates the work of EcoPeace,
which is dedicated to fostering a community approach
to water and energy security, despite a very challenging
environment. I think we can all agree that this model
of regional cooperation should be replicated to lay the
groundwork for peace.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo for her valuable and comprehensive briefing.
I would also like to thank Ms. Nada Majdalani and
Mr. Gidon Bromberg for their comprehensive and
important briefings.
Today we commemorate 52 years of Israeli
occupation, as well as the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Oslo Accords, the twenty-fifth year of the
Hebron massacre and the first anniversary of the
Great March of Return protests. Meanwhile, Israeli
aggression continues to entrench its occupation and
undermine any chance for genuine peace that would
grant the Palestinian people their legitimate rights. The
occupying Power is continuing its arbitrary detentions
and the demolition or seizure of Palestinian buildings.
It is also continuing its unprecedented illegal settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem.
In addition, the occupying Power has continued
its forced displacement of Palestinian civilians and its
intensification of the siege on Gaza, which has now
lasted for 12 years. It continues its acts of aggression
and its violations against Muslim and Christian holy
sites, while making peremptory and illegal unilateral
decisions, such as partially withholding Palestinian
tax revenues and refusing to renew the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron. Furthermore, it
is attempting to change the historical nature, status
and demography of Jerusalem and to impose a de
14/64

29/04/2019

facto policy of entrenching its sovereignty in the
occupied territories.
With regard to occupied Golan, it is Syrian
territory occupied by Israel, as stressed by Security
Council resolution 497 (1981). Israeli laws, control
and administration over the Syrian occupied Golan
are null and void and have no legal validity. The
recognition of Israel’s sovereignty over the Golan is
in violation of the Charter of the United Nations, the
principles of international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
We would like to focus our statement today on the
report (A/HRC/40/74) of the International Independent
Commission established by the Human Rights Council
to investigate violations committed during protests
held in the occupied Palestinian territories.
First, with regard to civilian victims, we were not
surprised that the report recognized the use by Israeli
forces of weapons and live ammunition leading to the
deaths of 183 persons, including 32 children, in addition
to the injuring of more than 6,000 persons, including
159 women and 940 children. Three paramedics and
two journalists were also killed. The Commission
concluded that Israeli soldiers had fired intentionally
at civilians.
Secondly, with regard to violations of international
law, the Commission stressed that the protests
were conducted by civilians who had clear political
objectives. In addition, it concluded that the sniping
operations by Israeli forces using live ammunition led
to the killing and injuring of civilian demonstrators,
in violation of humanitarian international law and
international human rights law. The majority of such
acts of aggression against demonstrators amounted to
war crimes or crimes against humanity. Even those
people protected by the international laws, norms and
conventions, such as the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, the Fourth Geneva Convention and it Protocol
Addional I, among others, were not spared the crimes
perpetrated by the Israeli forces.
Thirdly, with regard to the impact of the siege
on the medical sector, the Commission found that the
siege imposed on the Gaza Strip has had a detrimental
impact on the health-care system, representing a
violation of the fundamental rights of the population,
especially injured protesters, to life and health care.
The Commission also concluded that the injuries of
Palestinian protesters caused by the Israeli security
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

forces, which often required specialized medical care,
constituted a challenge to the health-care system in
Gaza and placed it under overwhelming pressure.
In the light of those documented atrocities, the
Commission called upon Israel to undertake an
immediate, neutral and independent investigation in
accordance with international standards. It also called
upon Israel to lift the unjust siege imposed on the Gaza
Strip in violation of international laws and norms.
Consequently, we call for serious follow-up to those
conclusions in order to ensure that the perpetrators of
those crimes are held accountable and ensure redress
for the victims, especially given the ongoing escalation
of violence that places civilians in danger.
That will require the international community
to demand that Israel, the occupying Power, cease
all acts of aggression against the Palestinian people,
while protecting civilians and ensuring respect for
international law and all resolutions of international
legitimacy. Palestine cannot be the exception to the
rule. The international community must be committed
to the international mandate of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East and provide its budget and activities with the
necessary financial resources and contributions.
In conclusion, we are afraid that we may find
ourselves commemorating the tenth or twentieth
anniversary of the Great March of Return. The
conclusions of the first Arab-European Summit, held
in Sharm Al-Sheikh in February, and of the Arab
Summit held in Tunisia in March create momentum to
prevent that from happening by adhering to peace as a
strategic choice.
The Arab countries launched the Arab Peace
Initiative in 2002, which is based on international
law, the resolutions of international legitimacy and the
principle of land for peace. We cannot reach a solution
to the Arab-Israeli conflict that is not in line with
such international terms of reference. Such a solution
must be preceded by an end to the Israeli occupation
of the Palestinian and Arab territories held since 1967,
including East Jerusalem, and by the recognition of
the State of Palestine, the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to self-determination, their right to
return and the need to compensate Palestinian refugees
while justly resolving their status in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

S/PV. 8517

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I would like to thank all the participants
in today’s briefing, in particular the representatives of
Eco-Peace Middle East.
Belgium supports dialogue with civil society and
the invaluable input of women and young people in
that regard. We wish to emphasize how much their
work contributes to creating an environment that is
conducive to peace and respect for human rights. The
dynamism and plurality of civil society are part of an
open and democratic society, and it must be allowed to
do its work without hindrance. We are concerned about
actions and policies that are hostile to civil society.
I would like to begin my statement by reaffirming
our commitment to the two-State solution, despite the
developments on the ground that are taking us further
away from such a solution every day. Belgium remains
convinced that there is no option other than a negotiated
solution based on the coexistence of two States, with the
city of Jerusalem as their future capital, in accordance
with agreed international parameters.
Any credible initiative to relaunch the peace
process must be based on international law, put an
end to settlement activities and allow Palestinians full
and free access to their resources and the enjoyment
of their rights, while ensuring Israel’s security. A just,
comprehensive and lasting solution that is supported
by the international community, in particular by the
Security Council, is in the interests of Israel and its
security and the stability of the entire region.
With those objectives and principles in mind, we
are obliged to observe that the settlement policy in
the West Bank and East Jerusalem is continuing and
is being accompanied by measures such as forced
displacement, evictions and demolitions. In accordance
with resolution 2334 (2016), we strongly condemn
that policy, which is contrary to international law,
undermines the viability of the two-State solution and
serves only to exacerbate tensions, as demonstrated
by the increased violence between Israeli settlers and
Palestinians. Any use of violence, whoever may be
responsible, is unacceptable and its perpetrators must
be prosecuted.
We are also concerned about the situation in Hebron.
The April 2019 report of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs on the subject paints a bleak
picture. We recall the responsibility of the parties to
respect international law and the responsibility of

19-1225415/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

29/04/2019

Israel, as the occupying Power, to ensure the protection
of Palestinians in Hebron and throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory.

State of Israel. We will not accept that the occupation of
the Golan Heights serve as a precedent to justify similar
possible actions in the occupied Palestinian territory.

With regard to the situation in Gaza, I stress that
all leaders must respect the fundamental right to
demonstrate peacefully. By establishing the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry, the Human
Rights Council has demonstrated its responsibility in
assessing the situation. The conclusions of its report are
serious and significant.

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
I also listened very carefully to the presentations of
Mr. Bromberg and Ms. Majdalani.

While recognizing Israel’s right to ensure its
security, we recall that Israel must respect the principles
of proportionality and necessity in the use of force.
We urge the Israeli authorities to conduct independent
investigations into the alleged illegal use of lethal force
so that the perpetrators are held accountable.
It is also not acceptable for demonstrations in
Gaza to be hijacked by extremist elements. We call on
all those responsible not to use or encourage children
to participate in demonstrations in Gaza that may
become violent.
We call on all parties to respect human rights
and international humanitarian law and to ensure
unhindered access for humanitarian actors. The
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East has an indispensable role
as a humanitarian actor, and Belgium will continue to
support its efforts on the ground.
The resolution of the Gaza crisis requires a
fundamental change, which includes the lifting of
the blockade and the full opening of crossing points,
while taking into account Israel’s legitimate security
concerns. A political solution to the crisis also
requires that control of the territory be returned to the
Palestinian Authority.
We call on all parties to constructively engage
in intra-Palestinian reconciliation talks. Elections
conducted in accordance with international democratic
standards can contribute to reconciliation. Unity is
in the interest of the Palestinian people and peace in
the region.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that, in line
with the relevant Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967) and 497 (1981), we do not
recognize Israel’s sovereignty over the territories
occupied since June 1967, including the Golan Heights,
and we do not consider them a part of the territory of the
16/64

There are complex and intertwined hotspot
issues in the Middle East with ongoing conflicts and
confrontations. The developing situation is cause for
increased concern. The question of Palestine is at
the core of the Middle East issue and is fundamental
to the region. It is the common responsibility of the
international community to safeguard the legitimate
rights and interests of Palestinian people.
The current situation in Palestine remains dire,
with the ongoing construction of settlements, the
Palestinian-Israeli peace talks at an impasse and a
grave humanitarian crisis. China is deeply concerned
about the situation. I would like to highlight the
following points.
First, we must preserve the two-State solution and
resolve the root cause of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Based on the Arab Peace Initiative, the principle of land
for peace and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the international community should work to resolve
the question of Palestine with a view to establishing
a fully sovereign State of Palestine based on the 1967
borders with East Jerusalem as the capital. Any new
initiative should be in line with the above-mentioned
international parameters.
Secondly, we must remain united and strive for an
early resumption of the peace talks between Israel and
Palestine. The settlement construction must stop. The
parties concerned should avoid any action or rhetoric
that may exacerbate the situation or any move that may
undermine trust so as to create the necessary conditions
for the resumption of dialogue. The parties with
influence in the Middle East should play a constructive
role and refrain from any unilateral action that could
further escalate the tension in the region. Greater efforts
should be made to accelerate the intra-Palestinian
reconciliation process and to actively explore new ways
to facilitate peace in the Middle East so as to overcome
the deadlock in the Palestinian-Israeli peace talks.
Thirdly, we should pay close attention to and work
to improve the economic and humanitarian situation in
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestine. The withholding by the relevant authorities of
the transfer of taxes collected on behalf of Palestine is a
matter of concern to China. We welcome the financial
support to Palestine reaffirmed at the recent Foreign
Ministers meeting of the League of Arab States. We call
on the parties concerned to fully implement obligations
under international treaties, including the Paris
Protocol, and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
The international community should increase its
support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and improve the
humanitarian situation of the Palestinian refugees.
With regard for other hotspot issues in the Middle
East, it is imperative that the international community
remain committed to a political solution, facilitate
dialogue and negotiations, deal with the situation
constructively and take into account the legitimate
rights and interests of all parties.
The Syrian Golan is internationally recognized as
an occupied territory. The Security Council has adopted
several resolutions calling for Israel’s withdrawal from
Syrian Golan. China opposes any unilateral action to
change that status quo and does not wish to see any
further escalation of regional tensions.
Development is the key to achieving peace. In
mid-April China hosted the second China-Arab States
Forum on Reform and Development. Recently, China
also successfully hosted the second Belt and Road
Forum for International Cooperation. The Middle
Eastern and Arab countries actively participated in
those events. China stands ready to leverage extensive
involvement in the Belt and Road Initiative to strengthen
cooperation and promote mutual benefit for regional
countries so as to provide opportunities and a platform
for development in the Middle East and to jointly build
a community of shared future for humankind.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation condemns in the strongest terms
the wave of terrorist attacks seen in New Zealand, Sri
Lanka, Burkina Faso and the United States, including
on a synagogue in California. We express our solidarity
with the Governments of those countries and with the
victims’ families. We also express our solidarity with
Mozambique over the floods and cyclones in that
brotherly country that led to great destruction.
We first thank your delegation, Mr. President, for
having convened this very important open debate and
for your skill in conducting our work this month. We

S/PV. 8517

also join other members in expressing our gratitude
to all the briefers for their detailed and informative
updates. In addition, we congratulate the State of Israel
on the holding and successful conclusion of the general
elections held at the beginning of April. We welcome
the presence of the Israeli and Palestinian delegations,
as well as others that, in solidarity with the Israelis and
Palestinians, are inscribed on the list of speakers for
this open debate.
Since the beginning of this millennium, the situation
in the Middle East has always been one of our key
concerns in considering ongoing international conflicts.
Like other countries, Equatorial Guinea has always
hoped that the problems created by the conflicts in
the region could be addressed with greater clarity and
sincerity, but above all fairly. What has happened in
Syria, Yemen, Lebanon, Palestine and other parts of the
region explicitly violates the purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations with regard to the pacific settlement
of disputes. The situation in the region is so sensitive
and so likely to deteriorate that it is crucial to ensure
that none of the parties enmeshed in those conflicts
take ill-advised steps that could plunge the region into a
fresh wave of violence, which would do nothing to help
achieve a peaceful, sustainable and lasting solution.
Every stakeholder in the region should therefore make
every effort to avoid any action that could incite further
violence among the warring parties.
In addition to the many deaths and injuries caused
by the ongoing destruction in the region, it has also
produced enormous losses of infrastructure and crops
as well as a lack of important services needed for
human subsistence, which has meant that their peoples’
development has been set back by decades. That has
forced millions to move from their places of origin
and to accept the fate of poor migrants, which is to
be mistreated all over the world. Among them are the
millions of Palestinians who have been involuntarily
displaced to various parts of the Middle East and
elsewhere, while maintaining the firm hope that one
day they and their children will be able to return to
where they were born.
While we await the publication of the United
States peace plan, which we hope will consider the
concerns of the two parties to the conflict and will
be an impartial and constructive starting point for a
renewed negotiations process, our delegation is very
concerned about the possibility that the elections held

19-1225417/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in Israel earlier this month will radically influence the
decisions, actions and behaviour of the parties to the
conflict, a concern that we expressed in our statement
in January (see S/PV.8449) and that was evident in
the Council’s subsequent discussions in February
and March (see S/PV.8466 and S/PV.8489) on Israel’s
decision not to renew the mandate of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron and the disagreement
between Israel and Palestine on the collection of tax
revenues, to mention only a couple of aspects.
The history of this conflict argues against creating
further disputes with regard to the few issues that for
many years have enjoyed some form of agreement,
unless there is a patently clear reason to the contrary.
That is something that Israeli and Palestinian politicians
must bear in mind if they truly intend to resolve their
long-standing differences one day. Equatorial Guinea
has always hoped to see the Israelis and Palestinians
come to an understanding that a definitive political
solution to their conflict would help resolve many of
the conflicts that are destabilizing the region today.
The establishment of an independent Palestinian State
is key to achieving an effective and lasting peace in the
Middle East.
The situation of women and children and the
entire population of the Gaza Strip remains a matter of
concern. For the past decade, Gaza has seen a decline in
needed public services and employment opportunities
that is entirely the result of the ongoing clashes
between Israel and Hamas and of internal Palestinian
divisions. We appreciate the work of the humanitarian
agencies that support the population, and we urge the
international community to encourage such efforts
by further contributing to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. Both Israel and Hamas must refrain from any
unilateral action likely to aggravate the conflict, which
in our view can be resolved only through negotiations
and dialogue based on the concept of two independent
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security within internationally recognized borders.
We encourage Egypt and other international
actors to continue working to foster intra-Palestinian
reconciliation, which in addition to its key role in
Palestinian consolidation has a crucial part to play in the
control and management of the Gaza Strip, which today
continues to cause serious security issues alongside
neighbouring Israel. We deplore the fact that Israel has
taken no steps to immediately and completely cease
18/64

29/04/2019

all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, as called for
in paragraph 2 of resolution 2334 (2016), as was
indicated in the Secretary-General’s report of 26 March
(S/2019/251).
We call on the United Nations and the international
community to step up efforts to exert further pressure
on the parties, so that negotiations between Israel and
Palestine can be resumed and lead to a negotiated
solution based on dialogue to this conflict that has
lasted for so many years.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her report on the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories. We also thank the
other briefers from the non-governmental organization
EcoPeace Middle East.
We are sorry to have to note that the Middle East
is still going through a turbulent period. The region is
plagued by many crises, old and new, of which one of
the most serious continues to be the terrorist threat.
Its scope indicates the need for a concerted effort by
the international community to establish the broadest
possible counter-terrorism front, which Russia has
repeatedly called for. The issue of a PalestinianIsraeli settlement is central to the instability in the
Middle East, and we have lately been observing an
increase in dangerous trends on that front, in practices
such as taking unilateral steps and aggressively
revising previously agreed arrangements. For us, the
internationally recognized basis for a settlement of
the issues in the Middle East, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Madrid principles, remains firm.
We have not passed the point of no return. The
2016 report of the Middle East Quartet of international
mediators lists the actions that must be taken to restore
trust among the parties and revitalize a sustainable
political process. First and foremost, Israel’s
settlement activity in the West Bank and its policy of
demolishing Palestinian property must stop. Violence
must be rejected and the terrorist attacks ended. Both
Palestinians and Israelis must refrain from aggressive
and provocative rhetoric, which is exactly how we view
the announcements of plans to annex settlements in the
West Bank.
We firmly believe that no one can achieve a
breakthrough acting alone, as the history of the
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Middle East has repeatedly confirmed. In our view the
mechanism of the Quartet, whose function has been
approved by several Security Council resolutions, is just
as relevant and needed more than ever, and we are willing
to mobilize its efforts on the political front. Russia will
continue to cooperate in establishing a constructive
agenda for a settlement in the Middle East, including
by expanding its cooperation with regional actors. The
most recent meeting of the Russian-Arab Cooperation
Forum, held in Moscow on 16 and 17 April, confirmed
that our approaches to finding lasting solutions to
the crises in the Middle East coincide. Our proposal
for holding a summit in Russia between the leaders
of Palestine and Israel remains open. We should point
out that the Palestinian leader has repeatedly affirmed
his consent to it. It will be important not to give up
determined efforts to restore unity in the Palestinians’
ranks. The latest intra-Palestinian meeting in Moscow
in February was useful, especially in the context of
the efforts of regional players, particularly Egypt
and Jordan.
We also need active international efforts to mitigate
the dire humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. Any
assistance in Gaza must be provided in coordination
with the legitimate authorities under President Abbas,
and should contribute to dealing with the problem of
restoring Palestinian unity. That was behind our recent
decision to supply Palestinians in Gaza and the West
Bank with 2,000 tons of flour. We will continue to
support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, whose activities
have a political as well as a humanitarian dimension
and an important stabilizing effect in the Palestinian
territories and the countries of the Middle East.
Collective diplomacy must be urgently intensified
in order to prevent the collapse of the international
community’s efforts to create the conditions for
achieving a two-State solution, the only viable one
for the Middle East, through direct talks between
Palestinians and Israelis. We believe that sending a
Security Council mission to the Middle East would
help us strengthen our unity and our cooperation with
the parties. We urge our colleagues on the Council
to consider creative approaches to relaunching our
work on a Middle East settlement. However, any ideas
should take into account the agreed-on parameters for a
settlement, including the Arab Peace Initiative adopted
by the leaders of the Arab States, which enshrines the
important principle of land for peace. In that context, we

S/PV. 8517

want to once again affirm that there can be no question
that the Golan Heights is Syrian territory, occupied by
Israel as a result of the 1967 war and illegally annexed
14 years later.
The instability in the Middle East demands that
responsible members of the international community
work for unity. However, rather than taking the direction
of imposing an outdated bloc mentality, which was how
many perceived the Warsaw conference, it should be
with a view to creating a platform for dialogue that
enables us to pursue a non-confrontational quest for
solutions to the security issues in the Middle East.
The Secretary-General was directed to make efforts in
that regard in accordance with resolution 598 (1987),
and there is interest in this possibility among regional
players, which was once again affirmed during the
recent conference in Baghdad of parliamentarians from
Iraq’s neighbours. We believe that the Russian concept
of security measures in the Persian Gulf could serve
as a good basis for a future regional architecture in
that regard.
Improved relations among the countries of the
Middle East would give impetus to activities aimed at
ending the most acute conflicts, of which one of the
most significant is that the concept of a political and
diplomatic settlement should continue to be the central
direction. Attempts to achieve a solution by force or
encourage various illegal armed groups to realize
geopolitical goals must be a thing of the past. We are
ready to cooperate constructively with partners on
every item on the Middle East agenda. We must increase
our coordination, develop consolidated approaches and
continue taking steps towards unity. Analyses confirm
the importance of efforts in that direction.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by congratulating Prime Minister Netanyahu
on being asked to form a new Israeli Government
and Prime Minister Shtayyeh on the formation of the
new Palestinian Authority Government. The United
Kingdom looks forward to working with both of their
Administrations to advance the objectives of peace and
prosperity. I also thank our civil-society briefers.
Like other Governments, the United Kingdom
continues to encourage a just resolution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, in line with international law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions. Our
understanding, shared by most Council members,
continues to be that sustainable peace requires a

19-1225419/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

safe and secure Israel, living alongside a viable and
sovereign Palestinian State, based on the 1967 borders
with agreed land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital
of both States and a just, fair, agreed and realistic
settlement for refugees. It will take the support of the
whole international community to make such a historic
peace possible.
I understand that the Balfour Declaration was
raised, and I would therefore like to set out the United
Kingdom Government’s position on it. The Balfour
Declaration was written in the middle of the First World
War. Its 100th anniversary was two years ago, in 2017.
It is a product of its time. We understand and respect
the sensitivities about the Balfour Declaration and the
events that have taken place in the region since 1917.
We are committed, as I have just said, to establishing
security and justice for Israelis and Palestinians through
lasting peace. Just as we fully support and are proud of
our role in the creation of the modern State of Israel as
a Jewish homeland, so we fully support the objective
of a viable and sovereign Palestinian State. There are
two halves of the Balfour Declaration, the second half
of which has not been fulfilled. The occupation is a
continuing impediment to securing the political rights
of the non-Jewish communities in Palestine that the
Balfour Declaration also envisaged. To that extent, it
remains unfinished business.
Today, however, I want to join others who are
calling for us to look forwards, not backwards. We
urge the new Israeli and Palestinian Governments to
seize the opportunity to reverse the current destructive
dynamic, improve the immediate situation on the
ground and strive to create the conditions conducive to
negotiating a lasting peace. That should begin without
delay and with renewed direct dialogue in order to find
a solution to the current revenue-transfer crisis. The
goal of a two-State solution is at stake. The current
impasse on the transfer of clearance revenues poses a
risk to stability and threatens the viability of a future
Palestinian State. The United Kingdom firmly believes
that prosperity and strong Palestinian institutions serve
Israel’s long-term security interests. We encourage the
Israeli Government to reverse its decision to withhold
revenues, which undermines the Oslo Accords, as
other speakers have made clear, and we encourage
the Palestinian Authority to accept the remainder of
the revenues on a provisional basis, since refusing all
revenues will only harm Palestinians.
20/64

29/04/2019

The advancement of yet more illegal settlements is
eroding the physical viability of a two-State solution.
We condemn the Israeli authorities’ announcement on
4 April of intentions to advance plans for more than
4,600 settlement units across the West Bank, which
is the single largest settlement announcement in
recent years, as many have noted. We are also deeply
concerned about the pre-election comments made by
Prime Minister Netanyahu in support of the possible
annexation of at least some parts of the West Bank.
Such a move would be contrary to international law and
destructive to peace efforts.
With the current destructive dynamic between
the parties, there is nothing to quell the incidences
of violence that we continue to witness, which
risks hardening extremist positions on both sides.
We condemn in the strongest terms, and without
equivocation, the terrorism of Hamas and other militant
groups in Gaza. Settlement violence should also be
wholeheartedly condemned, and the Israeli authorities
have a responsibility to provide appropriate protection
to the Palestinian civilian population. We are second to
none in recognizing Israel’s legitimate need to provide
security, but we continue to have concerns about the
excessive use of force by the Israel Defense Forces.
Measures used should be appropriate and in line with
international law. Accountability should be sought
through swift, transparent investigations.
The new Israeli and Palestinian Governments have
the ability to lead their people to a better future, free
from violence. Leaders can either seize the opportunity
to move forward and create a new dynamic, or they
can continue with short-termism and self-interest,
which will lead only to further deterioration for their
people. At this holy time of year, following Pesach and
before the start of Ramadan, we urge them to use their
new mandates to pursue a lasting legacy of peace. It
is up to us in the Council and the wider international
community to support the parties in their efforts to
achieve a just and lasting resolution.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her very comprehensive and insightful briefing, as
well as Ms. Nada Majdalani and Mr. Gidon Bromberg,
co-Directors of EcoPeace Middle East, for their
informative remarks.
Unfortunately, despite our constant calls for a
de-escalation in the Middle East, there has been no
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

progress at all. The latest developments in the Gaza
Strip and in the West Bank have reminded us how
important it is to continue the de-escalation process.
Despite the recent ceasefire between Israel and
Hamas, the security situation remains volatile, and any
miscalculations could pose the risk of an outbreak of
violence. In that context, I want to underline that all
sides must fully comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Our priority is restoring a political horizon for the
resumption of a meaningful peace process. We believe
that a negotiated two-State solution and a resolution
of all final-status issues, including Jerusalem,
settlements, the future of Palestinian refugees, borders
and security arrangements, remain a realistic path to
fulfilling the legitimate aspirations of both parties and
achieving long-term peace. We appeal to both sides to
refrain from unilateral steps that prejudge the outcome
of final-status negotiations, and we expect them to
demonstrate their commitment to peace through their
actions and policies. We condemn all acts of violence,
which are fundamentally incompatible with advancing
a peaceful two-State solution.
I would now like to touch briefly on the political
and security situation in the Gaza Strip, which remains
volatile. What we are specifically extremely concerned
about is the fate of the 2 million people in Gaza. Their
limited access to basic services could easily lead to an
escalation of social tensions that may destabilize the
situation in the region even further. Comprehensive
solutions to peace and security must also take into
account the threats posed by climate change and
environmental aspects such as water stress and
competition over natural resources. I greatly appreciate
the comments by the co-Directors of EcoPeace in that
regard. Creating a safe and secure world for all is not
just about our reaction. It is also about anticipation
and prevention. We therefore underline the need for
better climate-related security risk assessment and
management strategies.
We still believe that it will be possible to contribute
positively to the process only by returning to
meaningful bilateral negotiations, based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions and international law,
which encapsulate internationally agreed parameters.
The creation of a political horizon, as well as of an
appropriate framework for political progress, will be
possible only together with regional and international
partners, starting with the Middle East Quartet.

S/PV. 8517

We have been closely following the discussions led
by Egypt on intra-Palestinian reconciliation and hope
that the process will be successful. While we take note
of the formation of the new Palestinian Government,
we continue to urge all Palestinian factions to work
together to achieve the sustainable development of
that process, enabling the Palestinian Authority to
resume its full responsibilities in Gaza. One single and
legitimate Palestinian Authority could be an important
step for the unity of a future Palestinian State and a
basis for a sustainable peace agreement.
Before concluding, I want to underline the crucial
role in the region of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
which we should do our utmost to preserve. And last
but not least, I would like to reiterate our commitment
to the security and stability of the region. Before
2010, Poland’s largest contingents in peacekeeping
operations were deployed in the Middle East. We are
proud to be able to return to the region by supporting
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon with a
Polish military contingent.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): In the
wake of our moment of silence, I would once again
like to express France’s shock and firm condemnation
regarding the attack on the Poway synagogue.
Anti-Semitism is the enemy of us all. Anti-Semitism
and, more broadly, religious hatred are the complete
opposite of all we believe in and constitute an existential
threat to us all. We also condemn in the strongest terms
the recent terrorist attacks in Burkina Faso. More than
ever, the fight against terrorism in that country and
throughout the Sahel must be our shared priority.
I want to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her very
informative briefing, as well as Ms. Nada Majdalani
and Mr. Gidon Bromberg, of EcoPeace Middle East.
Their briefing gave us a valuable perspective on a
dimension of the conflict that the Council has not
sufficiently addressed. Their joint briefing, like the
work they do together on the ground, is also exemplary
and send us all a particularly welcome message of hope.
I want to thank them warmly, and I am also grateful to
the German presidency for taking the happy initiative
to invite them. I would like to emphasize once again
that it is more important than ever to ensure that the
Israeli and Palestinian authorities work to maintain
a pluralistic, open space within their respective civil
societies. In our view, that is one of the conditions of
dialogue and peace.

19-1225421/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Today I will focus on the dangers facing the
possibility of a two-State solution. We are close to a
point of no return, and the solution is threatening to
vanish before our eyes like a mirage in the desert. The
developments related to the policy of settlement in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem described last month in
the Secretary-General’s report on implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) (see S/2019/251) are particularly
worrying and are leading inevitably to the erosion of a
two-State solution on the ground. That is my first point.
Since the beginning of the year, more than 4,500
new housing units have been approved in the West
Bank. That continues the efforts of 2017 and 2018. Last
year was marked by a record level of announcements
of nearly 16,000 housing units. The increase is even
more serious because it is based to an unprecedented
degree on the creation or expansion of colonies
located deep in the West Bank. At the same time, in
recent months the policy of legalizing so-called wild
settlements in Israeli law has continued. Similarly,
the practices of demolitions of Palestinian structures
and expropriations and forced displacements of their
inhabitants is intensifying and increased by more than
50 per cent in the first three months of 2019 compared
to the same period last year. That trend is particularly
alarming in East Jerusalem, especially in the Old City
and its surrounding neighbourhoods. It is accompanied
by a slow but steady erosion of the status quo in the holy
places of Jerusalem, which led to renewed tensions last
month around the Esplanade of Mosques. With more
than 600,000 settlers in East Jerusalem and the West
Bank, we cannot avoid the inexorable reality that we
are now close to a point of no return.
That brings me to my second point — the current
shift towards de facto annexation of West Bank.
I have just mentioned the settlement policy, which
is illegal under international law and fuels a dynamic
of de facto annexation. Other trends contribute to
this phenomenon, such as the seizure of Palestinian
resources, particularly water resources, which was
mentioned earlier by our civil society briefers. In
addition to the developments on the ground, there
have been legal changes that run counter to the
Fourth Geneva Convention, including the adoption
of several laws in recent years that have extended the
prerogatives and powers of the Israeli State, as well as
the applicability of Israeli law to residents of West Bank
settlements. Palestinians in the West Bank continue to
live under Israeli military orders and to appear before
22/64

29/04/2019

military courts. The territorial grouping that is taking
shape before our eyes therefore already manifests the
unequal coexistence of two populations within the
same territory.
One of the consequences is the ongoing risk of
violence. We condemn all forms of terrorism and
violence, including the launch of rockets from Gaza
into Israel. We must also ensure that violence does not
become entrenched.
In accordance with its obligations under
international law, France does not recognize any
Israeli sovereignty over the occupied territories, be it
Jerusalem, the Golan, the Gaza Strip or the West Bank.
We have reiterated that position on several occasions,
including following the American decisions concerning
Jerusalem and the Golan Heights, which are contrary
to international law and applicable Council resolutions.
If the trends I have just described were to be
carried through to completion, they would make it
impossible for Palestinians to fulfil their national
aspirations, which requires the establishment of a State.
For Israelis, it would mean a fundamental contradiction
of the democratic character of the State of Israel, which
is an integral part of its DNA. We must recommit to
internationally agreed parameters. That was message
sent by France and several of its Arab and European
partners at the Dublin meeting in February, and it is the
takeaway message of my statement.
In the absence of any political perspective,
there may be a temptation to break away from the
agreed framework based on international law and the
resolutions of the Council, and to turn instead towards
unilateral decisions. We must all fully appreciate
the danger of the temptation of unilateralism. We
must remember that any attempt to deviate from the
parameters agreed by the international community
would be doomed to failure. Those parameters are
neither menu options from which to pick and choose
depending on political circumstances, nor old software
that must be updated. As a whole, they are the basis
for any future agreement. That does not mean that we
cannot also consider creative means of achieving them,
but let us be clear — those parameters have no viable or
realistic alternative.
The fates of the Israelis and the Palestinians are
intertwined; neither of the two peoples can achieve its
aspirations at the expense of the other. The disappearance
of the two-State solution would irreversibly signal
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that both parties had given up on the national project
as each has defined it thus far. France, as a friend to
both Israelis and Palestinians, cannot accept that. The
Council, which has crafted the parameters and outlines
of a future peace agreement, cannot accept it. The
increasingly deafening silence of the Council on this
conflict since the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016)
in December 2016 is all the more incomprehensible,
both for the sake of the Council’s credibility and for the
world, which is watching the Council. France, for its
part, does not intend to abandon its efforts to promote a
just and lasting peace in the region.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa wishes to
express its solidarity with those who have perished in
the recent terrorist attacks in their places of worship in
Sri Lanka, the United States of America and, yesterday,
in Burkina Faso, which the Council visited last month.
May their souls rest in peace.
We also express our solidarity with Mozambique,
which has been visited repeatedly by devastating
cyclones this past month, setting its development
agenda back decades.
The Council deals with the maintenance of
international peace and security on a daily basis. It is
our primary responsibility to ensure that all peoples
of the world are able to live without the threat of the
scourge of war and enjoy the ability to live in larger
freedom. In carrying out that mandate, the Council must
act in a fair and balanced manner. When responding to
violations of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations, we must act in a consistent manner.
When we act, or rather do not act, when it comes to
the matter of Palestine, we jeopardize the integrity and
credibility of the Council.
The Council must act decisively, as it does on other
matters on its agenda, to ensure that there is a resolution
to the conflict through a negotiated process. We must
reaffirm that there can be no sustainable solution to
the crises in the Middle East that does not include two
independent States, one for the people of Palestine and
one for the people of Israel. The only credible solution
must be built on the two-State solution, within the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as the capital of the
Palestinian State, where Palestinians and Israelis can
live side by side in peace and security. The Security
Council must make every effort to bring both parties to
the negotiating table in order to reach a solution.

S/PV. 8517

The guidelines for those negotiations, as the
representative of France pointed out, must be based on
the established international legal framework, which
includes General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map, to name but a few.
Unilateral actions by Israel, including its refusal
to renew the mandate of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron and its continued withholding of the
tax revenue that it collects on behalf of the Palestinian
Authority have done nothing but exacerbate the security
and humanitarian situation in Palestine. As long as the
situation remains unresolved and the territories remain
occupied, we run the risk of changing the facts on the
ground. The recent unilateral developments related to
the occupied Syrian Golan are a case in point. Final
status issues cannot be pre-empted by changing
the conditions and facts on the ground, but must be
negotiated by the parties.
We commend the German presidency for
highlighting women’s issues during this month. When
discussing issues in the Middle East, it is also important
to focus on the impact of the conflict on Palestinian
women. A recent study indicated that the occupation
disproportionately impacts the daily lives of Palestinian
women. As we delay action and the Security Council is
immobilized, lands and cities are being systematically
handed over to Israel. We do not recognize that. United
Nations agencies are immobilized and emasculated.
More and more settlements are being built in occupied
Palestinian territories. We do not recognize them. No
people in history have accepted oppression forever. The
same is true for the Palestinians.
In conclusion, the United Nations cannot abdicate
its responsibility and outsource its core mandate of
maintaining international peace and security. The
United Nations, its membership and the Security
Council cannot sit back and wait for the solution to be
presented to it by somebody somewhere. This is not
and has never been the role of the United Nations and
the Security Council. We must do all we can to carry
out this vital responsibility bestowed upon us by the
Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): We join others in thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her ever-concise
briefing, and Nada Majdalani and Gidon Bromberg
for briefing us on the environmental dimension of the

19-1225423/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

peace process and the precarious situation in Gaza
and the West Bank in the face of such challenges as
serious water shortages. We are convinced that the
transboundary nature of water makes it necessary for it
to be included in any attempt to build peace, so we take
this opportunity to congratulate them on the admirable
work they are doing in helping countries collaborate on
such a crucial issue as cooperation on shared waters.
We would like to begin by congratulating the new
Palestinian Prime Minister, Mohammad Shtayyeh, on
the formation of his Government, in the hope that it will
overcome the great challenges facing the Palestinian
people and its nation-building project. Similarly,
we congratulate Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu on his victory in his recent election to a fifth
term of office, hoping that he will continue to lead his
country along the path of development.
The exercise of democracy through elections,
Government formation and fresh governing mandates
marks a new stage of optimism, ideals, hopes and
renewed energy, which gives us the opportunity to
revive those things that have been stagnant or inert,
such as the will to resolve this conflict, which is the
pivotal point for peace in the Middle East.
We continue to witness with regret the increase in
tensions between the parties because of the persistence
of elements that gave rise to it: widespread violence,
particularly against civilians, including women and
children, provocation and use of inflammatory rhetoric,
actions against and in violation of international law
and order, and the lack of internal reconciliation. The
safety and well-being of the civilian population must
be our highest priority, overcoming all differences and
obstacles to sustainable peace. We therefore strongly
condemn any act of violence and intimidation against
the civilian population, especially the indiscriminate
firing of rockets, mortars and incendiary devices, and
the excessive use of force.
With respect to the population, it is also with
great disquiet and concern that we see the persistent
deterioration of the humanitarian and economic
situation in Gaza, which is experiencing a severe state of
insecurity and lack of basic necessities for well-being,
including delivery of such key services as electricity,
water and health, as well as the lack of jobs. In this
regard, we acknowledge the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
24/64

29/04/2019

Near East, in providing, with international support,
relief to the inhabitants of Gaza.
The picture described by our speakers today of
the impact of water scarcity on the region’s economic
and social development exacerbates an already fragile
social situation and increases vulnerability to food
insecurity, which itself puts at risk the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals and the human
development objectives for the most affected populations.
Such aspects as water pollution, overexploitation,
urbanization and a long conflict have come together
and resulted in the current worrying situation.
Another situation of great concern is the delicate
financial situation that the Palestinian Government is
going through, with several factors that exacerbate it,
including the involuntary withholding of collected taxes
and the decrease in international assistance, which have
generated a loss of 65 per cent of its income, inducing
its leaders to take austerity measures that, in a vicious
circle, create greater pressure on the economy, thereby
increasing demands on people’s living conditions.
We need to be aware of the critical moment in which
we find ourselves if we are to achieve a negotiated and
lasting peace in the Middle East that recognizes the right
of all peoples to self-determination, independence and
sovereignty, and the right to live in peace and security
within clearly recognized borders. We must embrace
the positions that bring us closest to a definitive solution
to the conflict — indeed, the solution that is the most
fair and inclusive — based on previous initiatives and
consensus agreements, and on a renewed political will,
with a view to our future generations and the most
vulnerable populations — women and children — while
remaining faithful to our responsibilities as individuals
and nations of the world that respect the multilateral
framework and identify with universal rights and
development goals towards the fulfilment of a twoState solution.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
would also like to begin by expressing our condolences
to the families of the victims of the recent terrorist acts
that have taken place in various parts of the world, acts
that we strongly condemn.
Peru welcomes the holding of this quarterly open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary Di Carlo for her comprehensive
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

briefing and the briefings by the o-Directors of
EcoPeace, Nada Majdalani and Gidon Bromberg.
Peru notes with deep concern and regrets that the
destructive cycle between Israelis and Palestinians
is not stopping, which constitutes an unsustainable
and destabilizing scenario for the Middle East and
for the international community. We are alarmed that
the prospects for a political solution are becoming
increasingly vague, and that unilateral decisions and
actions, or announcements thereof, may degenerate
into an even greater escalation of tension and violence.
Guided by its commitment to multilateralism,
international law and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, Peru supports the solution of two States with
internationally recognized and secure borders, to be
negotiated directly between Israel and Palestine on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders. These negotiations must
also determine the final status of Jerusalem.
We recognize Israel’s right to provide for its
own security and existence through the exercise of
self-defence, as long as it is exercised in accordance
with the principles of legality, proportionality and
precaution. The human rights of Palestinian citizens,
including minors, cannot be overlooked. To that end,
we must recall Israel’s obligation to comply with the
resolutions emanating from the Security Council. In
particular, we consider it urgent to put an end to the
increased-settlement, building-demolition and eviction
practices in the Palestinian territories occupied since
1967, in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016). Such
practices are contrary to international law, jeopardize
the territorial integrity of the Palestinian State and
undermine the chances of achieving a two-State solution.
We are also dismayed by the increasing deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, and how it contributes to increased levels of
radicalization and extremism among its population.
We emphasize the urgency of ending the blockade
of the Gaza Strip, which began prior to the recovery
of control of the area by the Palestinian Authority,
and of providing Israel with the necessary guarantees
for its security. We also consider it important to align
humanitarian assistance with development plans that
offer hope and opportunities to the youngest. Projects
such as those related to water promoted by the EcoPeace
seem to us to be very relevant in this regard.
We wish to join in the expressions of concern made
by various Council members following the unilateral

S/PV. 8517

decision of the Israeli Government to withhold a
significant amount of Palestinian tax revenues, given
the humanitarian impact that this has on the afflicted
Palestinians. We welcome the announcement by the
League of Arab States regarding temporary financial
contributions to cover that shortfall, but we believe
that should not obviate the need for the Paris Protocol,
which governs economic relations between Israel and
the Palestinian Authority, from being respected.
We would like to conclude by expressing our full
support for the efforts of the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
to prevent further escalation and promote dialogue
between the parties, as well as by reaffirming our
commitment to the search for a solution to the question
of Palestine, which will contribute to the achievement
of sustainable peace in the region.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Following the minute of
silence at the beginning of our meeting today, I would
like to join others in expressing our condolences for the
victims of the terrorist attacks in Sri Lanka, the United
States, Burkina Faso and other countries. We condemn
any attack that claims innocent lives.
Let me also begin by thanking the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for her briefing, as well as the
other briefers, who reminded us what is happening on
the ground.
Today’s open debate also takes place following the
issuance of the report by the Independent Commission
of Inquiry on the Protests in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory on the violence committed against the
Palestinians in Gaza since 31 March 2018. The
Commission’s report is a watershed in the history of the
occupied territory, as it exposes Israel’s use of extreme
violence, including live ammunition at close range,
against Palestinians involved in civilian activities. That
is a blatant disregard and violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights — and there is no
guarantee that it will not be repeated given the slightest
excuse. Against that backdrop, allow me to start with
my first point, which concerns the humanitarian
situation in Palestine.
In the light of the financial problems confronting the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), we need to pay
attention to the humanitarian challenges in Gaza. The
blockade must also be put to an end. The suffering of

19-1225425/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Palestinians is also being made worse owing to
Israel’s withholding of the tax revenues belonging to
the Palestinian Authority. We reiterate our full support
for the stance of the Palestinian Authority, which
rejects the acceptance of portions of the payment. It is
the Palestinians’ money and should be paid in full, and
without preconditions. We again call on Member States
to maintain and mobilize assistance to the Palestinians.
For our part, Indonesia recently pledged to provide
additional $1 million to UNRWA.
Secondly, with regard to the resolution of the
conflict, we believe that any peace talks and negotiations
must have a clear basis and goals. That is explicitly
reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016), in which the goal
of negotiations was also clearly defined as “achieving,
without delay, a comprehensive, just and lasting peace”
and “an end to the Israeli occupation that began in
1967” (resolution 2334 (2016), para. 9). Based on the
well-known parameters, a time frame should be set for
achieving a two-State solution, with an independent
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital, and
a just solution to the plight of the Palestineian refugees
based on the relevant resolutions. For any Middle
East peace plan to be successful, it must provide just
and permanent solutions to all final-status issues.
Furthermore, we caution against the lure of interim
arrangements. History proves they can be exploited
by the occupying Power to gain time to finalize its
settlement, colonization and annexation agenda, and in
the end, they make a solution more difficult to achieve.
That brings me to my final point, which concerns
the inaction of the Security Council. We have a twoState solution on the table but, at the rate we are going,
only one State will exist, and that is not Palestine. If
that were to happen, it would be a tragedy not only
for the people of Palestine but also for the credibility
of this organ and its resolutions. We reiterate that the
expansion of settlements, violence and many other
violations of resolution 2334 (2016) and other relevant
resolutions are a blatant affront to the authority of
this body. International and regional efforts to end the
Israeli occupation based on United Nations resolutions,
the Quartet road map, the Madrid principles and the
Arab Peace Initiative must be intensified.
For our part, during Indonesia’s presidency of the
Council in May, we will organize a Security Council
Arria Formula meeting on the core problem of the
Palestinian question, which is the settlements issue.
26/64

29/04/2019

That exercise is intended to take stock of possible ways
the Council can take action in response to that problem.
This is a critical moment in history, and collective
efforts are crucial. Indonesia calls for the international
consensus to be maintained, strengthened and respected.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
At the outset, Côte d’Ivoire would like to vigorously
condemn the heinous attacks perpetrated in Burkina
Faso and San Diego and express its deepest condolences
to the families of the victims, as well as its support
to the relevant authorities and its solidarity with the
Mozambican authorities. Our thoughts are also with
the family of Major General Francis Vib-Sanziri of
Ghana, Chief of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force.
My delegation welcomes the convening of
this meeting and congratulates Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, on her very informative
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. We would also like to thank
Ms. Nada Majdalani and Mr. Gidon Bromberg for
their briefings.
The Israeli-Palestinian dispute is today one of
the most complex conflicts, which the international
community has been facing for several decades. Despite
numerous mediation efforts by the United Nations and
bilateral partners, the crisis remains unresolved. The
ongoing political and security challenges in the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank, including the situation in
Hebron, as well as the serious humanitarian crisis
affecting Palestinians have, over the years, eroded the
hopes for a lasting peace that were raised by the Oslo
Accords, which were signed in 1993. In addition, the
shrinking space for possible political compromises
between the parties, as well as recurrent inflammatory
ideology and rhetoric, are exacerbating armed tensions
and confrontations. Notwithstanding that bleak picture,
Côte d’Ivoire continues to believe that peace between
Israelis and Palestinians is still possible.
My country’s commitment to dialogue as the
preferred means of settling disputes between peoples
and our unwavering position in support of the security
of the State of Israel and the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination are the
foundations of the message of peace that my country has
always conveyed to all parties to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. In short, Côte d’Ivoire strongly supports the
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

solution of two States coexisting peacefully within the
1967 borders. Given the current impasse and the vicious
cycle of violence that it engenders, my delegation
supports the international consensus on the need to
relaunch the Israeli-Palestinian peace process in order
to find mutually acceptable solutions to key issues, such
as the status of Jerusalem, the lifting of the blockade
on Gaza and the security of the Palestinian population
in Hebron. Côte d’Ivoire takes the opportunity of this
debate to once again call on the parties to the conflict to
engage resolutely in a constructive dialogue and abstain
from any unilateral action that could revive tensions.
My country is deeply concerned about the
consequences of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the
humanitarian situation, particularly in Gaza, which
is characterized by increasingly difficult access to
health-care services, ongoing water shortages and
power outages. The humanitarian crisis is aggravated
by a difficult socioeconomic situation, marked by
irregular payments of civil servants’ salaries and
a sharp increase in unemployment, in particular in
Gaza, where more than 50 per cent of the working
population, most of whom are young people, has been
affected. Côte d’Ivoire therefore reiterates its appeal
to international partners to continue their material and
financial support for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees, whose work is
vital for populations in distress.
Like the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the ongoing
crises in the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen are
also a matter of concern to my delegation. With regard
to Syria, Côte d’Ivoire believes that the following
three major actions could help to further strengthen
the international community’s peace efforts: first,
maintaining the ceasefire in Idlib governorate in order
to prevent further loss of life and a worsening of the
humanitarian crisis; secondly, ensuring the sustainable
delivery of aid by removing all obstacles and ceasing
hostilities; and, lastly, engaging stakeholders in
implementing the relevant provisions of resolution
2254 (2015).
With regard to the conflict in Yemen, my country
welcomes the mediation efforts of the international
community, including the United Nations, and calls
for their continuation in order to reverse the trend of
violence, overcome food insecurity and resolve issues
of access to drinking water, primary health care and the
risk of epidemics.

S/PV. 8517

All such efforts will unfortunately be in vain
until the parties to the conflict definitively renounce
a military solution to the crisis to engage in talks
and make the necessary compromises with a view to
building together a future of peace and stability for
all Yemenis.
Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its support to the Special
Envoys of the Secretary-General for their dedication
to peace in the Middle East under difficult conditions.
My country remains convinced that there can be no
lasting solution to either the Palestinian-Israeli dispute
or the armed conflicts in Syria and Yemen except
through dialogue.
In conclusion, my country urges all international,
regional and national partners to redouble their efforts
to restore peace to this troubled region and to put an end
to the suffering of millions of people.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.
First, I would like to thank the Israeli Ambassador
for responding to the question that I put to him in
our most recent meeting (see S/PV.8489). I listened
very carefully to the four pillars that he outlined as a
basis of Israeli policy. I also positively noted that he
included international law among them. I think that
is very important. I noted a certain selection among
international law. He heard our British colleague
speaking with regard to the Balfour Declaration, I also
missed referrals to resolutions 478 (1980), 497 (1981)
and, in particular, 2334 (2016), which is the most recent
and a very comprehensive resolution. With regard to
what the resolution says about settlements and so on, I
refer to what my French colleague has said previously.
But I would also remind the Israeli and Palestinian
representative that resolution 2334 (2016) condemns all
acts of terrorism, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric
and calls for such acts to stop.
Like others, I would like to recommit and state that
Germany supports a negotiated two-State solution and
is against any annexation. At the same time, Germany
is committed to Israel’s security as a democratic Jewish
State. I noted that democracy was not mentioned among
the four pillars.
I share my Indonesian colleague’s frustration
about the inaction of the Council. Also following our
last meeting, I took up the suggestion of the Israeli
Ambassador to have a closed meeting of the Security

19-1225427/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Council with the representatives of Palestine and Israel.
I was not able to accomplish that. While it was not much
of an issue with regard to substance, I was not able to
reach agreement on the formalities for such a meeting.
Given the lack of progress that we have achieved,
we took the initiative to try to break out of the ritual
repetition of known positions. We wanted to put a
glimmer of hope into the Chamber, and we invited
representatives of EcoPeace Middle East to present
what they are doing in a political landscape that
undermines the prospect of a two-State solution and
where developments contribute to the entrenchment of
a one-State reality.
Let me briefly return to the briefing by the
Co-Directors of EcoPeace Middle East. I thoroughly
enjoyed what they said and they demonstrated that
cooperation was possible. I thank them for their
engagement and for the fact that, as civil society, they
can play a very important role in building trust and
confidence, including regarding the mayors jumping
into the Jordan river. That trust that they have built is a
prerequisite for a solution that is based on negotiations
and cooperation, which we desperately need.
The second point that I wanted to make is that water
is not an esoteric issue. It is part of the Oslo Accords
and a final-status issue.
Let me conclude with a general point. Humanitarian,
resource and water issues are key insofar as they have
implications for security. Germany will continue to have
the relationship between climate change and security
on its agenda. I thank the briefers again in that regard.
On the topic of climate change, I would also add my
voice to those who expressed their condolences to the
victims of the terrible disaster that we have seen for the
second time in Mozambique.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Kiyoto
Tsuji, Parliamentary Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Japan.
Mr. Tsuji (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important open debate. I am grateful for
the informative briefings by Under-Secretary-General
28/64

29/04/2019

DiCarlo as well as Mr. Bromberg and Ms. Majdalani of
EcoPeace Middle East.
Japan continues to support a two-State solution,
where the State of Israel and a future State of
Palestine live side by side in peace. Japan’s position
remains unchanged.
We are concerned about the current impasse in the
political process. While there is no easy way towards
Middle East peace, it is important to resume direct
dialogue among the parties to advance the peace
process. In that regard, the continued engagement
by the United States is important, and we hope that
its peace plan, which will be released in the not-toodistant future, will serve as a constructive basis for
direct negotiations between Israel and Palestine.
The conflict should be resolved through
confidence-building and negotiations. We strongly
condemn violence and terrorism against innocent
citizens. The Government of Japan once again urges
the Government of Israel to fully freeze its settlement
activities, including the construction plan approved
by Israel this month, which undermine the viability
of a two-State solution. Unilateral attempts to change
the status quo by force or coercion are not acceptable.
Japan does not recognize the annexation of the Golan
Heights by Israel. That position remains unchanged.
We attach importance to the rule of law. The issue
of unilateral attempts to change the status quo by
force or coercion should be properly addressed by the
international community.
Japan continues to contribute to creating an
environment conducive to the realization of peace by
fostering confidence-building measures among the
parties through unique efforts such as the Corridor for
Peace and Prosperity initiative and its flagship project,
the Jericho Agro-Industrial Park. We highly appreciate
Israel’s continued support for those initiatives.
Let me finish by reiterating Japan’s continued
support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
The Agency is crucial not only for humanitarian
purposes but also for stability in the region. That was
reaffirmed at the ministerial meeting on UNRWA
that I attended earlier this month. This year we have
already contributed approximately $32 million to the
Agency. Japan has also been making a significant effort
to expand UNRWA’s donor base by boosting Asian
nations’ involvement, including through the framework
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the Conference on Cooperation among East Asian
Countries for Palestinian Development. The next
meeting of the Conference at the senior officials level
will be held in the West Bank this summer.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): Thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this open debate. I want to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her statement as
well as the briefers from EcoPeace.
The Book of Books tells us:
“To everything there is a season, and a time for
every purpose under heaven. There is a time of war,
and a time of peace”.
I am sure that all present have noticed that the time
for peace is not upon us yet and that, if one looks at the
region, there is no sign of its coming soon, as we heard
this morning.
The question of Palestine is still a source of
concern for the region and for the world. On this
question, the parties are gridlocked on every issue
that could lead to peace. The situation on the ground
is deteriorating, and instead of the talk of a twoState solution and land swaps that had characterized
negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis and was
enshrined in agreements and resolutions, we hear talk
of annexation of the West Bank or parts of it and of the
possible collapse of the whole peace process and the
peace paradigm and its basis.
The road to negotiations is blocked, and the main
negotiating partner, the Palestinian people, are under
tremendous political and economic pressure born of the
new political reality that is being imposed on them and
a debilitating financial situation coupled with a fragile
security one. The Palestinian Prime Minister says
that there is nothing left to negotiate about and asks
a legitimate question: where are we going to have the
Palestinian State?
The Palestinian Prime Minister calls the withholding
of Palestinian tax revenues by the Israelis a “financial
war” to push the Palestinians to surrender. There is fear
on the part of the international community that this is
bringing the Palestinian Authority to near financial
collapse and threatening its stability. This is coupled
with distrust and a total breakdown in communication
among the parties. There are no official contacts

S/PV. 8517

between the main parties that are supposed to negotiate
peace and discuss the much-promised peace plan.
The bases of a peaceful settlement are under
tremendous pressure and a source of concern, especially
the status of Jerusalem and the United Nations
resolutions that for more than 70 years constituted the
international legality on which any equitable, just and
comprehensive solution must rest, from resolutions 242
(1967) to 338 (1973) and 478 (1980), ending with 2334
(2016). The Council, as the French Ambassador said,
cannot remain silent on this.
On the ground, things are no better. Gaza is still
bleeding. The tragic targeting of civilians continues, and
despite the international outrage there is no indication
that this will come to an end. The Israeli decision not
to renew the mandate of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron is yet another threat to stability.
What is missing today is not United Nations
resolutions or peace plans or road maps for peace. All
of this has been done time and again. What is needed
is the political will to choose life and to take the road
to peace. That is why the Arab world made its strategic
choice for peace in its Arab Peace Initiative and still
believes that a comprehensive, just and equitable
solution is the only way forward.
But this peace cannot come through annexation or
recognition of the illegal annexation of occupied land.
Lebanon is seriously concerned about the implications
of recognizing the sovereignty of Israel over the
occupied Golan Heights. It considers this a flagrant
violation of resolution 497 (1981). Lebanon is also
concerned about the continued Israeli occupation of the
Lebanese territories seized by force in 1967.
I am pleased to report to the Council that over the
past three months, important political and institutional
developments took place at the domestic level in
Lebanon. A new National Unity Government was
formed, headed by Prime Minister Saad Hariri, setting
a very ambitious and proactive reform agenda. The
Government has shown a robust dedication to addressing
urgent priorities, especially in terms of the economic
and fiscal situation, structural reform and combating
corruption. It intends to preserve this momentum
with a view to making up for the time lost in the
formation process and meeting the many commitments
that Lebanon has made under the Paris Conférence
économique pour le développement, par les réformes et
avec les entreprises — the CEDRE Conference.

19-1225429/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

However, persistent challenges remain. The
continued Israeli occupation of Lebanese territories
and the daily violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty and
resolution 1701 (2006) are keeping the situation on the
southern border fragile. In the past three months alone,
Israel has violated Lebanese sovereignty 431 times: 112
times by land, 149 times by sea and 170 times by air.
This has to be noted, condemned and stopped.
Lebanon remains committed to the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and to
working towards a permanent ceasefire on its
southern border. It is also committed to continuing its
constructive engagement to settle border issues within
the framework of the tripartite mechanism and the
good offices of the United Nations and international
partners. It also hopes that it can one day soon move
to a permanent ceasefire. The Council can contribute
greatly to making this a reality by taking all the
necessary measures at its disposal to compel Israel to
shoulder its share of responsibility in this regard.
Finally, Lebanon remains committed to supporting
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and calls on all
States to renew their commitments and to help it uphold
its responsibility towards the Palestinian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
at the outset to congratulate Germany on its presidency
of the Security Council this month and also for having
so confidently and professionally led the work of the
Council. I want as well to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs and Peacebuilding,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for her thorough briefing. I
also express my appreciation for the efforts made by
the United Nations to achieve peace in the region, and
I thank the two Co-Directors of EcoPeace Middle East
for their briefings.
Against the backdrop of the troubled regional and
international situations following the emergence of
several crises of international concern, Jordan, under
the leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah II, has
continued its tireless efforts in support of our Palestinian
brothers in their just and legitimate struggle to realize
their national rights and to create an independent
Palestinian State across the June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. Jordan continues its
coordination with all international stakeholders,
30/64

29/04/2019

highlighting the constants from which we will not move
back. The Palestinian question, with all of its injustice
and suffering, is at the top of the priorities of Jordan’s
foreign policy this year, as has been the case each year
under the leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah II,
who said:
“Our Palestinian brothers deserve our full support
so that they can hold fast and continue to work with
the international community and its institutions
to achieve a just and comprehensive solution
that redresses the historical injustices they have
suffered and realize their right to a State. Jordan
will continue to carry out its national and historical
duty to support the Palestinian question which is a
first priority for Jordan.”
The Hashemite historical custodianship of the
Muslim and Christian Holy Sites in Jerusalem is a task
that was entrusted to us, and we will continue to carry it
out to the best of our ability. The protection and defence
of the Holy Sites and their Arab identity, whether
Christian or Muslim, is of paramount importance to His
Majesty King Abdullah II.
We stress in that regard that Jordan will fully
use its capacities to preserve the current historical
and legal status of the Holy Sites and to ensure that
Israel, the occupying Power, respects its commitment
under international law to guarantee the security of the
faithful, so as Jerusalem can remain a symbol of peace
and harmony. We underscore the freedom of entry to or
exit from the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
We condemn the repeated Israeli violations of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the latest example of which was
its being stormed by hundreds of extremists over the
past few days under the protection of the Israeli police
and special forces. In that context, I recall the final
communiqués issued at the Arab-European summit,
held in Sharm El-Sheikh in February; the Arab Summit,
held in Tunisia in March; the Russian-Arab Cooperation
Forum, all of which emphasized the importance of the
Hashemite custodianship of Islamic and Christian holy
sites in Jerusalem.
As for the issue of Palestinian refugees, the
international community must continue to shoulder
its legal, political and moral responsibilities in their
regard, as their issue remains one of the most important
final status issues and must be resolved on the basis of
the resolutions of international legitimacy, in particular
General Assembly resolution 194 (III) and the Arab
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Peace Initiative, in order to ensure the right of refugees
to return and be compensated. In that regard, we stress
that all final status issues must be resolved through
direct negotiations. We also emphasize the need to
continue to provide support to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA). We recall the visit of the SecretaryGeneral earlier this month to Jordan, where he met with
a group of aspiring UNRWA students in the Al-Baqa’a
refugee camp. We support the Secretary-General’s call
to allow 700 UNRWA schools to continue to provide
education to more than 530,000 male and female
Palestinian students in its five areas of operation.
With regard to the Syrian crisis, we reaffirm
Jordan’s firm position that a political solution to the
crisis must be reached. Syria must recover and restore
its role as a cornerstone of stability in the region and a
key component of joint Arab action. Political approaches
should be based on the principle of protecting the
sisterly country of Syria, preserving its independence
and territorial integrity and ensuring the safe and
voluntary return of its refugees to their country, cities
and villages of origin. That is the objective around
which we must all unite.
On behalf of the international community, Jordan
has hosted its brothers from Syria and shared its
available resources with them. We will continue to
do so until their safe and voluntary return has been
secured. In that regard, I wish to emphasize the need to
support the host countries of Syrian refugees, which is
a shared responsibility.
On the occupied Syrian Golan, it remains our
position that it is an occupied Syrian territory, in
accordance with all resolutions of international
legitimacy, particularly resolution 497 (1981), which
was adopted unanimously by the Council.
The escalation in Libya must come to an end,
which will require a calm and restrained approach. We
stress the importance of reaching a political solution
and supporting the efforts of the United Nations to
overcome the crisis, guarantee security and ensure the
stability and territorial integrity of Libya.
It is important that we pursue our common
global efforts to combat terrorism, obscurantism and
extremism. In spite of the defeat of Da’esh in Iraq and
Syria, the threat of terrorism has not yet ended and
remains a challenge. Jordan continues to support Iraq
in its counter-terrorism endeavours and will continue

S/PV. 8517

to support the country in its reconstruction and
stabilization efforts, given Iraq’s fundamental role as a
pillar of security and stability in the region.
Finally, the crises in the region require all of us
to show greater levels of cooperation in order to
combat common challenges and build a future that our
peoples deserve — one that is more secure and stable,
that provides our youth with excellent opportunities
and prospects, and our societies with sustainable
development, and that is full of hope and prosperity.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.
I also wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate through the lunch hour, as
we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): We have come here on
numerous occasions and stated that the Palestinians have
the right to live like the rest of us. They have the right to
be free and secure, and they have the right to enjoy what
is their own. Yet nothing has changed. A systematic
effort is being made to undermine the inalienable
rights of the Palestine people. The illegal occupation
continues. Illegal settlement activities continue. The
Israeli security forces use disproportionate force against
Palestinian civilians. Gaza is still under blockade.
Since the Great March of Return demonstrations,
humanitarian circumstances have become even worse.
Thousands of people have been deliberately shot in
the kness by Israeli forces and left with devastating
wounds. Humanitarian organizations on the ground
report that many of the wounds have become infected,
preventing reconstructive surgery, which is rarely
available in Gaza. The violence continues and recent
weeks have seen a further escalation of tension in the
area. Inaction in the face of persistent non-compliance
with international law and United Nations resolutions
further encourages Israel. The international community,
in particular the Security Council, cannot turn a blind
eye to the situation. There is an urgent need to revitalize
the peace process.

19-1225431/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The only viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is the two-State solution based on the 1967
borders, with Palestine and Israel living side by side in
peace. The rights of the Palestinian people, including the
right to self-determination, are not up for negotiation.
For decades, the basis for peace negotiations has been
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet road map. That was explicitly reaffirmed in
resolution 2334 (2016). The terms of reference cannot be
changed. What is needed now is to define a time frame
to realize the two-State solution, with an independent
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Unfortunately, the plight of Palestine refugees
is compounded by the financial crisis of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). In the absence
of a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the
Arab-Israeli conflict, the Agency’s mandate remains
vital to the refugees and to the region and beyond. It
is our collective and moral duty to support the Agency
and extend its mandate later this year. As Chair of
the UNRWA Advisory Commission and the Working
Group on the Financing of UNRWA, Turkey will step
up its efforts to contribute to the Agency’s work and
calls on all actors to do the same.
Recently, one Member State decided to recognize
Israeli sovereignty over the Golan Heights. That decision
is and should be null and void. It is in contravention
of resolution 497 (1981). It violates international law.
Unilateral steps will not change the facts. The Golan
Heights is territory occupied by Israel. The annexation
of territory by force is prohibited under international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations, and
under the law of State responsibility, States are obliged
not to recognize the annexation of territory as a result
of force.
In each and every open debate on the Middle East,
we are obliged to focus on a gloomy picture. But these
problems are not inherent to the history or culture of
the region; they are there because of the lack of justice
and fair treatment. For a lasting peace, justice must be
served, and we should contribute to that by collectively
upholding international law. That requires unity,
courage and resilience, particularly on the part of the
Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
32/64

29/04/2019

Ms. Juul (Norway): I will today focus my statement
on the Middle East peace process, as I am conscious of
the time restriction that the President just mentioned.
A slightly longer version of our statement that touches
on the situation in Syria, Yemen and Libya can be
read online.
There is a strong international consensus on how
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict should be resolved.
Only a negotiated two-State solution can create durable
peace. A political solution cannot be substituted by
institution-building and economic development alone,
even if those are essential building blocks for a future
Palestinian State.
We are deeply concerned about the current fiscal
crisis of the Palestinian Authority (PA), especially
regarding the clearance revenues of the PA budget,
which amounts to two thirds of its entire budget. In
March, based on a recent law adopted by the Knesset,
the Israeli Government decided to withhold 6 per
cent of the revenues it collects on behalf of the PA for
Palestinian prisoner payments, which was followed
by a Palestinian decision not to accept any clearance
revenues unless the entire transfers are reinstated.
The PA is currently implementing serious austerity
measures that are not sustainable. The donors cannot
fill the financing gap, and the existence of the PA could
be at stake if the fiscal crisis is not resolved. Norway
urges both parties to do their utmost to be pragmatic
and find a practical solution.
The situation in Gaza remains of great concern.
The people of Gaza will not have a normal life and the
economy cannot be sustained without lifting the current
closure regime. The PA, Israel and the donors must
mobilize support for the humanitarian package and
key infrastructure projects for Gaza. A condition for
further development is that the PA must return to Gaza.
Norway will chair the next meeting of the
international donor group to Palestine, the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians, which will be hosted by the
European Union in Brussels tomorrow, 30 April. In
addition to addressing the current fiscal crisis of the
PA, we will take the opportunity to urge the parties to
close some of the outstanding fiscal files. Progress on
those files is essential to stabilizing and improving the
situation towards a negotiated two-State solution. We
call on the parties to demonstrate genuine commitment
to the two-State solution and to take credible steps
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to reverse the current negative trends on the ground,
including settlement activities and acts of violence.
Norway has a long-standing commitment to peace
and security in the Middle East, and we will remain an
active and consistent partner to achieve that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
once again condemns in the strongest terms the
illegitimate and immoral decision of the President of
the United States of America with regard to Israel’s
so-called sovereignty over the occupied Syrian
Arab Golan. It constitutes a flagrant violation of
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
the relevant resolutions of the Organization, including
resolution 497 (1981), which was adopted unanimously
by the Council. That resolution acknowledged that the
Syrian Arab Golan is an occupied territory and that
any actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, in
the occupied Syrian Arab Golan, are null and void and
have no legal effect.
That decision by the United States represents
an attempt to undermine international legitimacy,
revealing the true reality and scale of its criminal
scheme to legitimize the occupation, spread chaos and
destruction and divide our region. It also revealed a
serious abrogation of the United States Administration’s
obligations — especially those associated with being a
permanent member of the Security Council — and the
fact that it is an enemy to all peoples around the world
who believe in international legitimacy and reject
policies of hegemony, colonialism and depriving people
and States of their rights.
The entire international community has rejected
the decision of the United States and reiterated its
commitment to resolution 497 (1981) and other relevant
United Nations resolutions that reaffirm the Syrian
Arab Republic’s sovereignty over the occupied Syrian
Arab Golan. International positions have shown that
the decision will serve only to further isolate the United
States, even among its closest allies.
The Security Council has been prevented from
discharging its responsibilities and mandate in
maintaining international peace and security as a result
of the position held by the United States Administration
in support of Israel’s occupation policies. The failure

S/PV. 8517

of the United Nations to implement its resolutions
on the settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict has
encouraged Israel to continue its aggressive behaviour
and its violation of international resolutions by
refusing to withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan
to the borders of 4 June 1967, in accordance with the
relevant international resolutions. Israel has launched
aggression after aggression against the territories of the
Syrian Arab Republic, the latest of which took place on
13 April.
Israel continues to perpetrate war crimes and
crimes against humanity in the occupied Syrian Golan,
including by confiscating land and property, expanding
settlements, looting wealth, attempting to falsify the
history of the Golan, stealing its monuments, laying
mines and depriving the steadfast Syrian citizens of
their rights, including their right to bear the identity
of their mother country and communicate with their
parents in their mother country, Syria.
Moreover,
Israel,
the
occupying
Power,
continues to exercise its policies of oppression, racial
discrimination, arbitrary detention and terrorism
against Syrian citizens. It carries out fake trials
and hands out long prison sentences, as is the case
with the Syrian Mandela — prisoner Sidqi Sleiman
Al-Makt — who was arbitrarily detained for exposing
Israel’s cooperation with the terrorist Al-Nusra Front
and other terrorist groups in the disengagement of
forces zone in the Syrian Golan. He was sentenced to
14 years imprisonment, having already spent 27 years
in the occupation prisons. We call on the international
community to work for the release of Sidqi Sleiman
Al-Makt and young prisoner Amal Fawzi Abou Saleh,
as well as those under house arrest.
My Government wishes to stress that the occupied
Syrian Arab Golan is an integral part of the territories of
the Syrian Arab Republic. Recovering the Golan from
Israeli occupation by any means under international
law remains a priority in Syrian national policy. It is
our eternal right that we will not compromise or waive.
Finally, the Syrian Arab Republic remains steadfast
in its principled position in support of the right to selfdetermination of the Palestinian people, as well as the
establishment of their independent State with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and the right to return for
refugees, in accordance with resolution 194 (III) of
1948. We renew our call to grant the State of Palestine
full membership at the United Nations.

19-1225433/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

29/04/2019

The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States.

which were agreed to in international multilateral
frameworks led by the Middle East Quartet.

Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): Today’s open
debate is taking place amid extremely complex regional
and international circumstances, in the light of the
uncertainty surrounding the future of several key issues
in the Middle East region and a number of successive
developments and events taking place in many countries
of the region, as well as the disregard of certain major
Powers for multilateral international legitimacy, which
represents the United Nations approach to addressing
issues in the Middle East, particularly that of the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories in Palestine, Syria
and Lebanon.

At the same time, we reiterated at both Arab League
Summits our total opposition to and condemnation
of the unilateral decision of the United States
Administration to recognize Jerusalem as the capital
of the State of Israel. We also rejected its decisions to
end its funding of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, to
support Israel’s suspension of fundamental transfers
to the Palestinian Authority and the closure of the
PLO office in Washington, D.C.,. We also condemn
the United States attempts to deprive Palestinians of
their inalienable rights, including their right to selfdetermination, the right of return and compensation
for Palestinian refugees, and the just resolution of their
cause in accordance with General Assembly resolution
194 (III) of 1948. Moreover, we reject the intention
of the United States to support Israel’s annexation of
illegal settlements established on occupied Palestinian
territories, in blatant violation of resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 497 (1981) and 2334 (2016).

In that context, the League of Arab States has
intensified its activities at the highest level in order to
counter those illegal positions. The twenty-ninth Arab
League Summit, held in March 2018 in Dhahran, Saudi
Arabia — the so-called Jerusalem Summit — as well
as the thirtieth Arab League Summit held in Tunis in
March — the so-called Summit of Determination and
Solidarity — both adopted a number of resolutions
and declarations. They have underscored the
determination of Arab States to implement international
legitimacy in accordance with international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and a number of
resolutions and declarations of the Security Council
and General Assembly on many issues. Those issues
have been subjected to fierce attacks through unilateral
decisions that have blatantly violated the rules of
international legitimacy and multilateral rules of action
through the United Nations and the Security Council.
At the two Summits, the League of Arab States
underscored its determination to continue to implement
the key principles that were adopted in Madrid and
Oslo, as well as the Arab Peace Initiative, the principle
of land for peace and the two-State solution as the
basis for the establishment of a Palestinian State with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We also stressed at the
Summits that the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) will remain the sole legitimate representative
of the Palestinian people, under the leadership of
President Mahmoud Abbas, and that the main principles
of the peace process, together with relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, constitute
a firm basis for achieving the desired settlement of
the Palestinian question through direct negotiations
between the two parties on the five final status issues,
34/64

Most importantly, the Arab League Summits
unanimously affirmed our rejection of any deal or peace
initiative that does not conform with the international
terms of reference to the Middle East peace process.
We reject the use of any political or financial pressure
exerted on the Palestinian people and their leadership
with the aim of imposing unjust solutions to the
Palestinian question that are incompatible with the
international terms of reference of the peace process.
We also reiterated our support for and endorsement of
the peace plan presented to the Council by President
Mahmoud Abbas of the State of Palestine on 20 February
2018 in an attempt to counter the clear United States
bias towards Israel (see S/PV.8183). The plan is based
on strengthening multilateral international frameworks
through the Security Council, and it has not yet received
the due attention of the Council.
The most recent Arab League Summit in Tunisia
also affirmed our rejection and condemnation of the
decision of the United States of America to recognize
the sovereignty of Israel over the occupied Syrian Arab
Golan. We consider that decision null and void, and we
believe that it constitutes a grave violation of the Charter
of the United Nations as well as Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 242 (1967) and 497
(1981). We reiterate the full support of the League of
Arab States for the right of the Syrian Arab Republic to
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8517

restore its sovereignty over the occupied Golan, as well
as Lebanon’s right to restore its sovereignty over the
Lebanese Shaba’a Farms, the Kfar Shuba hills and the
northern part of the village of Al-Ghajar.

achieve our ultimate goal of a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East.

The Foreign Ministers of Member States have been
given a mandate to use all political, diplomatic and
legal means to continue to confront the decisions of the
United States and intensify bilateral and multilateral
communication with the international community,
including the possibility of submitting a draft resolution
to the Security Council and seeking an advisory
opinion from the International Court of Justice stating
that the United States position is illegitimate, null and
void. The Group of Arab States in New York continues
its consultations with a view to implementing those
efforts in coordination with many States, international
and regional organizations, as well as those that have
expressed their rejection of the United States decisions
in accordance with their commitment to internationally
established positions, which is greatly appreciated by
the League of Arab States.

Mr. Gertze (Namibia): As your presidency of the
Council comes to a close, Sir, I would like to commend
you for the manner in which you have led the Council
this month. We further thank you for having organized
this important debate and for the moment of silence at
the beginning of this debate devoted to the victims of
terrorism and the recent terror attacks. I would also
like to thank the briefers for their comprehensive and
detailed briefings.

Having referred to the resolutions and declarations
of the past two Arab League Summits, I cannot
conclude without first expressing our regret on behalf
of the Arab League at the shift from dealing with the
Middle East issue within the formal international
multilateral framework of the United Nations and its
Security Council to parties outside the United Nations.
We now see that there are leaks, speculations, articles
and statements issued via social media platforms. There
have even been some press statements calling into
question the seriousness and effectiveness of the Arab
proposal contained in the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002.
The Arab demands are being ignored. They
constitute the basis of the peace process and its
objectives, including the settlement of the five
final status issues through direct negotiations
between the State of Israel and the State of Palestine
under international supervision that is neutral and
transparent. We call on the Security Council now more
than ever before to regain the initiative in dealing
with the important issue of the Middle East and
reaffirm the foundations of international legitimacy
within international multilateral frameworks in order
to strengthen the role of diplomacy for peace and
enhance the role of the United Nations. The League of
Arab States will continue to support the international
community represented by this Council until we

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.

Since the previous open debate on the Middle East
(see S/PV.8449), the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has
been dealt new and more devastating announcements.
The two-State solution is drifting further and further
away as it faces new hurdles. For that reason, I believe
that it is important to first highlight the positive
developments that have occurred since I last spoke
before the Council.
Namibia welcomes the formation of a new
Palestinian Government, with Prime Minister
Mohammad Shtayyeh at its head. We hope that the
formation of that Government will encourage the
advancement of intra-Palestinian reconciliation. We
further welcome the positive developments in the
assistance and delivery of humanitarian aid to the Gaza
Strip. The creation of 4,200 jobs, with another 15,000
expected soon, through the implementation of the cashfor-work programme, is encouraging for Gaza and its
economic development, which remains restricted due
to the imposed Israeli blockade.
Those most recent developments unfortunately
represent the only few beneficial steps taken in the
past three months. While demonstrations along
the perimeter fence in Gaza have continued, on
28 February the independent international commission
of inquiry on the protests in the occupied Palestinian
territory released its report and presented its findings
to the Human Rights Council (A/HRC/40/74). The
commission investigated all 189 fatalities and tracked
more than 300 injuries caused by the Israeli security
forces along the border fence between 30 March
2018 and 31 December 2018, and found reasonable
grounds to believe that in all but two cases, “the use
of live ammunition by Israeli security forces against
demonstrators was unlawful” (A/HRC/40/74, para. 94).

19-1225435/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We call on all parties to implement the recommendations
made by the commission, especially with regard to
the need for Israel to refrain from using lethal force
against civilians.
Settler-related violence also increased during the
reporting period. As a result of the decision taken by
the Israeli Government not to renew the mandate of the
Temporary International Presence in Hebron (TIPH),
thereby removing an essential element of protection
for the local population, a greater number of violent
incidents transpired in the H2 area of Hebron. We echo
the words of the Secretary-General in our hope that an
agreement can be found by all parties to preserve the
long-standing and valuable contribution of TIPH to
conflict prevention and the protection of Palestinians
in Hebron.
As outlined in the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2019/251) on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016), Israel continues to expand its settlement activity
in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem. The
demolition and seizure of Palestinian-owned structures
also continue unabated. On 7 April, Prime Minister
Netanyahu vowed to annex settlements in the occupied
West Bank. If undertaken, this would represent not
only the greatest but the gravest threat to the twoState solution.
Following President Trump’s decision in December
2017 to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel,
a month ago he signed an order recognizing Israeli
sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan. Namibia
wishes to recall that this measure goes against
resolutions 242 (1967) and 497 (1981), which declared
that the Israeli Golan Heights Law is null and void and
without international legal effect, and further called
on Israel to rescind its action. We urge the Security
Council to condemn this decision.
The Council meets on a monthly basis to discuss and
receive updates from the Special Coordinator regarding
the situation on the ground. Non-Council members are
able to take the floor on this matter on a quarterly basis.
I have been in my position as Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Namibia for a little over two years
now. In my time here, as many other Ambassadors have
done, I repeat the same words before the Council — that
settlement expansion is illegal under international law
and represents a threat to the two-State solution; that
the two-State solution remains the only viable and
realistic solution to this conflict; and that there is an
36/64

29/04/2019

urgent need for the parties to return to the negotiating
table. I reiterate all these words before the Council
again today.
But words are simply not enough. Strong political
will and desire are urgently required from all parties.
The Security Council must also play its vital role and
the international community at large must redouble
its collective efforts to work more diligently and
with greater determination to bring the conflict to an
end and to achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace between Israelis and Palestinians, with the
establishment of two States, ensuring the right to the
self-determination, freedom and independence of
Palestinians in their sovereign and independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me too begin by thanking
the German presidency for convening this open debate.
Discussions on this agenda item invariably leave
us with a mounting sense of despair at the deteriorating
situation in the region. Escalating violence, worsening
humanitarian crises and untold human suffering have
seriously undermined the long-cherished vision of
a peaceful Middle East. In Libya, regional rivalries
and external interference have imperilled a United
Nations-sponsored peace process, hurling the country
towards another protracted conflict and magnifying
the threat of a grave humanitarian crisis. International
efforts to find a political solution in Syria and ease the
humanitarian situation there have yet to accomplish the
desired objective. The political crisis in Yemen has also
produced an unprecedented humanitarian challenge.
Millions remain on the brink of famine.
This situation has been aggravated by the emergence
of a dangerous trend — the systematic erosion of the
established norms of international law and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, which is worsening
an already fragile regional situation. Inclusive political
processes founded on respect for international law
are being abandoned in favour of military solutions,
plunging the region into deeper instability and chaos.
Competing interests pursued by external powers are
further accentuating regional fault lines.
Another grim manifestation of this trend is evident
in attempts to erode the long-standing international
consensus on the status of Jerusalem, as well as the
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

unilateral decision to recognize Israel’s sovereignty
over the Syrian Golan. These measures have dealt a
severe blow to the rule of law and international norms,
besides frustrating the international community’s
efforts to find a long-term and peaceful solution to the
conflict in the Middle East.
Concern about the plight of Palestinians has
resonated in this Chamber for over seven decades now.
Regrettably, the suffering of the people of Palestine
continues to this day, with no hope of abatement. The
demolition of Palestinian homes continues across the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, while
Israel’s illegal settlements are expanding in blatant
disregard of international law and numerous Security
Council resolutions. Israeli control of and restrictions on
access to Muslim and Christian holy sites have further
inflamed tensions. In the midst of these disturbing
developments, the threat of the annexation of the West
Bank now looms large.
In the besieged Gaza strip, civilian lives, particularly
those of children and young people, remain under threat
amid another intensifying cycle of violence that risks a
broader escalation of the conflict. These infringements
of the collective will of the international community are
taking us further from the goal of a two-State solution,
which underpins the vision of a peaceful Middle East.
The Secretary-General has often reiterated
that there is no plan B. A viable, independent and
contiguous State of Palestine, on the basis of the
internationally agreed parameters, the pre-1967 borders
and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, remains the
only sustainable guarantee for enduring peace in the
region. On the humanitarian front, the mobilization
of resources to ensure sustainable funding for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East remains critical for over
5 million Palestinian refugees.
The Palestinian question, along with the Kashmir
issue, remains on the United Nations agenda and has
been so since its very inception. It is indeed regrettable
that the international community and the United
Nations have been unable to realize just and lasting
solutions to these disputes. As a result, the peoples of
the occupied lands in Palestine and in Kashmir have
endured prolonged repression and the denial of their
legitimate right to self-determination.
Lack of progress on the Palestinian issue has not
only frustrated the hopes and aspirations of generations

S/PV. 8517

of Palestinians, but has also resulted in endless hostility
and dissonance in the region. The continued erosion of
international law and the fundamental principles of
the Charter of the United Nations seriously undermine
the Council’s credibility and further highlight its
incapability of resolving long-standing disputes.
Lasting peace in the Middle East and elsewhere cannot
be accomplished without fully respecting the principles
of international law and embracing the fundamental
tenets of the Charter, which remains our sole instrument
of hope against injustice and oppression.
In conclusion, we would like to call on the
international community to uphold these principles and
to play its part in realizing the shared goal of a peaceful
Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the Chair
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Niang: I would like at the outset to congratulate
Germany and France on their joint presidency of the
Security Council.
In January, we urged the Security Council to take
action and make progress on the road to achieving
the two-State solution and the full realization of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people (see
S/PV.8449). This call has now become a matter of
utmost urgency as we face the expressed intention by
Israel to make the occupation irreversible and annex
parts of the West Bank territory.
Extending Israeli laws and sovereignty on settlements
in the West Bank is a flagrant violation of international
law and, if followed through, would thwart the chances
of reaching a peaceful solution. These declarations
must be condemned by the international community
and require urgent action in line with international law
and the relevant resolutions, as well as the international
community’s long-unfulfilled responsibilities towards
the Palestine question. If these worrying trends are left
unchallenged, they will contribute to the entrenchment
of the occupation, eroding the commitment to a twoState solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by
side in peace and security within the pre-1967 borders
and with a sovereign and independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The Committee was encouraged to note, during its
various activities and, most recently, in its meetings
with European Union and Belgian officials and

19-1225437/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

parliamentarians during the Committee delegation
visit to Brussels in March, that a solution based on
these long-standing parameters continues to enjoy the
overwhelming support of the international community.
Recently, steps have been taken to undermine the
permanent settlement of the conflict by unilaterally
dismantling the agreed building blocks of the final
status issues, including settlement construction, the
right of return of Palestine refugees and the status of
Jerusalem, among others. Moreover, the obligation
under international humanitarian law to protect the
Palestinian population is also being disregarded by the
occupying Power, including in Gaza. Regrettably, on
29 January, the mandate of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron was not renewed and international
monitors left the city, removing an essential element of
protection for the local population.
Israeli settlement planning and construction and
the demolition and confiscation of Palestinian property,
including in East Jerusalem, increasingly accompanied
by settler-related violence, are continuing unabated and
are illegal and in violation of resolution 2334 (2016),
inter alia. As noted by the Secretary-General in his
latest written report of 20 March (S/2019/251), the
advancement, approval or tender of more than 3,000
units in the occupied West Bank is the largest batch
since May 2018. The Committee welcomes the written
reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the resolution and looks forward to future reports in
this format.
Paragraph 5 of resolution 2334 (2016) calls on
Member States to apply the principle of differentiation
in all their relevant dealings between the territory of the
State of Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory.
Regrettably, some private companies continue to
disregard such provisions. It goes without saying that
third-party States must uphold their obligations under
international law. It is only by respecting international
law that we can ensure accountability and bring 52
years of illegal occupation to an end.
The Committee welcomes the final report of the
independent international commission of inquiry
established by the Human Rights Council to investigate
the demonstrations held between 30 March and
31 December 2018 (A/HRC/40/74), to identify those
responsible for violations of international human
rights and international humanitarian law. We call
on Member States to implement the Commission’s
38/64

29/04/2019

recommendations, to promote compliance with human
rights obligations and to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including an investigation into possible war crimes and,
if appropriate, the prosecution of suspected perpetrators
of international crimes.
Meanwhile, the situation in Gaza remains volatile
and demonstrations at the fence with Israel are ongoing.
On 30 March, the first anniversary of the Great
March of Return, 50,000 protestors gathered. Four
Palestinians were killed and 207 injured on that day
alone. An economy captive and dependent on Israel,
de-development and high levels of unemployment
among frustrated youth, especially in Gaza, where an
environmental disaster is looming, can only lead to
disaster. The Committee reiterates its call on Israel to
lift the 12-year illegal blockade that is creating dire
humanitarian conditions in the Strip.
In the meantime, the Committee reiterates its call
for the continuation of funding for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East so that it can reliably and predictably
continue to deliver crucial services in health, education,
protection and social services until the time when the
right of return of Palestine refugees is addressed in
final negotiations.
Turning now to the newly formed Government of
the State of Palestine, the Committee hopes that this
will constitute a step towards reconciliation among
all political players to safeguard the interests of the
Palestinian people and advance the realization of their
legitimate national aspirations.
In closing, the Committee would like to call on all
members of the Council and all supporters of the rights
of the Palestinian people — also represented around
this table — to take bold initiatives and move closer
to the establishment of a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State, based on its territorial contiguity,
which is the only recipe for a peaceful, stable and just
solution for the Palestinian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Let me
start by congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and on your initiative to discuss the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I would
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8517

also like to extend our thanks to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for her
valuable briefing, as well as Mrs. Nada Majdalani and
Mr. Gidon Bromberg for their briefings.

peace. That very unique document seeks to preserve
the status of Jerusalem and its special nature as a city
of multiple faiths, including its spiritual dimension and
unique identity.

The policies adopted by the Israeli occupying
authorities against the Palestinian people, including
Judaization, settlement-building and oppression, are
adding insult to injury in occupied Palestine. Not
only is this complicating the situation there, but these
policies are also stirring up bitterness and hindering
any movement towards initiating a peace process that
has been obstructed for years by undermining the
possibility of the two-State solution.

The statement issued at the end of the historic visit
to Morocco by His Majesty King Abdullah II of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, upon invitation from
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, stated that, given
their infinite care towards the Palestinian question, they
renewed their full support for the Palestinian people.
The aim is to restore all their legitimate rights and enable
them to establish their independent Palestinian State
within the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, on the basis of the relevant international
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the principle
of the two-State solution. His Majesty rejects all
unilateral measures taken by Israel, the occupying
Power, to change the legal, historic or demographic
position, as well as the spiritual nature of East
Jerusalem, especially the Islamic and Christian shrines.

Using force against defenceless civilians and
continued settlement activity in violation of United
Nations resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016),
among others, can never lead to peace or the launch
of a political process. Rather, these actions merely
serve to provoke the Palestinians and the international
community. The lack of dignified living conditions
does not help to build trust or provide the appropriate
framework for launching the peace process to achieve a
two-State solution along the lines of 4 June 1967.
Jerusalem holds particular prestige not for
Jerusalemites alone, but for all those who believe in the
three Abrahamic religions, as the first Qibla and the third
of the holy shrines, thereby granting it a special legal
status that cannot be altered in any way, in accordance
with Security Council resolutions. His Majesty King
Mohammed VI, Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee,
has always paid close attention to the city of Jerusalem
and has always affirmed its historic, legal and political
position. He therefore calls on the United Nations,
especially the permanent members of the Security
Council, to assume their full responsibility in order to
avoid any change to that status or impede international
efforts to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
His Majesty has called on more than one occasion
for no efforts to be made to undermine the status of
Jerusalem, as this is one of the final status issues.
Given this established conviction regarding the status
of Jerusalem for the adherents of the three heavenly
religions, on 30 March King Mohammed VI, Chairman
of the Al-Quds Committee, alongside the Head of the
Catholic Church, Pope Francis, signed in Rabat an appeal
for Jerusalem. This is an endorsement by His Majesty
and the Pope regarding Jerusalem and its inviolability,
stressing the spiritual aspects of Jerusalem as a city of

As for the Syrian Golan, both His Majesty the
King of Jordan and King Mohammed VI affirmed that,
in accordance with the resolutions of international
legitimacy, the Syrian Golan is an occupied territory
and that Israel’s decision to annex it is illegitimate, null
and void and constitutes a violation of those resolutions,
especially the relevant Security Council resolutions. In
the same vein, King Mohammed VI has sent a team
architects and artisans to preserve the historic and
cultural aspects of Al-Aqsa Mosque, in coordination
with Jordan.
In conclusion, Morocco’s position on this conflict
remains firmly based on the Arab Peace Initiative and
all principles as well as terms of reference aimed at
achieving peace. We call for an independent State of
Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital, along the
lines of 4 June 1967, living side by side with Israel in
peace, security and harmony.
The President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to the
United Nations.
Monsignor Grysa: The Holy See wishes to thank
the German presidency for convening today’s open
debate to consider the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.
In his briefings to the Council, the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay

19-1225439/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mladenov, frequently paints a bleak picture of the
situation, in which tensions fester and intercommunity
violence has the potential to flare up at any moment. In
Gaza, a disastrous humanitarian situation feeds despair
among the Palestinian population, at times manipulated
by extremist groups that resort to violence, while fear for
Israeli security increases. Too many innocent civilians
on both sides have paid the price of the indiscriminate
use of violence and force.
The formation of a new Palestinian Government,
however, offers a glimmer of hope amid the shadows
of despair that have for far too long characterized the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Indeed, unity is essential to
a politically stable and economically viable Palestine. In
this regard, the Holy See commends the tireless efforts
of neighbouring countries in forging talks with the
various Palestinian factions and facilitating dialogue
among them. These efforts remain important in terms
of respecting the inalienable rights and achieving the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people, as well
as attaining lasting peace and security for Israel.
Real challenges, of course, remain. The
increasingly fragmented Palestinian land will, with the
passing of time, only make the two-State solution more
difficult to realize. Difficulty, however, does not mean
impossibility. It is therefore incumbent on the parties
themselves, on regional actors and on the rest of the
international community to make every effort and use
all their political and diplomatic persuasion to prevent
this difficulty from becoming an impossibility. If the
two-State solution is to become a reality, the cycle
of violence needs to be broken and both parties must
resolve to avoid unilateral actions that would undermine
the two-State solution, as we so often hear repeated in
this Chamber.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which is
experiencing a growth in demand for its services,
continues to play an essential role not only in providing
basic services for Palestinian refugees, but also as a
critical component of wider regional development and
security. The Holy See commends those countries that
have increased their donations to enable the Agency to
carry out its work to ensure that the refugee population,
in particular children in the refugee camps, can live
with dignity.
Moves to change the identity of Jerusalem and
its status quo not only affect the already fragile
40/64

29/04/2019

populations who live there, but also have potentially
detrimental effects on peace and stability in the region.
As mentioned by the representative of Morocco, in his
recent visit to Morocco Pope Francis and His Majesty
King Mohammed VI made a joint appeal on the
importance of preserving the Holy City of Jerusalem
as the common patrimony of humankind and especially
the followers of the three monotheistic religions,
as a place of encounter and as a symbol of peaceful
coexistence, where mutual respect and dialogue can be
cultivated. They expressed their hope that full freedom
of access to the followers of the three monotheistic
religions and their right to worship be guaranteed, so
that in Jerusalem/Al-Quds Al Sharif they may raise
their prayers to God, the Creator of all, for a future of
peace and fraternity on Earth.
I wish to conclude with a passage from the Easter
message of Pope Francis for the Middle East:
“May the light of Easter illumine all
Government leaders and peoples in the Middle
East, beginning with Israelis and Palestinians, and
spur them to alleviate such great suffering and to
pursue a future of peace and stability.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Bougacha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my pleasure at the outset to express the appreciation of
my country for your leadership, Mr. President, of the
Council during the month of April. Likewise, I thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for her very valuable briefing. We also
pay tribute to the role of civil society in promoting a
just settlement to the conflict in Middle East.
This meeting takes place against the backdrop
of a tense and deteriorating situation due to Israel’s
ongoing occupation and violation of international
resolutions, while establishing a de facto policy through
its settlement activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem — which are all provocations, aggressions
and violations of all the rights, shrines, territories and
national capacities of the Palestinians— in addition to
its suffocating economic siege of the Gaza Strip.
Tunisia reiterates its appeal to the Security
Council and the international community to assume
their full responsibilities and take serious and urgent
action to pressure the occupying Power to comply
with the resolutions of international legitimacy,
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

including resolution 2334 (2016), to end settlements
and occupation. This is critical if we hope to achieve
any progress towards reaching a settlement to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, in accordance with
international law, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
principle of the two-State solution. That would ensure
the establishment of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State within the lines of 4 June 1967, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, leading to a comprehensive
settlement of the Palestinian question and helping to
achieve stability and peace in the Middle East.
In the final statement of the Summit of the League
of Arab States, held on 31 March in Tunisia, Arab
leaders affirmed the central status of the Palestinian
question and committed themselves to making every
effort to relaunch serious negotiations in accordance
with a certain timeframe. They also affirmed that
peace, security and stability can be achieved only when
it is based on a just and comprehensive solution to the
Palestinian question and the Arab-Israeli conflict as
a whole. The Arab leaders renewed their rejection of
all the unilateral steps and actions of the occupying
Power to change the historic and legal position of
East Jerusalem.
Moreover, Arab leaders called upon the countries
of the world not to recognize Jerusalem as the capital
of Israel or move their embassies there, as well as to
comply with resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980).
They renewed their rejection and condemnation of the
so-called Jewish nation-State law as a consecration of
racial practices and a denial of the rights of Palestinian
people, especially their right to self-determination.
Arab leaders called on the international
community and the Security Council to shoulder their
responsibilities and provide the necessary protection
to the Palestinian people. They also renewed their
commitment to contributing financially to the budget of
the State of Palestine in order to enable it to cope with
its economic and financial difficulties, especially under
the arbitrary measures of the occupation authorities.
The Arab leaders also called on the international
community to continue supporting the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East so that it can provide basic services to
Palestinian refugees.
Tunisia expresses its support for any serious effort
to revive the peace process and return to negotiations
between the Palestinians and Israelis on the basis of

S/PV. 8517

agreed international terms of reference, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. That would
be according to a specific timetable during which an
agreement should be reached regarding final-status
issues with international guarantees, including the
issue of Jerusalem. We reaffirm that any endeavour
or initiative to settle the conflict that does not take
into consideration the aforementioned criteria and
the two-State solution is doomed to fail and will not
achieve progress.
Tunisia stresses once again the illegality of
recognizing Israel’s sovereignty over the occupied
Syrian Golan, which is in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and the resolutions of international
legitimacy, including resolution 497 (1981). My
country’s delegation emphasizes, in line with the
statement of the Arab League summit in Tunisia,
that legitimizing the occupation is a totally rejected
approach. The most recent United States position on the
Golan does not alter the legal status of the Syrian Golan
as a Syrian territory occupied by Israel in 1967. That
position has absolutely no legal effect and does not give
rise to any commitment or create any rights.
In conclusion, my delegation joins international
consensus on the need for urgent action by the
international community, especially the Security
Council, in order to make a real change in dealing
with the Palestinian question and to provide a serious
and credible opportunity to reach a peaceful, just and
comprehensive solution, in accordance with the twoStates vision. That would achieve peace, security and
stability for all peoples of the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Marzooq (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
My country fully supports United Nations efforts
to achieve peace, and condemns in the strongest terms
all terrorist attacks, including recent attacks in New
Zealand, Sri Lanka, Burkina Faso and the United States
of America. In that regard, we extend our deepest
condolences to the families of the victims.
We salute the Palestinian people for their
steadfastness and determination to endure the
severe economic, humanitarian and political crises
they are facing. We fully support the policy of the

19-1225441/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian Authority and congratulate it on forming a
new Government.
Since the announcement of the creation of a plan
for peace in the Middle East, or so-called deal of the
century, the occupying Power has committed a long list
of blatant violations with a view to changing the legal
and demographic status of the occupied territories. It
continues to build illegal settlements and has ended
the temporary international presence in Hebron, while
freezing part of the Palestinian tax revenues and taking
other illegal decisions that are null and void in violation
of the international resolutions and that could have
serious repercussions in the region.
As peace-loving States that are keen to expedite
the deal of the century, we must work together to
strengthen the international front against all unilateral
decisions that perpetuate the occupation and to block
the immunity granted to Israel, forcing it to respect and
implement international resolutions and agreements.
Iraq recognizes no solution that clearly and explicitly
violates the resolutions of international legitimacy and
international law, nor do we acknowledge it as part of the
peace process. We renew our rejection of all violations
by Israel, the occupying Power, against Muslim and
Christian holy sites, especially attempts to change the
historical and legal status of the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque
with temporal and spatial divides. Iraq commends
the Al-Quds appeal, launched by King Mohammed
VI of Morocco and Pope Francis, which stresses that
Al-Quds Al-Sharif is a symbol of coexistence and
mutual respect for human heritage. Jerusalem unites
and does not divide. We must therefore work to ensure
that Al-Quds remains a symbol of peace.
Iraq deplores the United States declaration of Israeli
sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan. We stress
that Syria has the right to fully recover the occupied
Syrian Golan, in accordance with the resolutions of
international legitimacy. We reject any decision that
entrenches Israel’s occupation of the Syrian Arab Golan
or any other occupied Arab territory.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call on the
international community to fulfil its commitments
and take the steps necessary to revive the peace talks
in order to achieve a just and comprehensive solution
based on relevant United Nations resolutions. We also
call on all countries that have not yet recognized the
Palestinian State to do so expeditiously, as that will
provide the Palestinians with the support needed to
42/64

29/04/2019

seek a political, not a military, solution, rather than
wait for the occupying Power to annex other parts of
the West Bank.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to express our appreciation for your tireless efforts,
Mr. President, during your presidency of the Security
Council this month. I thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing this morning, as well as Ms. Nada
Majdalani and Mr. Gidon Bromberg for theirs.
The Middle East is facing many threats to
international peace and security. However, the
Palestinian question remains its biggest challenge. It is
commonly recognized that a just, comprehensive and
lasting solution to the Middle East issue is the twoState solution, with Palestine and Israel living side by
side in peace and security. To that end, it is necessary
to establish an independent Palestinian State within
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
line with the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Arab Peace Initiative, and to put an end to the Israeli
occupation of the occupied Arab territories, including
the Syrian Golan and the occupied Lebanese territories.
The State of Qatar reaffirms its principled and
firm position that the Golan is an occupied Arab land
and that Israel’s imposition of its laws, jurisdiction
and administration on the Golan is null and void with
no legal effect. The State of Qatar also rejects any
attempt to undermine the status of Al-Quds, especially
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, which is enduring the ongoing
attempts of the Israeli occupying forces to storm it,
which is a clear violation of international legitimacy
and conventions.
The State of Qatar is working with the United
Nations and the parties concerned to calm the situation
and provide an environment conducive to peace
while alleviating the humanitarian situation of the
Palestinians, especially in the Gaza Strip, which is under
a fierce blockade. In that regard, His Highness Sheikh
Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar,
has allocated $150 million in emergency aid to address
the dire Palestinian humanitarian situation. Qatari aid
has secured enough fuel to generate electricity over the
last period.
The State of Qatar continues to emphasize its
position that the Syrian crisis can end only through
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a political solution that meets the aspirations of all
the Syrian people, in accordance with the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2254 (2015), thereby
maintaining the national unity, territorial integrity,
sovereignty and independence of Syria. We will
continue to work with the United Nations and our
international partners to achieve a political solution
based on legal and international terms of reference.
The State of Qatar is gravely concerned about
the military escalation in western Libya in advance
of the Libyan national conference, which threatens
to undermine the United Nations-sponsored political
solution. The dangerous escalation of the situation in
Libya and the attack on Tripoli have serious implications
for the unity of the country and the future of the
political situation that require the Security Council to
take decisive measures to deter those responsible for
the escalation. The State of Qatar fully supports the
legitimate Government of National Accord, which is
recognized internationally in keeping with Security
Council resolutions, as well as the efforts of Special
Envoy Ghassan Salamé to reach a just political solution
for the brotherly Libyan people.
The nearly two-year-long unjust blockade imposed
on the State of Qatar constitutes a flagrant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
friendly relations among States, which obliges States
to refrain from escalating and fuelling conflicts and
to resolve disputes by peaceful means. We believe that
the fabrication of that crisis — whose objectives are
well-known — amid the tensions in our region not
only harms the State of Qatar and the vital Arabian
Gulf region but also creates a dangerous precedent in
international law by legitimizing illegal international
measures, violating human rights and undermining the
efforts of the Council to maintain international peace
and security.
The legal validity of the State of Qatar’s approach
to the Gulf crisis was reflected in the ruling issued by
the International Court of Justice in July 2018, which
demonstrated the determination of the State of Qatar to
resort to the mechanisms provided by the international
law to resolve disputes.
The two-year-long blockade and the unjust
campaign against the State of Qatar have only served to
enhance Qatar’s positive international standing and its
valuable contributions to international cooperation and

S/PV. 8517

the maintenance of international peace and security.
We will continue that approach, which has been
acknowledged by the United Nations and the entire
world. In that regard, we wish to renew our support and
appreciation for the sincere mediation by His Highness
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah of sisterly
Kuwait. We also wish to express our appreciation to the
friendly countries that supported that mediation.
We stress that we will continue our efforts to defuse
the crises and achieve a lasting and comprehensive
peace in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
has the honour to speak on behalf of the 120 States
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The Movement takes this opportunity to reaffirm
its solidarity with the Palestinian people and their
inalienable rights and just cause at a time when the
situation on the ground in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, is at a critical and
unsustainable juncture.
The Security Council has the responsibility of
ensuring the maintenance of international peace and
security. The organ must uphold its obligations, as
established in the Charter of the United Nations, and
take action to implement its own resolutions, which
constitute the basis for a peaceful, just and lasting
solution to the conflict and are legally binding for all
Member States. That is why we are concerned about the
fact that the Security Council has been unable to fulfil
its own mandate owing to the use of the veto by one of
its permanent members.
The Movement continues to believe that resolution
2334 (2016) offers the only viable path to peace , by
establishing the requirements for a just settlement on
the basis of the two-State solution , and while respecting
the terms of reference historically endorsed by the
international community, in accordance with United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles , including
the land for peace principle, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map. That should ensure that the
Palestinian people enjoy their inalienable rights. We
therefore call for the implementation of the resolution
and for it to be respected by the occupying Power.

19-1225443/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We insist on respect for and the implementation of
all relevant United Nations resolutions. It is imperative
that immediate action be taken to remedy the current
situation on the ground, reduce tensions and foster an
environment conducive to the quest for peace. We must
avoid the adoption of unilateral, provocative or arbitrary
measures, which serve only to embolden Israel to
continue its illegal policies and practices in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
The Movement continues to be concerned about
the situation in the Gaza Strip, which is especially
grave on the humanitarian front and continues to
deteriorate day by day. We therefore call for the Israeli
blockade to be completely lifted, which continues to
inflict unspeakable humanitarian, social and economic
suffering on more than 2 million Palestinian children,
women and men in Gaza.
That crisis must be addressed comprehensively
and in accordance with international law, including
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and all relevant United Nations resolutions, in the
context of Israel’s continued illegitimate and hostile
foreign occupation of Palestinian territory, since 1967,
and of all of the calls for an end to an occupation that
has lasted for more than half a century.
Given that Israel has renounced its obligations as an
occupying Power under the Fourth Geneva Convention
to protect Palestinian civilians, the Movement calls on
the international community to ensure the protection of
Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip and the rest of the
occupied territories, in order to alleviate the occupied
population’s critical situation of insecurity and prevent
further losses of innocent lives. Failure to do so could
further aggravate the situation and lead to the tragic
loss of more civilian lives.
The Movement expresses its indignation at Israel’s
impunity for all the violations it has committed, many of
which could be considered war crimes. The absence of
justice leads to new crimes being committed and further
destabilizes the situation on the ground, which in turn
diminishes the prospects for peace, as indicated in the
report (A/HRC/40/74) of the independent commission
of inquiry established by the Human Rights Council
to investigate the 2018 Gaza protests. That is why we
call for international action, especially by the Security
Council, to put an end to the occupying Power’s
systematic violations against the occupied Palestinian
civilians and hold it accountable for its crimes. Israel
44/64

29/04/2019

must abide by its obligations and responsibilities under
international law.
With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement reaffirms that any measures or actions
that the occupying Power Israel may take or has
taken — such as the illegal decision of 14 December
1981, aimed at altering the legal status, physical
character, demographic composition and institutional
structure of the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as
Israel’s measures to implement its jurisdiction and
administration in this area, including attempting to
exercise sovereignty over it by calling local elections
in four Syrian localities — are null and void and have
no legal effect.
Accordingly, and in line with our principled
position, we once again demand that Israel comply
with resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw completely
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of June
1967, in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). We also condemn the unilateral proclamation
of the United States on recognizing the Golan Heights
as part of Israel and we call on the Security Council to
reject that provocative act.
With regard to Lebanon, we reaffirm the need
for Israel to withdraw from all Lebanese territories,
including the areas of the Shaba’a farmlands, the
Kfar Shuba hills and the Lebanese part of Al-Ghajar
village up to the Blue Line. We also urge Israel to
cease its violations of Lebanon’s territorial integrity
and sovereignty, in accordance with international
resolutions, particularly resolution 1701 (2006).
To conclude, we call on the international
community to uphold international law and the
Palestinian cause in a coordinated effort with the aim
of ending that injustice. We reaffirm our commitment
to a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution
to the Palestinian question, including the suffering
of Palestinian refugees. We also express our support
for the heroic Palestinian people in their struggle to
enjoy their inalienable rights and legitimate national
aspirations, including the rights to self-determination,
freedom and independence in their State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke
in Spanish): Uruguay attaches great importance
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to the different matters on the Security Council’s
Middle East agenda, which are always complex
and multidimensional.
We wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, for her informative briefing, as well as the
co-Directors of EcoPeace Middle East, Mr. Gidon
Bromberg and Ms. Nada Majdalani, for their briefings.
We also wish to thank the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his continued and dedicated
work, which Uruguay fully supports.
The ninth quarterly report (S/2019/251) of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) — the second report submitted in writing in
the permanent format that my country requested when
it previously took the floor in the Council — provided
a disappointing outlook last month in that we have
seen no improvements since December 2016. The few
positive measures that have been adopted have been
unable to reverse the negative trends on the ground, as
a result of which the viability of the two-State solution
is in serious jeopardy.
We once again recognize the potential contribution
of the different multilateral, regional and unilateral
initiatives — both those in force and those that are
taking shape — but we are clearly still very far from
achieving a solution to a conflict that has already
lasted more than seven decades. The two-State solution
remains the only viable option; there is no plan B that
can replace it. Uruguay maintains strong ties with both
the State of Israel and the State of Palestine. We once
again reaffirm the right of Israel and Palestine to live
in peace within secure and recognized borders, in an
atmosphere of renewed cooperation that is free from
any threat or act that might breach the peace.
We must return as soon as possible to the table
for direct negotiations that can clarify all pending
issues. That will be difficult, but to continue in the
state of paralysis and stagnation that we are currently
witnessing will be even worse. To achieve that goal,
we must reverse the current negative trends on the
ground that are clearly detailed in Special Coordinator
Mladenov’s most recent report, as it will otherwise be
extremely difficult, if not impossible, for Palestine to
consolidate its State territory.
The intensification of the development, approval
and construction of settlements in the West Bank and

S/PV. 8517

East Jerusalem, as well as the illegal measures that
sustain them, is extremely worrisome. The eviction of
Palestinian families and the continuous demolition and
confiscation of their property compound that scenario,
while stoking speculation and heightening the risk of
plans for a future annexation. We condemn the fresh
acts of violence and terrorism against Israeli civilians,
including the firing of rockets and explosive devices
from Gaza, and the increase in settler violence against
Palestinian civilians, as well as the excessive use of
Israeli force in response. We categorically reject the
incitement and glorification of all violent acts.
For all those reasons, we would once again like to
request both sides to adopt measures and make gestures
that gradually de-escalate and ease tensions, which
is the only way to reach a definitive solution to the
conflict in the medium and long terms and a just and
lasting peace to this long-standing disagreement.
Last October, Uruguay presented a set of 10
measures in that regard, which we wish to reiterate
today, including ending the launching of industrial
and homemade missiles from Gaza and ceasing all
actions that could be classified as terrorist; refraining
from the disproportionate repression of demonstrations
in Gaza; suspending the settlement policy in the
occupied territories; suspending demolition orders for
Palestinian homes; fully recognizing the State of Israel;
returning prisoners or their corpses, as a minimum
demonstration of humanity in the conflict; consolidating
reconciliation agreements between Fatah and Hamas to
promote Palestinian unity and dialogue; and working
for the economic potential of the region and options for
cooperation. The experience demonstrated today by the
representatives of EcoPeace Middle East should serve
as a role model for that.
Seventy years ago, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 181 (II). Thanks to the impetus of that
international legal act taken by the Organization,
Israel and Palestine have continued to consolidate their
identity, rights and obligations as States and recognized
legal entities. As was the case 70 years ago, when it was
responsive and eager to find a solution, the international
community today remains ready and expectant.
A positive outcome is not advanced by leaders taking
action without considering their consequences, while
the international community supports and promotes
them in good faith. It is time to put aside hatred,
mental blockages and frustration. Any territory gained

19-1225445/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

or exercise of misconceived sovereignty is worthless
if it is achieved at the cost of peace and prolongs the
struggle of the peoples that inhabit the region.
Before concluding, allow me to briefly touch
upon the situations in Yemen, Syria and, owing to its
geographical proximity, Libya.
The humanitarian crisis in Yemen shows no signs of
improvement. While the Stockholm Agreement marked
a beacon of hope in the long and bloody conflict, the
parties must respect what has been agreed and avoid
actions on the ground that harm civilians and carry the
risk of increasing famine, cholera and other afflictions.
This month’s attack against a school in Sana’a is yet
another example of the plight of millions of Yemenis
every day.
In Syria, we support the efforts of Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen to move forward the peace process
and the future integration of a balanced and credible
constitutional committee, in line with resolution 2254
(2015).
Finally, the recent military escalation in Libya,
encouraged by the support that some Council members
and important actors in the region have offered to one
of the parties — a party that does not respect binding
international agreements — is endangering the United
Nations-supported Government of National Accord and
pushing the country closer to another civil war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the member
States of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC).
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Germany
and France on their successful and innovative joint
presidencies of the Security Council over the past two
months. I would also like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, and the other briefers for their
comprehensive and interesting briefing this morning.
I would like to strongly condemn, on behalf of the
OIC, the recent attacks against worshippers of the three
Abrahamic faiths in New Zealand and Sri Lanka and,
in just the past two days, against a synagogue in San
Diego and a Protestant church in Burkina Faso, which
demonstrate the need to promote greater tolerance
46/64

29/04/2019

among all communities and faiths. We mourn the
incomprehensible loss of innocent life.
What is clear is that the situation on the ground in the
Palestinian territories is fragile and cannot be neglected
any longer. The conflict has critically destabilized the
Middle East, paving the way for extremist groups to
spread their messages of terrorism and violence. The
international community must take united, practical
measures to save the prospects for peace and the twoState solution, on which we are all agreed.
The OIC is committed to an outcome that sees
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
based on the June 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital, according to the relevant resolutions,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Madrid principles.
To reach such a just resolution, with Palestine and
Israel living side by side in peace, security and mutual
recognition, the OIC calls on the Security Council and
Member States to take the following steps as a priority.
First, we must urgently address the dire
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. Today’s discussion
serves to highlight the ongoing humanitarian, political
and economic crisis in the Palestinian territories,
while recent reports about the grave conditions in
the Gaza Strip are cause for serious concern. The
international community has a duty to act to avert a
humanitarian catastrophe.
Israel’s near total closure of the Gaza Strip continues
to harm the nearly 2 million Palestinians living in the
41 by 11 kilometre territory. For more than a decade,
Israel has maintained a generalized travel ban, limiting
travel to exceptional humanitarian cases. The result
is that travel out of Gaza today is at about 1 per cent
of its level 20 years ago. Even in those exceptional
humanitarian cases, including those involving medical
patients, applicants often face difficulties in obtaining
travel permits.
There are also severe restrictions on the entry and
exit of goods in Gaza, with significant consequences for
Palestinians’ access to essential services. The limited
supply of electricity often compromises the local
water supply, sewage treatment services and hospital
operations, as we heard in this morning’s briefing.
Shortages of fuel have led to a partial shutdown
of several hospitals for extended periods. Gaza’s
unemployment rate today is well over 50 per cent, and
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

is even higher for women and youth, while 80 per cent
of the population relies on basic humanitarian aid.
We must therefore act to support the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA), which provides aid to the
majority of Gaza’s population and to refugees in need
throughout the region. As we have heard, at the fortysixth session of its Council of Foreign Ministers, held in
the United Arab Emirates in March, the OIC announced
the establishment of an endowment fund for Palestine
refugees, which will bolster the financial position of
UNRWA and enable it to sustainably deliver relief
and humanitarian, educational and health services to
Palestinian refugees. However, further mobilization
is truly needed to provide UNRWA with sufficient,
predictable and sustainable funding. The OIC calls for
the continued generous support of Member States to
that end.

S/PV. 8517

sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan does not
alter the legal status of the Syrian Golan Heights under
international law.
Finally, we must provide the necessary assistance
and support for Palestinians to achieve economic
and social development in line with the Sustainable
Development Goals, to which we have all made a
commitment. The international community must
ensure that Palestinians are not left behind and are able
to build a self-sustaining national economy.
In conclusion, we affirm that the OIC will spare
no effort to advance international peace and security
through the promotion of a two-State solution whereby
Palestine and Israel live side by side in understanding,
peace and prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.

Secondly, we must all collectively drive
international momentum to break the deadlock in the
political process. The international community and the
Security Council have a crucial role to play in reaching
a just and comprehensive solution to the conflict.
We must intensify our efforts to launch credible
negotiations on all final-status issues in the Middle
East peace process, in accordance with the established
terms of reference. In that regard, the OIC reiterates
that the only viable solution to the conflict is the twoState solution. The OIC reaffirms that safeguarding the
prospect for peace requires halting unilateral measures
that undermine peace and security. To that end, Israel
must stop its illegal settlement activities, in accordance
with resolution 2334 (2016), as they pose a major
obstacle to the two-State solution.

Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I thank you,
Mr. President, for personally presiding over this open
debate. We welcome this exchange in the light of
developments in different parts of the Middle East and
hope that the Security Council will engage in open
debates on other countries’ situations as well.

We reiterate our deep concerns about Israeli
control over, and restrictions to, access to Islamic
and Christian holy sites. Furthermore, any unlawful
attempts to change the legal status of Jerusalem
seriously jeopardize international security and must
end. The OIC emphasizes that international consensus
must be respected and the agreements that underpin the
international order enforced. The Charter of the United
Nations applies to all without exception.

With respect to recent developments concerning
the Golan, Liechtenstein stresses that the prohibition of
the annexation of territory is a cornerstone of the rulesbased international order. The annexation of territory
as a result of any use of force runs counter to the
established norms of international law. Annexation also
amounts to an act of aggression — the worst form of the
illegal use of force — which is not only forbidden by
international law but also subject to individual criminal
accountability, including under the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court.

We reaffirm that our efforts to achieve international
peace and security will not succeed without an end
to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab
territories. In that regard, the OIC reiterates that the
recent recognition by the United States of Israeli

We repeat our view that the two-State solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains the only
viable avenue leading to sustainable peace between
Israelis and Palestinians and for the entire region. Our
position remains unchanged: settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including in East
Jerusalem, are illegal under international humanitarian
law. The decisions taken by the Council in that regard,
including resolution 2334 (2016), must be respected and
fully implemented by all parties and relevant actors.

Last month marked the eighth anniversary of the
beginning of the war in Syria. Hundreds of thousands
of people have been killed and many more have been

19-1225447/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

injured and displaced. The country has suffered
large-scale destruction. There is an entire generation
of children who have not known life without war.
The entire region has been destabilized by an armed
conflict shaped by foreign actors. The Security Council
has failed in the task of addressing the crisis and human
suffering in any meaningful manner. Six single and six
double vetoes have been exercised, with tremendous
human costs and far-reaching negative consequences
for the United Nations as a whole.
By creating the Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, the General
Assembly stepped in to counter the Council’s inaction
and ensure that the worst crimes committed will not
go unpunished. The mechanism is operational and
fully part of the institutional framework of the United
Nations, as a subsidiary body of the General Assembly.
Last week’s submission of the report of the Mechanism
(see A/73/741) to the General Assembly made it clear
that the Mechanism currently represents the best hope
that the Syrian people will one day see justice served.
There can be no sustainable peace without justice,
in particular not for a conflict characterized by the use
of chemical weapons, the systematic use of torture and
summary executions, as well as sexual and gender-based
violence and the indiscriminate shelling of civilian
areas. Justice must be an integral part of any political
settlement, and we welcome the strong signal to that
effect emanating from the third Brussels Conference,
held in March. Despite the sobering track record of the
Council, we continue to call on it to finally refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
Like many, we consider the Stockholm Agreement
of December 2018 on Al-Hudaydah a milestone that
brought hope to the people of Yemen for progress
towards an end to the conflict. Its swift and effective
implementation is crucial to reaching a sustainable
political settlement. Like many as well, we are
disappointed by the painfully slow progress to date
and call on the Council to put its full weight behind
the efforts of the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy
to ensure that all parties and stakeholders deliver on
their commitments.
The Council has a crucial responsibility to
protect civilians from the most serious crimes under
48/64

29/04/2019

international law, including the deliberate targeting of
civilian populations and infrastructure and preventing
the delivery of urgently needed humanitarian aid. With
more than 20 million people in need of assistance, that
responsibility is more acute than ever. We call on the
members of the Council, in particular the 10 signatories
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
Group code of conduct on mass atrocity crimes to live
up to that responsibility.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.
Mr. Sauer (Finland): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the
United Kingdom. The full written version of these
remarks will be circulated in the Chamber.
The situation in the Middle East continues to
deserve full international attention. The European
Union (EU) wishes to express its serious concern about
the current trends on the ground, which threaten the
viability of the two-State solution and are dismantling
it piece by piece.
As already recalled in recent debates, the Middle
East peace process remains a key priority for the
European Union. The EU’s position has been consistent
and remains unchanged. Our position is determined
on the basis of what we believe is in the best interests
of peace and stability in the region, as well as our
adherence to international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
We see no viable alternative to a negotiated twoState solution that falls within the internationally agreed
parameters set out in the European Council conclusions
of July 2014; fulfils the legitimate aspirations of both
parties, including both Israeli and Palestinian security
needs and Palestinian aspirations for an independent,
democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable State of
Palestine; ends the occupation that began in 1967; and
resolves all final-status issues, including the status of
Jerusalem as the future capital of both States.
It remains our first priority to keep the twoState solution alive and, to that end, to safeguard the
possibility of new peace negotiations being held. We
hope that both the new Palestinian Government and
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the future Government of Israel will share with us the
importance of resuming the peace process. In order to
achieve a just and lasting peace, any future plan for
Israel and Palestine must recognize and build upon the
internationally agreed parameters.
Israeli settlement construction has continued
unabated in recent months; plans for more than 4,600
new housing units were advanced by the Israeli
authorities only last week. The European Union’s
position on the Israeli settlement policy is clear and
remains unchanged: we will continue to consider
Israeli settlements and their expansion in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, as illegal under
international law. The settlement policy erodes the
viability of the two-State solution and the prospects for
a lasting peace, as reaffirmed by resolution 2334 (2016).
The EU also expects the Israeli authorities to
take steps to restrain the increasing settler violence.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory has
continued to deteriorate, with no clear political horizon
in view. The EU firmly condemns all acts of violence,
terrorism and incitement to violence and hate, which are
fundamentally incompatible with advancing a peaceful
two-State solution.
The EU wishes to express its concern regarding
the recent funding crisis of the Palestinian Authority,
which has been exacerbated by Israel’s decision to
withhold a percentage of the revenues it collects on
behalf of the Palestinian Authority and the latter’s
subsequent refusal to accept any clearance transfers
unless the full amount is reinstated. Israel must fully
implement its obligations under the Paris Protocol.
The EU also supports the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians, which contributes to safeguarding the
two-State solution, and it encourages the parties to
closely coordinate with the donors.
The EU reiterates its call upon all Palestinian factions
to engage in good faith with a view to reconciliation. A
single, legitimate and democratic Palestinian Authority,
with a common national vision and full control over
the whole Palestinian territory, including Gaza, is
critical for fulfilling the national aspirations of the
Palestinian people and achieving a viable Palestinian
State. We reiterate that there is no State of Palestine
without Gaza, or with Gaza alone. In that context, the
EU encourages the prompt establishment of a date for
the planned Palestinian elections.

S/PV. 8517

We continue to follow the situation in Gaza with
great concern. We have repeatedly called on all parties
to take swift steps to bring about a fundamental change
in the humanitarian, political, security and economic
situation in the Gaza Strip, including the end of the
closure and the full opening of the crossing points,
while addressing Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
The EU pays tribute to the efforts led by Egypt and the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process to avoid further escalation and attempt to
improve the humanitarian situation in Gaza.
We welcome Israel’s decision to increase part of the
fishing zone from 12 to 15 nautical miles off Gaza’s
coast. We hope that decision will lead to additional
steps towards the further lifting of restrictions. As the
health system in Gaza continues to be under severe
strain, we urge all parties to facilitate the entry of muchneeded personnel and medical supplies. The lifting
of restrictions on the movement of people, including
to benefit those in need of medical care, services
and goods — in particular many goods designated
as dual-use items — is essential for reconstruction,
service delivery and required infrastructure projects.
In addition, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which supports over 5 million Palestinian
refugees, is facing serious financial challenges for 2019.
The majority of Gaza’s population is directly dependent
upon UNRWA’s food support for their basic needs.
The Agency lacks sufficient funds to meet its food
delivery to Gaza past June. UNRWA is key to regional
stability. We would like to commend UNRWA’s efforts
to overcome the recent financial crisis. We firmly
support UNRWA’s mandate and encourage others to
also demonstrate their support for its work.
The European Union is concerned by the findings
in the report of the United Nations Independent
Commission of Inquiry (A/HRC/29/52), in particular
that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the use
of live ammunition by Israeli security forces against
demonstrators may be unlawful. The Commission is of
the opinion that the Israeli Government has consistently
failed to meaningfully investigate crimes and violations
committed against Palestinians.
We urge the Israeli Government to carry out
meaningful investigations. The EU recalls that
compliance with international law, including
international humanitarian law and international human

19-1225449/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

rights law, by States and, when applicable, by non-State
actors is a cornerstone for peace and security. All those
responsible for non-compliance with those norms must
be held accountable. Human rights must be respected
on both sides.
The EU recalls the importance of a thriving and
diverse non-governmental organization (NGO) sector
and broader civil society sector and the vital role that
they play in open and democratic societies. We are
concerned that, in the current political landscape, the
efforts of those on all sides who seek to bridge the gap
between Israelis and Palestinians are being undermined.
The EU recalls the importance of the unhindered work
of civil society organizations, in particular human
rights organizations, both in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory, as they contribute to finding
common ground and work towards the achievement of
the two-State solution. In that regard, we urge Israel to
allow Mr. Omar Shakir and Human Rights Watch to
continue their human rights advocacy work unimpeded.
The EU will continue to grant financial support to
projects proposed by both Israeli and Palestinian NGOs
to address issues relating to human rights, equality and
peacebuilding, as it does for similar proposals from all
over the world.
While upholding its policy of clearly distinguishing
between the territory of the State of Israel and the
territories occupied by it since 1967, the EU rejects any
attempts to isolate Israel and does not support calls for a
boycott against Israel. The EU stands firm in protecting
the freedom of expression, the freedom of press and
the freedom of association, in line with the Charter of
Fundamental Rights of the European Union. The EU
stresses the importance of ensuring that journalists in
Israel, the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and
Gaza can perform their professional duties without
undue interference.
Lastly, the position of the European Union on the
status of the Golan Heights has not changed. In line
with international law and resolutions 242 (1967) and
497 (1981), the European Union does not recognize
Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Golan Heights.
International law affirms very clearly that borders
cannot be changed by military force.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Kelapile (Botswana): At the outset, our
delegation expresses its gratitude for the opportunities
50/64

29/04/2019

to address the Security Council twice this month under
your able leadership, Mr. President. We appreciate the
convening of this quarterly open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, as well
as the co-Directors of EcoPeace Middle East, for their
invaluable perspectives on the subject matter. Our
delegation also acknowledges the outstanding service
of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
in fulfilling what remains one of the most intense yet
most important responsibilities of the international
community and the Security Council.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries;
however, we wish to highlight a few points in our
national capacity.
As we meet here today, the recent mass suicide
bombings at places of worship and hotels in Sri Lanka;
the shooting at a synagogue in southern California here
in the United States; and another attack at a Protestant
church in Burkina Faso are sad reminders that the
world is becoming increasingly dangerous and call on
us to act together and decisively. We condemn in the
strongest terms those acts of violence and offer our
condolences to all those affected.
As the world continues to witness the deteriorating
situation in Israel and in Palestine, Botswana remains
equally concerned about the developments in the
region. Without any doubt, the ongoing situation has an
adverse impact on the political, economic and security
situations of both Palestinians and Israelis. Of further
worry is that those trends undermine meaningful
negotiations and prospects for achieving lasting peace
and the realization of the ultimate goal of a twoState solution. We are especially deeply concerned by
reports in Gaza indicating a dire situation that is at risk
of major escalation, with retaliatory actions causing
severe humanitarian suffering, deaths and injuries of
innocent civilians. We therefore call for restraint in the
use of excessive and lethal force, for the protection of
the lives of all.
Our delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) (S/2019/251), relating to Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory. We remain
troubled by how little progress was achieved during the
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

reporting period. We are particularly concerned about
the ongoing settlement activities in the Palestinian
territories. We reiterate that those actions are in
violation of international law and constitute a significant
obstacle to achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East. We echo the call for complete
adherence to obligations under various international
instruments, as well as the call to refrain from any steps
that could reverse progress towards the resumption of
the peace process.
Our delegation fully supports the international
community’s continued efforts towards finding a
negotiated settlement on the Middle East conflict.
We remain optimistic in our collective ability to exert
influence on the parties concerned to resume the
intra-Palestinian peace talks, with a view to paving the
way forward towards relaunching the Israeli-Palestinian
dialogue. In that regard, we welcome the momentum
maintained throughout several recent gatherings,
including the third intra-Palestinian meeting, a
conference of a group of Arab and European Foreign
Ministers and the first joint summit of the League of
Arab States and European Union member States, all
held in February.
There is certainly a lot to be gained if the Palestinian
leaders and their people can reunite behind their desirable
and well-deserved cause for self-determination. But
the prevailing rift and divisions among the Palestinian
leadership in itself greatly undermines their collective
ability to engage meaningfully in the peace process as
a united negotiating force.
Allow me to conclude by once again reiterating
our delegation’s long-standing position and conviction
that there is no alternative to the two-State solution. We
believe that bringing about lasting peace in the Middle
East, whereby Palestinians and Israelis live side by
side in a peaceful and dignified manner regardless of
race, religion or otherwise, remains a cause still worth
pursuing. That would be the greatest investment and
peace dividend by the international community for
generations to come.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm Botswana’s
solidarity with the Palestinian people, as well as our
unwavering support for a sovereign Palestinian State as
determined by the pre-1967 international borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We renew our call for the

S/PV. 8517

strengthening of coordination of international efforts
to that just end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on presiding over the Security Council
for this month. I wish friendly Germany every success.
United Nations resolutions, especially Security
Council resolutions, are the basis for relations among
Member States in order to achieve the lofty goals of the
Organization, in particular maintaining international
peace and security, ending occupation and granting
peoples their right to self-determination. However,
Israel has clearly failed to fulfil its commitments under
the Charter of the United Nations. Israel has continued
to violate human rights in a blatant manner.
The latest of the Israeli illegitimate practices was
enacting a law that would allow the occupying Power
to withhold tax revenues belonging to the families
of Palestinian martyrs and detainees. Israel has also
continued its settlement expansion on Palestinian
territory and has continued to violate the sanctity of
religious sites.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reaffirms that the
Palestinian question is its first priority and that any
solution that does not grant Palestinians the right
to establish their own independent State along the
4 June 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as its capital, is
doomed to fail. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia remains
committed to international legitimacy, including the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
We stress once again the need to provide protection
for the Palestinian people, to protect occupied Jerusalem
and to maintain its Arab, Muslim and Christian identity
as well as its legal and historical status. We also stress
the need for Israel to end its occupation of all Arab
territories, including the Syrian Arab Golan, the Sheba’a
Farmlands and all other occupied Lebanese territories.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reiterates its
steadfast position on the Syrian Arab Golan as an
occupied territory, according to resolutions 242 (1967)
and 497 (1981). We reject any decision to recognize
Israeli sovereignty over the Golan. We underline that
any such recognition does not change the legal status of
the occupied Syrian Arab Golan.

19-1225451/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Iran continues its provocative expansion approach
in the Middle East by supporting the participation
of the terrorist Lebanese organization Hizbullah in
the fighting in Syria and by supporting the Houthi
militias in Yemen, which refuse to implement the
Stockholm Agreement.
We welcome the decision by the United States to
consider the Islamic Revolutionary Guard of Iran and
Hizbullah as terrorist organizations, as well as the
decision by the United Kingdom to consider Hizbullah
as a terrorist organization. We call on the Security
Council to take all the necessary measures to list those
two organizations, including the Houthi militias, as
international terrorist organizations. We also call on
the Council to demonstrate the necessary courage
and to name the parties that continue to obstruct the
peace process in Yemen, first of which is Iran, which
continues to provide the Houthis with weapons, in
clear contravention of resolutions 2140 (2014) and
2216 (2015). My country’s Government stresses the
importance of reaching a comprehensive political
solution in Yemen, in line with Council resolutions,
including resolution 2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and the outcome of the Yemeni
National Dialogue Conference. We also stress the need
to implement the Stockholm Agreement as the first step
towards a comprehensive political solution.
My country supports the efforts of the Special
Envoy for Syria to resolve the Syrian crisis. We
hope that Syrians will be able to take the appropriate
measures for establishing the suggested constitutional
committee, which will be tasked with drafting a new
Syrian constitution that guarantees equality for Syrians
and fulfils their aspirations to freedom and dignity.
We stress the need to put an end to the suffering of
detainees, abductees and the disappeared in Syria in
order to release them or shed light on their whereabouts
and their fate. That remains a humanitarian concern
that should not be subject to bargaining.
The countries of the region have long suffered
from conflicts and imposed wars, especially the Israeli
occupation of Palestine and the Iranian attempt to
impose its hegemony on the Arabian Gulf. It is time to
put an end to occupation and hegemony in the region
and ensure freedom and prosperity.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will always be the
first to support the people and their decisions so as to
52/64

29/04/2019

put an end to their suffering, as is the case in Yemen,
the Sudan, Libya and Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is grateful for the convening of this meeting.
We recall that the United Nations has reaffirmed the
Security Council’s permanent responsibility
“with regard to the question of Palestine until the
question is resolved in all its aspects in accordance
with international law and relevant resolutions”,
as set out in the seventh preambular paragraph of
General Assembly resolution 73/19, of 2018.
We are also grateful for the informative briefings
by Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo,
the work done in the field by the co-Directors of
EcoPeace Middle East, the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/251) on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) and the April report prepared by the Office of
the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process (S/2019/251).
Nevertheless, this year we once again express our
concern about the very serious deterioration of the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem. As of March, the situation has not
changed. The reports I mentioned give an account of the
persistent factors that threaten the stability of the West
Bank and the survival of the aspiration of building a
Palestinian State, such as the expansion of illegal Israeli
settlements in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, the demolition and confiscation of properties
and the destruction of Palestinian infrastructure. All
that is compounded by declining financial support,
which has lead to a severe fiscal crisis coupled with
growing humanitarian needs and the lack of political
prospects for a negotiated solution.
We again appeal to Israel to review its decision on
the partial withholding of 6 per cent of the revenues it
collects on behalf of the Palestinian Authority. We also
condemn the indiscriminate firing of rockets and mortar
shells against Israeli civilians, which is prohibited by
international humanitarian law. We condemns violence
by all actors.
In November 2018, 156 Member States voted in
favour of General Assembly resolution 73/19, which
reaffirms the need to achieve a peaceful settlement to
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the question of Palestine, at the heart of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, in all its aspects, and to intensify all efforts
to that end, as well as the urgency of safeguarding the
prospects for achieving the two-State solution, Israel
and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security
within recognized borders, on the basis of the pre-1967
borders, and of making tangible progress towards the
implementation of that solution and towards a just
solution to all final-status issues. In addition, 148 States
also shared our position on several provisions relating
to occupied East Jerusalem and reiterated that any
measures taken by Israel to impose its laws, jurisdiction
and administration on the Holy City of Jerusalem are
illegal and therefore null and void and have no validity
whatsoever, and called upon Israel to put an immediate
end to all such illegal and unilateral measures. The
Secretary-General’s report nevertheless shows that the
evictions and displacements of Palestinians continue
and that settlement activity threatens to increase.
In the face of the persistent serious and
deteriorating situation, my delegation reiterates its
call to the international community to make tangible
progress in supporting the advancement of a definitive
and just peaceful political solution on the basis of the
existence of two States, Palestine and Israel, which, as
the Secretary-General has reiterated, is the only way to
achieve peace and stability in the Middle East, restore
the rights of the Palestinian people and bring about the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine as a
full-fledged Member of the United Nations.
Our delegation would like to acknowledge the
invaluable efforts made by the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Egypt
and all States involved to contribute to stability in
the region.
Finally, my delegation expresses its full support
for the mandate of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and its appreciation to the Agency’s
Commissioner-General and staff for their tireless
efforts and valuable work in assisting Palestine refugees
with emergency assistance, which has saved the lives
of 1.5 million Palestine refugees affected by conflict
and humanitarian crises, especially in Gaza and Syria.
We welcome with hope the strategic dialogue of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians that will take
place tomorrow, 30 April, in Brussels, to discuss

S/PV. 8517

sustainable ways to continue to support UNRWA and
alleviate tension in Gaza.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Ms. Osman (Malaysia): First and foremost, I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important open debate, which allows non-members
of the Security Council to express their views on the
worrisome situation in the Middle East, in particular
in the occupied Palestinian territory. It is our sincere
hope that the views expressed here will be considered
seriously by the members of the Council for the sake of
maintaining peace and security in the region.
Malaysia wishes to align itself with the statements
delivered earlier by the representative of the United
Arab Emirates, on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, and by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Malaysia is greatly concerned over Israel’s recent
irresponsible statement on its intentions to annex the
West Bank. Given that Israel has managed to expand
illegal settlements at an unprecedented scale, continues
to demolish Palestinian homes and structures, continues
to bring unimaginable death, suffering and misery to
the people of Palestine, be they in the West Bank or
Gaza, that statement has come as no surprise. It follows
Israel’s stated intention to annex the Golan Heights
just a few weeks earlier, which regretfully, the United
States has recognized.
Malaysia is deeply disappointed that the United
States would recognize the forced and illegal occupation
of a land that belongs to a sovereign State. We hope
that the United States can demonstrate leadership in the
Palestine-Israel conflict. As the leader of the free world
and the leading country advocating democracy, the
United States can certainly bring about the necessary
changes so that we can make tangible progress in the
peace process. In that regard, the United States, as well
as other members of the Security Council, must do
their part to allow both Palestine and Israel to resume
negotiations on finding a solution to the Palestine and
Israel conflict. Malaysia is confident that, with the
support of the international community, much more can
be achieved than what we have arrived at today.
Malaysia condemns the continuous use of force
by Israel against Palestinian protesters during the

19-1225453/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

rallies in March this year to commemorate the first
anniversary of the Great March of Return. The regime’s
total contempt and disregard for the findings of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the protests in the occupied Palestinian territory,
published less than a month ago (A/HRC/40/74), has
only proved the intransigence of the Israeli regime.
The international community has a duty to collectively
ensure that Israel’s continued violations are put to an
end. The escalation of violence in the Gaza Strip and
the West Bank in recent weeks, leaving dozens more
innocent Palestinian civilians dead, paints an even
bleaker future for the prospects of a two-State solution.
Malaysia reiterates its call on all States Members of
the United Nations and the international community to
continue pressing Israel and demand that it immediately
and completely cease all illegal settlement activities in
the occupied territories as well as the ongoing illegal
demolition of Palestinian homes. Israel must end all
other violations of international law and international
humanitarian law and fully comply with all the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), and the Charter of the United Nations.

29/04/2019

standing trust deficit owing to the Council’s inaction
must be overcome now.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Please accept
my heartfelt thanks, Mr. President, for Germany’s
successful leadership on the work of the Security
Council during the month of April. We join other
delegations in thanking the Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the other
briefers for their comprehensive briefings this morning.
I also join other speakers in condemning the recent
attack at a synagogue in San Diego in the United States
of America.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the United Arab Emirates on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
We congratulate the formation of new Palestinian
Government this month, with Mr. Mohammad Shtayyeh
as its Prime Minister.

Malaysia strongly condemns the proclamation by
the United States to recognize Israel’s sovereignty over
the Golan Heights. The Golan Heights are and will
always be an indivisible part of Syria. Malaysia finds
it unacceptable that the United States would recognize
the forced and illegal occupation of land that belongs
to a sovereign country. Malaysia calls on the United
States to respect and uphold its responsibility under the
resolution 497 (1981). Israel must be made to withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan Heights.

I would like to speak today on three specific areas
of concern. First, with regard to political and human
rights situation, for a long time the international
community has been overburdened with the recurring
violations of international human rights law and
humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. The persistence of patterns of
violations cannot be viewed in isolation from measures,
statements and provocations by Israel, the occupying
Power, or other parties, aimed at further destabilizing
the region and beyond and delaying the prospects for a
successful outcome of the peace process.

The current deadlock in the Middle East peace
process needs firm and pragmatic solutions in
accordance with international law and norms. It is
therefore important that the international community
create conditions conducive to peace talks in order to
improve prospects for finding a peaceful solution to
this long-standing conflict. Malaysia remains steadfast
with respect to its long-standing and principled position
for the inalienable rights of Palestinians, including the
establishment of an independent and sovereign State
of Palestine, based on the pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. We are unequivocal in our
conviction that the Security Council must reassume its
rightful role as the ultimate broker, particularly with
respect to the Palestine-Israeli conflict. The long-

For nearly 5 million Palestinians living under
occupation, the degradation of their water supply, the
exploitation of their natural resources, the destruction of
their environment and denial of right to their health are
symptomatic of the lack of any meaningful control they
have over their daily lives. The 2018 report (A/73/53)
of the Human Rights Council also addressed concerns
regarding arbitrary detention, ill-treatment and torture,
increasing restrictions on the rights to the freedoms
of expression, association and peaceful assembly,
the tightening of restrictions on movement, and
continued and across-the-board lack of accountability.
Such violations weaken the international system and
contribute to further deepening the current political
impasse and jeopardizing opportunities for making

54/64

19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the two-State solution a reality. People living in the
occupied Palestinian territory need to be able to stand
up for their rights without being punished for their
courageous advocacy and calls for action. The Council
must take immediate action to ensure that Israel ceases
its violations of international law when responding to
any just demonstration by the innocent and unarmed
people of Palestine. We must ensure legal accountability
and end impunity for the excessive use of force against
largely peaceful Palestinian demonstrators.
The second point that I wish to highlight is related to
humanitarian concerns. No doubt this volatile situation
is exacerbating the humanitarian crisis facing the
Palestinian people, particularly in the Gaza Strip. Under
the pretext of a security threat to Jewish settlers in the
occupied territory, thousands of Palestinian civilians
have been rendered homeless and forced to live under
tragic circumstances owing to Israeli offensives on the
Gaza Strip, which has been tightly closed for almost 11
years now. The dire situation on the ground has grown
steadily more dangerous as a result of the illegal Israeli
blockade and escalation of military aggression and raids
carried out in the occupied territory, including East
Jerusalem. This aggression has resulted in the tragic
loss of civilian lives and a high number of casualties
among Palestinian civilians, including children. The
extent of the vulnerability of the Palestinian people and
their deepening poverty is responsible for the increase
in the number of Palestinian refugees. Programmes
undertaken by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) are also facing serious shortfalls. For our
part, pursuant to the directive of our Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina, we contributed $50,000 to UNRWA’s
programme budget last year. I hope other countries that
have championed humanity will also come forward to
keep UNRWA going with their voluntary contributions.
My final point relates to the necessity of promoting
socioeconomic development for the people of Palestine.
We are advocating here at the United Nations under the
slogan of leaving no one behin. However, according to
the United Nations country team, the Israeli occupation
has contributed directly to poverty, unemployment
and a prolonged humanitarian crisis. The mere fact
of living under occupation for five decades has left
Palestinians from all walks of life disadvantaged or
vulnerable in some way. An end to the occupation is
therefore a must. We cannot be “one people” if we do
not help our Palestinian brothers and sisters overcome

S/PV. 8517

their political, social, economic and cultural hardships
and pave the way for them to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals.
We believe all barriers to streamlining internal
revenue collection should be eliminated. Financial
support to Palestine is also required. We strongly
suggest that prompt intervention is needed to compel
the Israeli authorities to lift the closure that obstructs
the freedom of movement of goods and of the 1.8 million
civilians of the Gaza Strip.
The international community, with the Security
Council at the forefront, must continue to act to ensure
accountability for all Israeli violations and provide
protection for the Palestinian people as long as Israel’s
illegal foreign occupation persists and the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people are denied. As the
Israeli colonial settlement policy constitutes blatant
contempt and systematic violations of numerous United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
we once again call upon the international community
to respect that resolution and ensure that Israel respects
it as well, in particular its paragraph 5, which obliges
Israel not to deal with settlements.
We reiterate our call upon the Security Council to
recommend and positively consider the admission of
State of Palestine as full Member of the United Nations.
We urge international actors to engage
constructively and effectively to sponsor a multilateral
political peace effort to achieve a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East based on relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. It
is now our — the international community’s — moral
responsibility to strive to have an impact with a view to
enabling the Palestinian people to live in freedom and
dignity in their Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): We align ourselves the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The Cuban delegation regrets that since the last
open debate on this issue (see S/PV.8449) there has been
no progress in favour of the just cause of the Palestinian
people. On the contrary, there was a dangerous

19-1225455/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

worsening in the deterioration of the situation on the
ground over the past quarter.
As we commemorate the first anniversary of
the Great March of Return, Israel continues to use
indiscriminate and disproportionate force against tens
of thousands of Palestinian civilians in Gaza, who
are peacefully demonstrating for an end to the illegal
Israeli occupation, the blockade of the Gaza Strip and
the realization of all the rights of the Palestinian people.
Israeli air strikes and bombings continue to massacre
the Palestinian people, while the Security Council
remains silent. It is particularly regrettable that this
organ, owing to the repeated obstruction by the United
States delegation, has not condemned the escalation of
violence and the tragic events that have taken place in
the Gaza Strip since 30 March 2018.
The Cuban delegation reiterates its strong rejection
of the disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force
by Israel against Palestinian civilians in the occupied
territories, including East Jerusalem and particularly
the Gaza Strip, in flagrant violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and international humanitarian law.
We reiterate our condemnation of the illegal
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory and the demolition
and confiscation of Palestinian property. All of those
measures, coupled with the blockade of the Gaza Strip,
violate the Fourth Geneva Convention and erode the
viability of a two-State solution.
The Cuban delegation expresses its deep concern
at Israel’s decision to not renew the mandate of the
Temporary International Presence in Hebron. It was
very regrettable that the Security Council has also
been unable to demand that Israel renew the mandate
of the International Presence, in accordance with the
relevant Council resolutions, the Oslo II Accords and
international law.
We reiterate the call on the Security Council
to fulfil its responsibility, conferred to it under the
Charter of the United Nations, for the maintenance
of international peace and security. The Council
must demand an immediate end to the occupation of
the Palestinian territories and to aggressive policies
and settlement practices, as well as compliance with
the resolutions on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, adopted by this
organ, in particular resolution 2334 (2016).
56/64

29/04/2019

We reaffirm our full support for a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, based on a two-State solution that allows
the Palestinian people to exercise their right to selfdetermination and their right to an independent
and sovereign State with pre-1967 borders and East
Jerusalem as its capital, and the right of return
for refugees.
We express to the people and the Government
of Palestine our unwavering solidarity and support
for Palestine’s accession as a full Member of the
United Nations.
We reject the unilateral action of the United States
Government in recognizing the city of Jerusalem as
the capital of Israel and its withdrawal of financial
support for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, all
of which further exacerbates tensions in the region
and deepens the precarious humanitarian situation of
Palestinian refugees.
We vigorously condemn the decision of the United
States Government to recognize the occupied Syrian
Golan as Israeli territory, which constitutes a serious
and flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 497 (1981).
That new manoeuvre by Washington, which violates
the legitimate interests of the Syrian people and of Arab
and Islamic nations, will have serious consequences
for stability and security in the Middle East and will
further exacerbate tensions in that volatile region.
We will continue to support the demands of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to recover
the Golan Heights, and call once again for the total
and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from the Syrian
Golan and all other occupied Arab territories.
We reject the fabrication of pretexts and concepts
to try to legitimize in the Council the unilateral use
of force and aggression against sovereign States. We
demand respect for multilateralism and an end to double
standards, interference in internal affairs, foreign
aggression and the sponsoring of terrorist groups that
promote instability and conflicts in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): My delegation wishes
to congratulate France and Germany for the successful
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

joint presidency of the Security Council for the months
of March and April. It is an example of how collaborative
partnerships can help to strengthen multilateralism. I
would also like to note with appreciation the positive
changes introduced in recent months to improve
transparency in the workings of the Council, and
thereby help to increase the legitimacy of its decisions.
And yet the Council is failing to protect its legitimacy
on the question of Palestine, which is probably the
most enduring issue in the Council’s history. Since
the previous debate on this topic, held in January (see
S/PV.8449), more countries have announced their
intention to move their embassies from Tel Aviv to
Jerusalem. And in recent weeks we heard the disturbing
news that Israel’s illegal annexation of the Syrian Golan
is also receiving recognition. Such decisions are illegal
and in clear violation of the resolutions of the Council
and the Charter of the United Nations.
The Council has declared null and void — through
resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980) — Israel’s illegal
occupation of Palestine, the annexation of Jerusalem,
the shifting of Israel’s capital to Jerusalem and the
decision by any country to recognize Jerusalem as
Israel’s capital. Through resolution 2334 (2016), the
Council called upon all States to distinguish, in their
relevant dealings, between the territory of the State
of Israel and the Arab territories occupied since 1967.
Similarly, any action by Israel to exercise sovereignty
over the Syrian Golan violates resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 497 (1981). The Maldives therefore
requests the President of the Security Council to
publicly condemn the decisions by any country to
recognize Israel’s illegal annexations of Jerusalem
and the Syrian Golan and encourage those countries to
return to the right side of international law and conduct
themselves in a manner consistent with international
norms of acceptable behaviour.
Israel’s seven-decades-long illegal occupation of
Palestine violates the basic human rights of thousands
of men, women and children. Israel’s illegal seizure
of Palestinian lands must stop. The illegal blockade
of Gaza must come to an end. The racial and religious
discrimination against the Arabs must end. The
Maldives reiterates its calls on Israel to stop the
attacks on Palestinian civilians, including women and
children. Palestinians must be treated with dignity
and respect, and their inalienable rights must be
restored immediately.

S/PV. 8517

The Maldives has always believed that an
independent and sovereign Palestine, established on
the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side in peace and harmony with Israel,
is the best and the only solution to the conflict. The
Maldives calls upon the occupying Power, Israel, to
fully implement the resolutions of the Council and
respect the legal obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations. We also urge the Security Council and
the international community to redouble their efforts
to end the conflict and to bring meaningful and lasting
peace to the people of Palestine.
The conflict in Syria has already claimed the lives
of hundreds of thousands of people, including children.
It has levelled entire cities and towns to the ground and
reduced them to rubble.
On Yemen, my Government is encouraged by the
Council’s decision to adopt resolution 2452 (2019) on
16 January and to establish a Special Political Mission
to support the implementation of the ceasefire. The
Maldives calls upon the parties to exercise maximum
restraint and bring an end to the long suffering of
millions of civilians and children in Yemen. The
Council must expedite the pooling of resources to
observe the truce, which is still very fragile.
My Government reaffirms its support to the
Council and the Secretary-General in all ongoing
efforts to bring lasting peace to the Middle East. As we
begin to observe the holy month of Ramadan in May,
it is also our wish that the people of the Middle East
will be able to observe the holy month free from the
hardship of conflict, perform their religious duties with
dignity and be treated with compassion.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Seifi Pargou (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
the world’s longest crisis. It is a given fact that no crisis
can be solved permanently without addressing its main
root causes. The question of Palestine is no exception.
It started as a result of the occupation and can come to
an end only by ending it.
The Security Council, whose primary responsibility
is the maintenance of international peace and security,
has an explicit legal obligation to counter aggression
and occupation. It must therefore take the necessary
measures to force the occupying Power to end the

19-1225457/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

occupation. However, the consideration of this issue by
the Council over the course of the past seven decades
has resulted in the adoption of some resolutions with no
actual effect on the fate of Palestinians.
Interestingly enough, relying on the absolute
support of a permanent member of the Council, Israel
has implemented none of those resolutions. In addition,
whenever the Council has determined to adopt a
resolution to compel Israel to implement them, the United
States has vetoed all such proposals — 44 times thus far.
As a result, the Zionist regime has been emboldened to
continue, with total impunity, its expansionist policies
and illegitimate practices and has systematically
committed all four core international crimes, that is, the
crime of aggression, genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. However, under the current United
States Administration, the situation has drastically
changed, as the United States itself has also embarked
on directly violating the relevant binding resolutions of
the Security Council.
The first example was moving the United States
Embassy to Jerusalem and the second was recognizing
Israel’s sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan.
Both acts are against the peremptory norms of
international law, let alone the Council resolutions
According to international law, the territory of a State
shall not be the object of acquisition resulting from the
threat or use of force and no such territorial acquisition
shall be recognized as legal.
Therefore, the acts of the United States in that
regard are illegitimate, null and void and have no legal
weight and value. The Islamic Republic of Iran once
again condemns, in the strongest possible terms, those
internationally wrongful acts. We stress that the Golan
is, and will remain, an integral part of Syria.
The history of Palestine over the past seven
decades teaches us certain important lessons. First,
with regard to Israel, the Council has been both inactive
and ineffective because of the unreserved support of
the United States for Israel. Indeed, the continuation of
that situation would further erode the credibility of the
Council and increase its existing trust and confidence
deficit. Likewise, in addition to the United Nations,
international law is another victim of the Israeli
intransigence to end its occupation of Palestine.
Secondly, regarding Israeli-related issues, the only
principle that guides the United States foreign policy,
particularly under its current Administration, is not
58/64

29/04/2019

“America first” but “Israel first”, even at the price of
blatantly violating the basic principles, as well as the
peremptory norms, of international law.
Thirdly, the United States has proved to be an
unreliable partner, particularly when it comes to all
matters regarding Palestine. Therefore, no one should
trust its ill-advised proposals regarding the Palestinian
question, including with respect to the so-called “deal
of the century”. Indeed, the inalienable rights of a
nation cannot be compromised by putting it under
extreme military, political and economic pressure or
bought with petrodollars.
Fourthly, in the past 70 years, Israel has committed
numerous crimes, including waging war against all
its neighbours with total impunity. The decade-long
illegal inhumane blockade on Gaza, the continuation
of which is drastically deteriorating the already
grave humanitarian situation, is another example in
that regard.
Under such circumstances, the international
community must continue its long-standing strong
support for the just cause of the Palestinians and for the
full realization of their inalienable rights, in particular
the establishment of the independent State of Palestine,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
Furthermore, the international community should
resist any attempt by the United States and some of its
allies, including Israel and Saudi Arabia, to change the
nature of the real threats in the Middle East. The first
and foremost problem in the Middle East is the question
of Palestine, and the plan to substitute it with artificial
and fabricated threats and crises is designed to divert
the attention of the international community from the
Israeli illegal occupation of Palestine and the lands of
others. It should be rejected by all peace-loving nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): First of all, I thank
Germany for organizing such an important open
debate. I thank the briefers and the representatives of
the Observer State of Palestine and Israel for their very
important contributions.
In line with most of the international community,
Hungary still considers the two-State formula the best
solution to the seven-decade Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
as no credible alternatives have been put forward that
address both the legitimate security concerns and the
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

aspiration to statehood by both parties. Over the past
three months, however, with Israel having elections and
the Palestinian factions still not able to resolve their
differences and unite, we saw no progress regarding the
relaunching of the negotiations between the parties.
We believe that in the current stalemate the
international community should play a positive role
in facilitating the relaunch of negotiations. In that
regard, Hungary’s awaits the presentation of the United
States peace plan with hope. At the same time, we find
it important to stress that the Israeli and Palestinian
leaders should understand that long-lasting peace
requires difficult compromises by both sides. On the
one hand, their task is to arrive at such compromises
and, on the other hand, to convince their peoples to
accept them. We hope that all sides will agree to engage
in a renewed dialogue in good faith. As a member of the
European Union, we will continue working to achieve
peace and stability in the Middle East region.

S/PV. 8517

announcement of the construction of 840 new housing
units in Ariel (see S/PV.8489). We are also concerned
over the launching of rockets from the Gaza Strip into
Israeli civilian areas.
Regarding the ongoing situation in Gaza, we call
on Israel and the Palestinian Authority to act seriously
to prevent any further deterioration of the humanitarian
situation. There can be no lasting solution for Gaza
without a lifting of the blockade and the restoration
of the power of the Palestinian Authority in Gaza. My
delegation highly appreciates the tireless efforts of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East to ease the suffering
of Palestinians.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.

A just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the
conflict can be achieved only through earnest and
constructive dialogue and negotiations, in accordance
with international law, including all relevant United
Nations resolutions, particularly Security Council
resolutions 478 (1980), 2254 (2015) and 2334 (2016).

Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): First of all, I would like
to thank the German presidency for convening this
important open debate. I also thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her valuable briefing, as
well as Ms. Nada Majdalani and Mr. Gideon Bromberg
for their interventions. Viet Nam aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Viet Nam time and again has reaffirmed its support
for the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people
for their inalienable rights, including the right to selfdetermination and the establishment of an independent
and sovereign State. We strongly believe that the twoState solution is the optimal way to end the conflict and
to fulfil the aspirations of both Israelis and Palestinians.
We wish to see two States, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security along the pre1967 borders.

Viet Nam is deeply concerned over the continued
negative trends on the ground, particularly deadly
clashes, incitement to violence, provocations, illegal
settlement expansion, displacement of people and the
dire humanitarian situation in Gaza and the West Bank.
It is ultimately the people who suffer the most. The
situation is a denial of the fundamental rights for the
people on the ground and undermines all efforts towards
a peaceful solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

We call for unity at both the national level, with
a genuine intra-Palestinian reconciliation, and the
international level, with continued and consistent
support in words and in deeds. We highly appreciate
the efforts made by Egypt to promote Palestinian
reconciliation and call upon all concerned to abide by
international law and United Nations resolutions on
this issue.

Viet Nam condemns all acts of violence against
civilians and excessive use of lethal weapons. We urge
all concerned parties to exercise restraint and to refrain
from all acts that would escalate tensions. We share the
concern that Special Coordinator Mladenov expressed
in his briefing to the Council last month that no step
had been taken by Israel to cease settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories and the recent

Regardless of the enormous efforts made by the
international community, prospects of a sustainable
political solution to the conflict seem to be on a
dangerous trajectory, as the Secretary-General has
warned. Viet Nam urgently appeals to all parties
concerned to make greater concerted efforts to put
an end to the pain and suffering of the people on the
ground and to bring the peace process back on track.

19-1225459/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

29/04/2019

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.

territorial integrity along with its neighbours in the
region must end.

Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate the German and French presidency
of the Council on the work done this month. I wish
also to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this important debate, which is being held against the
backdrop of increasing developments and challenges in
our region. I thank you also for allowing Member States
to participate in this open debate, which addresses
highly complex and sensitive Middle East issues.
I would also thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, for her valuable briefing.

One of the most serious challenges we are facing
in our region is the grave threats posed and excessive
damage caused by terrorism. This destructive scourge
leads to the loss of lives and the destruction of the
infrastructure and the security and stability of States.
Once again, we reiterate our firm position in condemning
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever
a terrorist act is committed, regardless of the identity of
the perpetrators or their motives.

Today more than ever the international community
must play a greater role in the implementation of its
resolutions in order to achieve peace and stability in
the Middle East and create positive conditions for
more opportunities for a political settlement. That
includes providing protection for the peoples affected
and putting an end to any interference in the domestic
affairs of States. In addition, it is vital to help States
to maintain their sovereignty, security, independence
and stability.
In that context, the Kingdom of Bahrain stresses
that in order to achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the region, we must first settle the Palestinian
question. The brotherly Palestinian people must be
granted their legitimate right, as other peoples, to
establish an independent State, along the lines of 4 June
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on the basis of
the Arab Peace Initiative, the two-State solution and the
various relevant resolutions of international legitimacy.
We stress also the importance of maintaining the status
of Jerusalem and its historical character.
The Kingdom of Bahrain, as part of the coalition
to support legitimacy in Yemen under the auspices of
the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, is committed to
achieving a comprehensive peaceful solution in Yemen.
We are committed to achieving security and peace
in the sisterly Republic of Yemen and to meeting the
aspirations of the brotherly Yemeni people to security
and development, in keeping with the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its implementation mechanism,
the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and
the resolutions of the Security Council, especially
resolution 2216 (2015). All forms of interference in the
internal affairs of Yemen that threaten its unity and
60/64

We stress the importance of combating together
extremist ideologies and terrorist groups and of drying
up their sources of funding. We note that the eleventh
meeting of the Counter Da’esh Finance Group was
held on 16 and 17 April in the Kingdom of Bahrain.
At that meeting we discussed the tireless efforts of the
international community to combat the Da’esh terrorist
group. Those efforts made possible the defeat of that
terrorist group in a number of countries. In addition, its
ability to carry out and finance attacks has diminished.
However, we must remain cautious and continue our
efforts to overcome Da’esh and similar terrorist groups
once and for all and stop any financial flows to them.
The transfer of funds to terrorist groups outside of
the official financial system constitutes one of the
greatest challenges we are facing. Indeed, Da’esh, the
terrorist group Hizbullah and Al-Qaida, along with
other terrorist groups, rely on the receipt and transfer
of funds through illegitimate channels.
In conclusion, in order to achieve international peace
and security we must be united and devise innovative
mechanisms to overcome long-standing and emerging
challenges. The Kingdom of Bahrain will continue to
cooperate with the international community to settle
conflicts by peaceful means in order to achieve peace,
stability and security in the region and in the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at
the outset to thank the German presidency as well as
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing. I also thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for the efforts he is making
regarding the peace process in the Middle East and to
preserve the parameters of the process. I thank him as
well for his tireless efforts to contain the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip and for his
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

efforts to achieve inter-Palestinian reconciliation. I
also thank the representatives of Eco-Peace for their
comprehensive briefings.
The occupation of the Arab territories since 1967
is one of the issues that have been discussed by the
Council for decades. One generation after another has
listened to briefings and presentations that are similar,
sometimes identical, to one another. We have been
patient, hoping that a day will come when the rights
will be restored and peace, security and stability will
prevail in the region.
We remain certain that the Security Council and
the Organization as a whole, including the SecretaryGeneral, will remain the legitimate guarantors of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian and Syrian
peoples. However, we must consider the negative
developments concerning the Palestinian question
and the occupied Syrian Golan. We had not thought
that it would be possible to add even more injustice to
the historical injustice suffered by the Arab people,
meaning additional injustice after half a century of the
injustice already done to them. That is why I would
like to reaffirm the content of the communiqué issued
by the Arab Kings and Presidents during their summit
in Tunisia.
On the issue of the recent United States decision
regarding the occupied Syrian Golan, we affirm that in
no way will it alter the legal status of the Syrian Golan,
which has been occupied by Israel since 1967. It also
has no bearing on resolution 497 (1981), which does not
recognize Israeli’s annexation of the Syrian Golan.
I will not discuss the suffering of the Palestinian
people here, as we all know just how much they
are suffering. We heard a briefing on that issue
earlier today. Nonetheless, I would like to take this
opportunity to draw the Council’s attention to the fact
that we are facing a new development in the Palestinian
question, particularly with regard to the fate of the
two-State solution, which has been adopted by both the
Palestinian and the Israeli people, as well as endorsed
by the international community, and which benefits and
responds to the aspirations of both parties.
The next stage requires us to fully understand
that there can be no viable solution to the Palestinian
question based on the status quo, which we consider
a step backwards that will have serious consequences.
Solutions cannot be based on the illegal annexation of
occupied territory or on giving Palestinians economic

S/PV. 8517

incentives while ignoring the fact that the real issue
is a political one. We are talking about a people who
have lost their homeland and generations of whom have
been born and have lived under occupation. No one
will emerge victorious if the legitimate international
terms of reference and norms are violated, because the
fact is that the Palestinian and Israeli peoples share a
common fate.
The two parties must decide their destinies,
especially as we are now at a historic crossroads. They
can either live in peace in two States living side by
side, through negotiations based on the 4 June 1967
borders, including Jerusalem and under the terms of
the Arab Peace Initiative, or they can adopt temporary
measures in the hope of achieving political victory
under the spectre of a single State, which can only bring
enormous challenges for both peoples. There is no third
option. Neither party can emerge victorious or realize
its aspirations at the expense of the other, whichever
road they decide to take.
In conclusion, 40 years have elapsed since the peace
treaty between Egypt and Israel was signed. It remains
an example for all to follow, as it laid the groundwork for
achieving a fair and comprehensive peace in the region.
True peace, which serves the people, is based uniquely
on the acknowledgement by the parties concerned of the
importance of restoring people’s rights and ending the
occupation. We are confident that both the Palestinian
and Israeli parties are capable of arriving at such a
peace, as long as they prioritize the genuine interests
and security of their peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate.
I would like to begin with some remarks concerning
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Brazil reiterates its
support for a two-State solution, with Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security. Brazil
encourages the parties to seek a constructive political
environment conducive to a return to meaningful
negotiations. The situation in Gaza, which has now
lasted for a year, continues to highlight the importance
of a fair, just and mutually agreeable political solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian question. In that spirit, Brazil
welcomes the United States initiative for a peace plan.
We look forward to its presentation and encourage
all the parties involved to engage with an open mind

19-1225461/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in constructive negotiations. Peace can be achieved
only through difficult decisions and concessions from
all sides.
With regard to Syria, Brazil is gravely concerned
about the escalation of violence in Idlib and reiterates
the importance of fully complying with the ceasefire
agreed on last year. Only then can we begin to create
conditions on the ground that can enable progress to
be made towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
Brazil would like to underscore its support for the
work of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and its hope
that we will soon see further progress on the Geneva
track, especially through the speedy convening of a
constitutional committee, which will be a crucial step
towards an urgently needed political solution, based
on the parameters established by the relevant Security
Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2254
(2015), and the Sochi declaration. We reiterate that only
a political process mediated by the United Nations and
owned and led by the Syrian people can bring an end
to the conflict and enable the alleviation of Syrians’
humanitarian suffering.
Brazil regrets that the security situation has
continued to delay the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement and resolution 2452 (2019) in Yemen.
We remain committed to monitoring the ceasefire in
Al-Hudaydah, for which we have agreed to deploy
Brazilian military and police officers. In our view,
the Stockholm Agreement represents only a first step
on the way to achieving a comprehensive political
solution to the conflict in Yemen. In that regard, while
welcoming the recent announcement that the parties
have agreed to the concept of operations for the first
phase of the redeployment of forces in Al-Hudaydah, we
are following with great concern the continued reports
of violence, which threaten to undermine the fragile
ceasefire in the city and the escalation of violence
elsewhere in the country. We call on the parties to
continue to work with Special Envoy Martin Griffiths
towards the full implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement and urge them to refrain from measures
that might lead to a halt in the momentum created by
its establishment.
Lastly, Brazil is opposed to any military action in
Libya and urges all sides to de-escalate the situation,
commit to a ceasefire and engage with the United
Nations, the African Union and the relevant regional
stakeholders in order to ensure a full and comprehensive
cessation of hostilities throughout the country. We
62/64

29/04/2019

continue to believe that establishing lasting peace and
national unity ultimately requires an inclusive Libyanled and -owned political process. We call on all parties
to work with Special Representative Ghassan Salamé
to achieve a comprehensive political solution to the
security crisis and the dire humanitarian situation
in Libya.
The President: The representative of Israel has
asked to make a further statement. I now give him
the floor.
Mr. Bourgel (Israel) (spoke in French): I have
asked for the floor to comment on various statements
made earlier today, specifically by the representatives
of Syria, Iran and Lebanon. I will try to do that in the
four minutes I have, as I know it has been a long day
for everyone.
If the goal of this open debate were truly to discuss
the situation in the Middle East and not just about putting
one side on trial, we should be considering broadening
the discussion and establishing the underlying causes
of the destabilization in our region, which are the
destructive activities of Iran and those who do its
bidding. In that regard, I would like to remind the
Council once again that the Islamic Republic of Iran is
one of the world’s main sponsors of terrorism. It spends
approximately $7 billion a year to finance its networks,
and needless to say at the expense of its own citizens
and needs. It uses the arms that it manufactures and
sells to fuel and encourage terrorism all over the world,
especially in Syria, Lebanon and Yemen.
Furthermore, as it did in Lebanon, it is trying to
turn Syria into a launchpad for the ballistic missiles
that it produces, in flagrant violation of resolution
2231 (2015). It exports its missiles, foments terrorism
and spews out its destructive ideology, in violation of
resolutions 1559 (2004), 1701 (2006) and 2216 (2015).
Where Israel is concerned, there can be no denying
that its main goal is my country’s destruction, sooner
or later. The Supreme Leader of the Islamic Republic
of Iran has said that Israel will be wiped out in 25
years at the most. I would also like to point out that
the Syrian regime has offered its territory as a platform
for Iranian terrorism. On 20 January, for example, in
complicity, the Iranian Quds Force launched a mediumrange ground-to-air missile from Damascus towards
the Israeli Golan Heights.
With regard to Lebanon, Hizbullah, which is
internationally recognized as a terrorist organization,
19-12254

29/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

is part of the Lebanese Government, in which it
plays an open, active and important role, while it has
stockpiled more than 130,000 missiles that can be
fired at my country at any time, not to mention the six
attack tunnels recently discovered across our borders.
Hizbullah’s fanatical position clearly poses a serious
threat to the stability of the entire Middle East as well
as my country’s security.
The international community has a moral obligation
to take firm measures against those who continue to
fuel violence and promote terrorism and whose only
goal is undermining global peace and stability.
The President: The representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran has asked for the floor to make a
further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Seifi Pargou (Islamic Republic of Iran): Today
the Saudi delegation made unfounded allegations
against my country that I do not want to dignify with an
answer. We are not surprised to hear such fabrications,
as they are in line with Israel’s approach to diverting
attention from this meeting’s agenda, which is Israel’s
occupation of Palestine. They make these accusations
to distract from the reality of Saudi’s relations with
extremists and terrorists. Saudi Arabia’s Wahhabi
ideology is the ideology of major terrorist groups
around the world, just as its petrodollars are the main
source of funding for global terrorist activities. That
is what its patron, the United States, has repeatedly
stated. The Saudis are therefore the founding fathers of
terrorist groups, ideologically and financially.
As Saudi Arabia pays to remove its name from
the list of child killers in the United Nations, it is also
trying to portray itself, by making large contributions
to United Nations counter-terrorism mechanisms, as a
country that is combating terrorists. However, neither
its fabrications against others nor such contributions
can change the reality of deeds such as its cold-blooded
murder and dismemberment of Saudi journalists. And it
should stop beheading innocent Saudi minorities on the
pretext of fighting terrorism. The reality is that they are
brutally killed only because they are minorities.
Last but not least, with regard to the Israeli
delegation’s accusation and nonsensical statement, the
item on this meeting’s agenda is the Middle East and
Israel’s occupation of Palestine. Israel has to answer
for that. In its short lifespan, it has already waged 15
wars in our region and has invaded all of its neighbours,

S/PV. 8517

without exception. It must be brought to justice and
held accountable.
The President: The representative of Saudi Arabia
has asked for the floor to make a further statement. I
now give him the floor.
Mr. Alhakbani (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to respond to the statement made by the
representative of Iran.
We strongly reject the baseless and erroneous
accusations by the representative of Iran against my
country. They are not surprising, coming as they do
from a representative of the Iranian Government, which
is guilty of violating all international humanitarian and
ethical laws and customs.
History has shown conclusively that Iran has
blatantly interfered in the domestic affairs of Arab
countries by supporting armed groups and coup
militias. Any Arab country in which Iran has interfered
has ended up suffering from division, instability and the
spread of armed groups as well as sectarianism. History
has also shown conclusively that the strife, divisions
and conflicts that the Middle East is suffering from
began with the Khomeini revolution in Iran in 1979.
The Iranian Constitution states that it is important to
export the revolution’s ideology, along with hatred and
expansive ambitions. Iran’s policy is clear, as we can
see from the formation of armed parties loyal to it in
Arab countries that have led to the destruction of State
foundations, including in Syria, Lebanon and Yemen,
where we see examples of its hostile policies. Its
expansionist policies are crystal clear. It is flagrantly
interfering in the domestic affairs of neighbouring
countries, as well as pursuing hostile policies and
persistently threatening to close maritime straits
and international trade routes, in blatant violation of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
It is also violating Security Council resolutions on
Yemen and supporting the Houthi militias in their
coup attempts, thereby prolonging the suffering of our
brother people of Yemen.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has an independent
judicial system and legislature that respect human rights,
while ensuring justice and equality. The representative
of Iran has attempted to accuse my country in an effort
to distract attention from the crimes committed by
Iran in the region. The Arab region is in dire need of
stability on the security front if it is to embark on a path
of reconstruction and development in a region that is

19-1225463/64

S/PV.8517

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

still suffering from Iranian interference. It is time for
the Security Council and the international community
to take a serious stance against Iran’s destabilizing

64/64

29/04/2019

policies in the Middle East if we want to put an end to
such destabilization and divisions.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

19-12254
