S/PV.7527

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7527th meeting

Wednesday, 30 September 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lavrov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Chikoti
Mr. Mahamat
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Wang Yi
Mr. Fabius
Mr. Judeh
Mr. Linkevičius
Mr. Aman
Mr. McCully
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. García Margallo
Mr. Hammond
Mr. Kerry
Ms. Rodríguez Gómez

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Settlement of conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa and countering the
terrorist threat in the region
Letter dated 1 September 2015 from the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2015/678)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-29556 (E)
*1529556*

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Settlement of conflicts in the Middle East and
North Africa and countering the terrorist
threat in the region
Letter dated 1 September 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/2015/678)
The President (spoke in Russian): I would like
to warmly welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers
and other distinguished representatives participating
in today’s Security Council meeting. Their presence
today underscores the importance of the subject under
discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Australia, Austria,
Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus,
Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Montenegro, Morocco,
the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Poland,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, the Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey,
Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates and Uruguay to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: Her Excellency Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy; His Excellency
Mr. Nabil Elaraby, Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States; His Excellency Mr. Iyad Ameen Madani,
Secretary-General of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation; and His Excellency Mr. Abdulaziz
Al-Ammar, Permanent Observer of the Cooperation
Council for the Arab States of the Gulf to the United
Nations.

2/83

30/09/2015

I propose that the Council invite His Grace
Archbishop Paul Richard Gallagher, Secretary for
Relations with States of the Holy See, to participate in
this meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules
of procedure and previous practice in this regard.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/678, which contains a letter dated
1 September 2015 from the Permanent Representative of
the Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Russian
Federation for organizing this very important meeting,
and I take this opportunity to express my deep thanks
to the many Foreign Ministers who are participating
in this meeting. The number of participating Foreign
Ministers is impressive. I hope that this kind of
solidarity will always be with us as we address the
many subjects with which we are seized.
The Middle East and North Africa are in the midst of
some of the deadliest conflicts and worst humanitarian
emergencies of our times. Terrorist groups, such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida
affiliates, are elevating the horror and complicating the
search for solutions. While each is very different, the
crises and conflicts in Iraq, Libya, Syria and Yemen
all expose similar horrors. The situation in Syria has
proven to be the most intractable. It has generated one
peril after another: the use of chemical weapons, the rise
of ISIL and other extremist groups, the worst refugee
crisis since the Second World War and the displacement
of 8 million people inside the country.
We need to take urgent measures to protect civilians
from widespread violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law. We have an obligation
to the Syrian people to help ensure accountability for
serious crimes. I appeal to the Council to strongly
support my Special Envoy’s efforts to promote a
comprehensive and credible political transition based
on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex). Iraq,

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7527

Libya, Syria and Yemen are our common concerns and
the resolution of their crises is our shared responsibility.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

Next year, Member States will mark the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. With the Strategy now
long-established as the accepted framework for action,
we must push for more concrete implementation. Those
efforts must be balanced and anchored in international
human rights law. We must also have a keen sense
of the need to avoid unintended consequences. The
United Nations is working with many partners to
expand capacity-building assistance to Member States,
including to stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters
and to address the related ills of illicit drug-trafficking
and cybercrime.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.

It is not enough to counter terrorism; we must also
prevent violent extremism, while taking care not to take
steps that only breed the resentment and alienation on
which violent extremism feeds. During the course of
this session of the General Assembly, I will present
to the Member States a comprehensive plan of action
outlining ways we can work together in this endeavour.
The plan of action will recommend ways that Member
States can address the drivers of violent extremism at
the global, regional, national and local levels. It will
also set out how the United Nations system can support
Member States through a holistic all-of-United Nations
approach encompassing peace and security, sustainable
development, human rights and humanitarian action.
The current reviews of peace operations and
peacebuilding are also underscoring the importance
of addressing root causes. The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1), with its focus on justice, inclusive institutions
and resilience, also has a strong preventive dimension.
A more sustainable world will be a safer world.
Conflicts, governance failures and systematic
violations of human rights are affecting not only the
Middle East and North Africa, but the world at large.
Women and girls are facing systematic brutality. Young
people are having their futures taken away from them
before they have barely had a chance to dream. We must
work together to stop this downward spiral, using all
United Nations tools. The people of the Middle East
and North Africa deserve our full support in meeting
these tests and steering the region towards a path of
freedom, safety and dignity for all.

A year ago, the Russian Federation raised the
question of undertaking, under the auspices of
the Security Council, a comprehensive analysis of
problems related to the suddent outbreak of terrorism
and extremism in the Middle East and North Africa.
Since then, the situation there has deteriorated further.
The growing potential of the crisis has reached the
point where it is possible to speak of the destruction
of the political map of the region as it stood back then.
Today, we can clearly claim that attempts to address
the situation in isolation, without linking it to the overall
regional and historical context of individual conflicts,
are futile. We addressed the situations in Iraq, Libya,
Yemen, Lebanon and Syria in that way in their time,
seeking each time to convince one another that if only
we resolved that specific problem everything would be
fine. In most cases, solutions were often sought in a
change of that particular regime or others at any price,
with no regard for the consequences and without a
comprehensive strategy or even a short-term vision of
the following two or three steps.
The euphoria that engulfed many following the
Arab Spring changed to horror with the spread of chaos,
the escalation of violence, the shadow of religious
warfare looming over the region and, of course, the
unprecedented terrorist threat. The heinous activities
of the Al-Nusra Front, Al-Qaida in Iraq, Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb, the Yemeni branch of Al-Qaida,
Al-Shabaab in Somalia, Boko Haram and other groups
have faded in the light of the expansion of the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Across
the territories of Iraq and Syria, ISIL has created an
extremist quasi-State on the ground that possesses a
vast repressive aparatus, stable sources of income, a
well-equipped army and elements of weapons of mass
destruction.
ISIL cells are flourishing in Libya, Afghanistan
and elsewhere. Its announced plans include the capture
of Mecca, Medina and Jerusalem and the spread of its
evil activities to Europe, Central and South-East Asia,
and Russia. These terrorists carry out mass killings and
public executions, and threaten the very existence of
various ethno-religious groups, including Christians,

15-295563/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

30/09/2015

Kurds and Alawites. ISIL has a professional propaganda
machine active in dozens of languages.

Security Council is needed, in the interest of maximum
efficiency in counter-terrorist efforts in the region.

Today, as the merciless expansion of terrorists
leads to an uncontrolled wave of population movements
to Europe, we recognize the damage that has been
done and that there is a need for joint action. We note
that, at the recent informal summit of the European
Council in Luxembourg and the Prague summit of
the Visegrad Group, it was clearly recognized that the
migration crisis cannot be resolved until its root causes
are addressed — in other words, until a solid bulwark
is erected to block ISIL and its desire to subjugate the
region with laws dating back to the Middle Ages. We
should not be stopping the refugees but the terrorists
and conflicts and war they engender.

Secondly, there is a need to step up progress on
the intra-Syrian dialogue on the basis of the Geneva
communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex).
We support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and we are
making our contribution to launching a political process
that brings together representatives from the entire
spectrum of opposition forces and the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic.

The Russian assessment of the situation was clearly
spelled out in the statement made by President Putin
at the general debate of the General Assembly on
28 September (see A/70/PV.13). We do not seek to drive
the discussion in the fruitless direction of saying who is
right and who is guilty, but unless we learn the lessons
to be drawn from the reckless, mistaken adventures
undertaken over the past 10 or 12 years, we will not
be successful. The main lesson is that any unilateral
actions are dangerous. What we need are collective,
agreed approaches that are backed by Security Council
decisions. We believe that has to begin with a clear
and unambiguous determination of priorities. In that
connection, in our view, there is a clear understanding
that the main threat is terrorist aggression, embodied,
as it is, in the actions of ISIL.
We believe that should be followed by consistent,
practical steps in three key, interconnected areas. First,
it is necessary to combine and coordinate the efforts
of those who are able to make a real contribution to
the fight against terrorism, namely, the armed forces
of Syria and Iraq, the Kurdish militias, the armed
ranks of the patriotic Syrian opposition — in short,
anyone who opposes ISIL on the ground, as well as
outside actors who in one way or another can support
counter-terrrorism efforts in the region. It is essential
that such coordination be based on decisions of the
Security Council, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. In planning joint action in the
fight against ISIL, use could be made of the potential
of such a Charter-established body as the Military
Staff Committee. This is precisely a case in which the
military expertise of the permanent members of the

4/83

Thirdly, there is a need for inclusive and balanced
external support for the political process, including the
participation of Russia, the United States of America,
Saudi Arabia, Iran, Turkey, Egypt, the United Arab
Emirates, Jordan and Qatar. In that regard, we believe
that the European Union has a useful role to play. China’s
involvement would also boost the chances for success.
We believe that such an array of outside sponsors
acting in unison would help Syrians reach agreement
on the basis of common goals, that is, preventing the
creation of an extremist caliphate and strengthening the
Syrian State on the basis of national reconciliation and
understanding.
While addressing the General Assembly recently
(see A/70/PV.13), President Vladimir Putin proposed
discussing the possibility of a Security Council
resolution on coordinating all forces that want to
stand up against the Islamic State and other terrorist
groups. Today we will present to the members of the
Council a draft resolution based on previously adopted
Council resolutions, with the aim of aligning joint
counter-terrorism efforts on the basis of the norms
of international law. We expect a comprehensive
discussion of this topic in the coming month.
We are mindful of the growth of the threat posed
by ISIL, and there is a need now to forge practical
cooperation on the activities of all forces working to
counter terrorism. On 30 September, following a request
of the Syrian leadership, the President of Russia asked
for and received the consent of the Federation Council
to use the armed forces of the Russian Federation in the
Syrian Arab Republic. I am referring here exclusively
to the use of the Russian air force to carry out strikes
against ISIL positions in Syria. We have informed the
authorities of the United States and other members of
the coalition established by it. We are prepared to set

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

up open channels of communication to ensure the most
effective fight against terrorist groups.
The most important task is to counter the financing
of terrorism. The ingenuity of terrorists in an effort
to diversify their sources of income cannot but cause
concern. Among their main sources are the illicit trade
in oil and other mineral resources and illegal trafficking
in drugs, weapons and cultural artefacts, as well as
“donations” from sympathizers. In that connection, we
call for more stringent implementation of the provisions
of resolution 2199 (2015) with regard to drawing up
a sanctions list of physical and legal entities that are
trading with the Islamic State. There is also a need to
improve the effectiveness of the Group of Experts of
the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, systematically and
while taking advantage of the potential of the Financial
Action Task Force on Money Laundering and related
regional structures. We also propose making States
accountable for their implementation of resolution 2199
(2015) in a regular and systematic maner.
We believe that it is necessary to include the
Islamic State as a separate entity on the Security
Council’s counter-terrorism sanctions list. Any delay in
addressing this clearly pressing issue would, of course,
be counterproductive in terms of the effectiveness of
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts.
We call for more aggressively countering the
threats posed by foreign terrorist fighters. We need
urgently to establish a single database on such fighters,
develop additional mechanisms for sharing information
on their movements and put in place simplified
procedures for their extradition. Preventive efforts are
of particular importance. First and foremost, we need to
counter incitement to terrorism in line with resolution
1624 (2005), adopted 10 years ago. Since that time, the
urgency of countering terrorist ideology has increased
substantially. Russia’s multi-ethnic and multireligious
character gives us unique experience when it comes
to peaceful coexistence among different ethnic groups
and religious communities. We are ready to share our
experience and to learn from our partners.
Preventing terrorism, including in partnership with
civil-society organizations, also entails addressing
violent extremism. We believe it fundamentally
important that the initiatives now being proposed in
this area be firmly based on international law, including
respect for sovereignty and equality of States and
non-interference in internal affairs. One cannot bandy

S/PV.7527

about slogans to promote the fight against extremism
in specific countries over the heads of legitimate
Governments. Such attempts have already happened
and have not led to anything good, as everyone here is
aware.
Combating the terrorist threat must go hand in
hand with heightened efforts to resolve various conflict
situations in the region, whether in Syria, Libya or
Yemen. First and foremost, however, this applies to
the longstanding stalemate in the Palestinian-Israeli
question, which is fuelling extremist feelings on the
Arab street. The Quartet of international mediators,
together with Arab States and with the support of other
United Nations Members, must acknowledge their
responsibility for re-establishing direct talks between
Israel and Palestine, on the basis of the concept of two
States. Progress on that track would make a major
contribution to ensuring stability and security for the
peoples of the region.
We look forward to a frank discussion during the
course of today’s meetings, as well as in upcoming
meetings. It is important that we listen to one another
as we explain our positions, as well as to find ways
to cooperate on the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations in order to put an end to the terrorist threats and
ensure security in the Middle East and North Africa.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Wang Yi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic
of China.
Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
supports and greatly appreciates Russia’s initiative to
convene this open debate of the Security Council at the
ministerial level. Resolving the conflicts in the Middle
East and eliminating the threat posed by terrorism are
essential to world peace and part of the responsibilities
of the Security Council.
The situation in the Middle East region is serious
and disturbing, with differences among nations,
religious sects and ethnic groups aggravating the
situation. Wars and conflicts, humanitarian disasters
and terrorist threats are interlinked. The image of
the drowned 3-year-old Syrian boy is an affront to

15-295565/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

human morality and strikes at the conscience of the
international community.
We are gathered today in the Chamber of the
Security Council not to express lament and engage
in empty rhetoric, but to seriously reflect on the root
causes of the turmoil in the Middle East, make an
accurate and objective assessment of the situation in the
region, seek a feasible and effective solution and strive
to build a framework for peace that can be acceptable
to all parties. More important, we are here to seize
opportunities and take action to break the vicious circle
of incessant turbulence in the Middle East, comply with
the mandate entrusted to the Security Council by the
Charter of the United Nations and meet the expectations
of the international community and, in particular, of
the people of the Middle East.
China hopes that the international community and
the people of the Middle East will jointly build a region
of peace, tolerance and prosperity. First and foremost,
the peoples of the Middle East need a region of peace.
Stability is a blessing, while turmoil brings with it peril.
Peace is the most precious. The 70-year history of the
United Nations has witnessed continuous gun smoke
in the Middle East and the displacement of innocent
civilians.
The history of the Middle East has taught us, time
and again, that violence will not lead to the ultimate
solution of problems and that hatred will only extinguish
hopes. Only by respecting one another can people live
together peacefully. Only by adhering to dialogue
can problems be resolved, and only by promoting
friendship can a better future be created. That is what
the international community hopes to see and what
China’s diplomacy aims to achieve.
People need a Middle East characterized by
tolerance. The Middle East — once a cradle of
civilization — boasts a glorious history with major
contributions to human progress. Its flourishing
civilization and cultural confidence have made that
region an important platform for exchanges and the
integration of Eastern and Western civilizations. In the
twenty-first century, the coexistence of civilizations
requires the spirit of harmony without imposed
uniformity, more than ever before, and the progress of
society calls for inclusiveness and broad-mindedness.
The various religions should tolerate and learn from
one another, and the various ethnicities should live in
harmony.

6/83

30/09/2015

People need a Middle East of self-advancement. The
Middle East is the home of all the peoples in that region.
Therefore, its future and destiny should be determined by
those same countries, through consultation. Countries
outside of the region may provide help but should avoid
interfering in the internal affairs of other countries
and — even more importantly — avoid imposing a
specific model on them. The regional order should be
shaped by the countries in the Middle East, based on
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in
the light of the circumstances on the ground, and in
accordance with the needs of the people there.
The Syrian crisis has been lingering for nearly five
years. The international community should not stand
idly by, nor should it intervene arbitrarily. First, we need
to step up humanitarian assistance. In particular, the
growing tension caused by the migrant situation needs
to be addressed so as to avoid additional tragedies.
We welcome greater efforts on the part of European
Union member States to that end. Syria’s neighbouring
countries — which have received over 4 million Syrian
refugees over the past several years — face even
greater and more immediate pressure. It is both unfair
and unrealistic to ignore their efforts and difficulties.
Political settlement is the only way out of the
Syrian crisis. To achieve that goal, parties need to find
a middle way that draws on workable international and
regional practices, satisfies Syria’s national conditions
and accommodates the interests of all parties. The
resurgence of violent terrorist forces and the spread
of the migrant crisis have further driven home to all
parties the necessity and urgency of seeking a political
settlement to the Syrian crisis.
China calls on all parties to seize the
opportunity — arising from a growing desire for a
political settlement — to convene a third Geneva
Conference on Syria and push for restarting an
inclusive political transition process that does not set
preconditions or predetermined results, and involves all
parties to the conflict. Let the Syrian people decide for
themselves the future of their country, with the help
of the international community and the support of the
Security Council.
In order to achieve that goal, Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and Special Envoy de Mistura are carrying out
active mediation efforts. China, in that regard, hopes
that all parties will unite behind the United Nations
endeavour, create conditions, build consensus and

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7527

foster an enabling environment for a mediated solution
to succeed.

Minister and Minister for Foreign and Expatriates
Affairs of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.

China is deeply concerned about the recent conflict
between Israel and Palestine involving the Al-Aqsa
mosque compound. Violence never brings true security;
it will only entrench hatred. China firmly supports the
timely restoration of the Palestinian people’s lawful
rights and the realization of peaceful coexistence
between the two States of Palestine and Israel. The
international community should work together to
facilitate restarting talks between Palestine and Israel
on a broad-based platform, with the direct participation
of all parties concerned. Only talks can bring hope for
peace and a better future.

Mr. Judeh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow us,
Mr. President, to express our profound gratitude for
your initiative in convening this important meeting
on the settlements of disputes in North Africa and the
Middle East and on facing terrorist threats in the region.

Terrorism is a scourge affecting all humankind. The
evolving situation in the Middle East has repeatedly
shown that terrorist activities are all the same in nature,
and that, in order to fight them, we must not adopt
double standards. Combatting violent terrorism in all
of its manifestations should be the shared responsibility
and priority of countries in the region and the
international community. China calls for broad-based
and comprehensive international counter-terrorism
cooperation within the United Nations framework.
International counter-terrorism cooperation should
include the following priorities: combatting cyberterrorism, preventing the rise of violent extremist
ideologies, blocking the flow of terrorists and terrorist
funding, strengthening the exchange of intelligence and
giving full play to the role of Security Council.
China believes in a comprehensive response to
terrorism that addresses both the symptoms and the
root causes. Regional instability and development
gaps breed terrorism, while ethnic disunity and
religious conflict allow radical ideologies to resurface.
In order to fundamentally resolve issues that breed
and help spread terrorism, we must properly address
regional disputes, restore regional stability, enhance
the governance capabilities of the various countries,
accelerate economic development and improve people’s
lives in tangible ways.
China hopes that this Security Council meeting will
be a new starting point for renewed efforts on the part
of the international community and open new prospects
for peace and security in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to His Excellency Mr. Nasser Judeh, Deputy Prime

By virtue of our geographic location, we — in the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan — are the most implicated
in the current struggles in the region; and we are the most
directly affected by the political, economic, security and
humanitarian problems. Our vision of the root causes
and the factors of instability in the region come out of
a realistic view of our direct and vital interests in the
settlement of disputes and the restoration of peace and
stability to the region. The root causes of conflict in the
region — which have been exacerbated since what has
previously been referred to as the Arab Spring — have
been fed by deprivation. By deprivation, I mean both
political and social deprivation, which began at different
phases over the last several years. The situation has
worsened to varying degrees in the various countries
of the region. The common denominator among the
countries that have experienced such struggles is the
cumulative effects of that deprivation — be it political,
social or economic — and the lack of political prospects
to correct the situation in those areas. Efforts to steer
away from political discrimination and marginalization
have also been inadequate. Those shortcomings have
led to approaches that are guided by sectarian or
tribal tensions — at the expense of national unity and
peace. That has created fertile ground for terrorist
organizations to expand their operations.
Today, we are also witnessing the occupation of
Jerusalem — in particular, the occupation of the Al-Aqsa
mosque compound — Haram al-Sharif. The ongoing
Israeli violations threaten peace between religions. We
call on Israel to stop these violations immediately and to
respect the sanctity of holy places, in accordance with
the fact that his Majesty King Abdullah is the Custodian
of the holy Muslim and Christian places in Jordan, in
order to avert the repercussions of such a crisis on the
whole world. There is no doubt that the root cause of
the conflict is the fact that the people of Palestine have
for decades been deprived of their historical rights and
prevented from establishing an independent State on
their national territory. That was the beginning of the
instability in the region, which over the years has been

15-295567/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

translated into various forms of extremism both inside
and outside the region.
The only solution, therefore, is the two-State one:
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State
within the borders of 4 June 1967. This is indeed of
major interest to Jordan, because Jordan is directly
involved in all serious negotiations on issues pertaining
to the final solution in this respect.
The basis for restoring stability and solving the
existing problems requires a comprehensive political
process that deals with the root cause of the conflicts
in the region: the absence of a political solution to
the Syrian conflict, which is about to enter its sixth
year — one that leads to a political transition, satisfies
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and
guarantees their unity and security. That absence
serves only to fuel extremism and terrorism and to
aggravate the situation. In addition, the absence of
an inclusive and comprehensive political process in
Iraq and sectarian marginalization has also given the
Islamic State in Iraq and Sham (ISIS)/Daesh a chance
to develop. Defeating that terrorist regime will require
a political reconciliation process and the strengthening
of national unity among all Iraqi factions.
In Libya, despite international efforts to achieve a
political solution among the Libyan parties and make
the transition to a modern State, which requires the
support of international legitimacy, there has been an
expansion of terrorist activities, notably those of ISIS,
among others.
Regarding Yemen, we have to recognize that there
is no alternative to a political solution and that all
political parties should go back to the political process as
represented by the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative
and the results of the National Dialogue Conference,
in addition to accepting constitutional legitimacy as
represented by his Excellency Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour. Had it not been for the fact that some
parties rejected this process, there would have been no
reason for military action to strengthen and stabilize
the legitimacy of the Government.
The conflicts that are raging in many countries
have taken on sectarian aspects and threaten to ignite
a Sunni-Shiite conflagration that would jeopardize
the security and stability of the region. The fact that
these conflicts have taken on a sectarian aspect has
strengthened, in one way or another, the approaches
taken and the views espoused by certain terrorist

8/83

30/09/2015

organizations. Jordan has repeatedly emphasized that
it completely rejects the idea that this is a Sunni-Shiite
sectarian conflict or any form of religious conflict.
A confrontation of this nature must be dealt with in a
completely political context.
The humanitarian dimension of the ongoing
conflicts is increasingly problematic. Today we see
Syrian refugees flowing into neighbouring States and
beyond. The humanitarian consequences resulting from
the absence of political solutions cannot be contained.
There can be no humanitarian solution to the Syrian
problem. What we need is a political solution that will
put an end to this human suffering. Jordan, my country,
today is hosting approximately 1.4 million Syrian
citizens, in addition to a large number of refugees from
other countries, despite our limited capabilities. My
country has, however, almost exhausted its ability to
host those refugees in the absence of the international
support required to share the burden.
Today we are seeing heart-rending photographs of
those people, of an ancient civilization and culture, as
they seek refuge outside their country. The international
community as a whole must assume its responsibilities,
as countries cannot alone assume it in its stead. It is
important to emphasize that we should comply with
and fully implement Security Council resolutions
relating to the fight against terrorism. We in Jordan are
at the forefront of the international efforts to combat
terrorism, at the military, security and ideological
levels. His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein has
emphasized that this war is our war. It is a war within
Islam, against the Khawarij, who distort the image of
our religion, which is a religion of tolerance and one
that preaches acceptance of others, peace and dialogue.
In his address to the General Assembly the day
before yesterday (see A/70/PV.13), His Majesty stressed
that it is certain that the most important front in this
war is the intellectual one. We must seek, as a human
society, to win over hearts and minds; we should unite all
of our efforts to wage this war. It is vital that we comply
with and fully implement the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council regarding the fight against terrorism,
including resolution 2170 (2014), on the threat posed
by the Al-Nusra Front and Daesh, and resolution 2178
(2014), on facing the threat of foreign terrorist fighters,
who are joining terrorist organizations in the region
from more than 100 countries. This phenomenon has
dire consequences for both countries of origin and
countries of destination, in addition to the dangers

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

it poses to neighbouring countries, including the
perpetration of terrorist attacks in those States, which
places a heavy security burden on them.
The success of efforts to combat terrorism and
extremism will require an inclusive political approach
dealing with the root causes of the crisis: deprivation,
marginalization and exclusion, which were primarily
responsible for weakening the State and created a
vacuum that was then exploited by terrorist groups.
Revitalizing political processes aimed at solving these
problems would support the military and security
approaches, both within and outside the region, and
address the issue of the financing of foreign terrorist
fighters by depriving their purposes and motives of any
legitimacy.
We in the Security Council, the organ entrusted with
the maintenance of international peace and security,
must rise to the challenge and meet the expectations
of peoples all over the world. We must assume our
responsibilities in this context.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to His Excellency Mr. Laurent Fabius, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Development of the
French Republic.
Mr. Fabius (France) (spoke in French): I will focus
my statement on the fight against terrorism in Iraq and
Syria.
Confronted with the Syrian crisis and the limitless
barbarism of Daesh, the Security Council has,
unfortunately, mostly been the “Impotence Council”.
What the victims of this tragedy and international
public opinion are demanding of us can be expressed in
two words: act fast. That is also France’s position, and I
would add, if possible, act in unison.
France is an independent Power. Around the world,
we seek peace and security. In Iraq and Syria, that
requirement has determined and will determine our
choices. In Iraq, in August 2014, when Daesh seized
Mosul, an international coalition was formed. From day
one, France committed itself to it. Our military action,
relayed on the ground by the Iraqi security forces and
the peshmerga, was accompanied by a political process
of national reconciliation. It took no less than a year
after the start of our involvement before Daesh began
to pull back. It remains a strong threat, and all of us
here now know that defeating terrorism will require a
long-term effort.

S/PV.7527

In Syria, the situation is even more complex.
Indeed, there the terrorist group Daesh has flourished
in reality with the complicity of Mr. Bashar Al-Assad’s
regime. Its grip on Syrian territory has expanded in
recent months, with the city of Raqqa as its centre.
The flow of foreign fighters has increased, raising the
terrorist risk far beyond the Levant region. The regime’s
scorched earth policy has alienated a large majority of
the population. A military response from the coalition
was organized. We think that it should be strengthened.
But by itself it cannot be a sufficient response, since the
solution — and I think we all are in agreement on this
point at least — must be a political solution.
Today, some are proposing that we join our forces
to form in Syria a grand coalition against Daesh. Russia
has just presented the principles for a draft Security
Council resolution. What is France’s position? It is
based on a few principles that I will now set forth.
First, we must strike Daesh wherever we can. As
far as France is concerned, that is what we are doing.
In Iraq, we have been operating for more than a year
in the framework of the coalition and at the request
of the Iraqi Government. In Syria, the coalition’s air
forces have been engaged for several months, and last
Sunday, by decision of the President of the Republic,
French fighter planes took action against a training
camp where attacks were being prepared specifically
against our country.
I say to all partners who wish to join our efforts:
they are welcome, subject to three conditions.
The first is that there can be no ambiguity about
whom we are fighting. The ones that we must fight are
the terrorists affiliated with Daesh and other radical
groups that want to impose their barbaric laws. But
that obviously does not include the civilian population
and the moderate opposition forces, which for years
have courageously defended their vision — which is
also ours — of a united Syria that is democratic and
respectful of all communities, in contrast to the other
form of terror, namely, the bloody repression on the
part of the regime. That is the first condition — the
enemy is Daesh and not the civilian population or the
moderate opposition.
The second condition is that an end be brought,
at the same time, to other forms of violence against
civilians, which is what is actually fuelling extremism
and the dramatic flow of refugees. It is said that 80 per
cent of the 250,000 dead from the Syrian crisis and that

15-295569/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

80 per cent of the millions of refugees driven out of
the country in the last three years were the result of
the indiscriminate shelling on the part of the regime,
which must be stopped. The Security Council must,
therefore, once and for all, prohibit the use in Syria of
barrel bombs and chlorine bombs.
The third condition is that it be recognized that the
problem must be addressed at the root: the fight against
Daesh is connected to a political transition that could
give new hope to the Syrian people. The fate of that
people cannot be limited to alternative horrors — a
criminal regime, on the one hand, or barbaric terrorism,
on the other hand. What we need to seek is set forth
in black and white in the Geneva communiqué of June
2012: a Government with full executive powers that
brings together elements of the regime — yes, elements
of the regime — and elements of the opposition that
reject terrorism.
The time has come to implement such an exit
transition and reassure the Syrian people that their
future will not be in the hands of an executioner. We are
familiar with the essential objectives, parameters and
players for such a transition. We now need to implement
the process. In our view, it involves a broad negotiation,
under the auspices of the United Nations Special Envoy
for Syria and under the supervision of a contact group
whose core, in our view, could be extended beyond the
Permanent Five to include key regional partners.
I would add that in order to make those commitments
credible, we must consider the mechanisms that can
effectively, beyond words, protect the civil population.
In Syria, there are entire areas that are now under the
fire of indiscriminate bombing that is not justified
by the struggle against terrorism. Thousands of
Syrians have had to flee their cities and villages. That
must stop. Several of our partners have put forward
concrete proposals for creating — the nomenclature
varies — security zones, overflight prohibition
zones — in which the safety of the civilian population
would be ensured. We need to study those proposals
carefully and quickly, in order, if possible, to implement
them wherever they would be helpful to peace.
In the fight against Daesh, there is no magic
formula that could exempt us from the long effort
needed to combat terrorism. But there are — and they
should be avoided — false solutions that would only
prolong the crisis. A coalition whose very foundation
would, in fact, prohibit any rallying of Syrians against

10/83

30/09/2015

terrorists would fuel the Daesh propaganda and in the
end strengthen its power of attraction. It would be a
moral and political error for which the Syrian people,
the entire Middle East, Europe and the world would
have to pay for decades.
France is therefore ready to act with its traditional
partners — and with Russia and others — on the basis
of the three principles I have just set forth, as long
as the actions taken respect the three conditions: an
effective military engagement against Daesh and other
terrorist groups, and not against the Syrian resistants
or the civilian population; stopping the barrel bombing
and chlorine bombing of the civilian population; and
a broad negotiation aimed at a political transition that
does not lead to keeping the executioner of Syria in
power, but which makes it possible, finally, to truly
bring the Syrian people together. Those are the three
preconditions for the effectiveness of our actions in
Syria.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and African Integration of
the Republic of Chad.
Mr. Mahamat (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Russian Federation for having
organized this very important meeting on the settlement
of conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa and
countering the terrorist threat in the region. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his briefing.
The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations
affords us an opportunity together to ponder not only
the persistence of armed conflicts but also to reflect
on a new type of threat, that of terrorism, which is
spreading at a mind-boggling pace and threatening
peace and security throughout the world. This meeting
comes at just the right time. I hope that it will enable
us to carry out a comprehensive, in-depth analysis of
all the scourges afflicting the Middle East and North
Africa and to contemplate collective actions based on
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
At the outset, we need to ask ourselves
about the root causes of terrorism today and its
manifestations — Daesh, Al-Qaida, Jabhat Al-Nusra,
Ansar Al-Sharia and so forth — before we turn to
coming up with solutions. In the part of the world we
are discussing, extreme socioeconomic crises and a
lack of political reform that meets people’s aspirations

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

for greater democracy and freedom are sources
of significant frustration. Corruption, oppression,
discriminatory practices and marginalization of ethnic
and religious minorities have all further exacerbated
the situation. That explosive situation has been
compounded by external interference, as the chaos that
has taken hold of certain countries, such as Syria and
Libya, serves to bear out.
If we take the case of Libya, for example, we
should recall that during the very first hours of the
crisis the African Union sought a negotiated solution.
A mediation process was on the verge of achieving
success. Unfortunately, it was ignored — and even
undermined. No chance was given for a peaceful
settlement to the crisis. The consequence was the
destabilization of a country and an entire region, which
today has become the favoured arena of terrorists of
all stripes. The chaos that followed continues to impact
most of the African continent as well as Europe,
notably with the phenomenon of migration. This chaos
threatens all the countries of the Sahel region, including
those neighbouring my country, Chad, as a result of
the illicit flow of weapons and the actions of terrorist
groups active in Libya. Among the factors that further
exacerbate the conflict in the Middle East and North
Africa are the illicit transfer of weapons to non-State
actors, the shortcomings of conflict-prevention
mechanisms and the poor coordination between the
United Nations and regional organizations. We must
be frank that the situation is compounded by the slow
response of the international community, especially
that of the Council.
Allow me to touch on a few possible avenues to
find solutions to confront terrorism and tackle the
crises that have resulted in the region recently.
First, there is a need to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The conflict, which is as old as the United
Nations and has persisted for decades without any
prospects for peace, is a major source of the problems
in the region. With regard to the Palestinian issue, we
are of the firm belief that there is no alternative to a
two-State solution, one that can put an end to the Israeli
occupation and create an independent, sovereign and
viable Palestinian State living side by side with Israel in
peace and security. In that regard, the Security Council
must clearly determine responsibilities and exert the
necessary pressure on the parties to ensure that the
two-State solution becomes a reality. The international
community must not simply accept the situation of what

S/PV.7527

Palestinians experience on a daily basis — continued
settlements, the expropriation of land, the destruction
of homes, forced displacement, repeated incursions and
the ongoing desecration of the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Secondly, we believe that only a political solution
via a direct dialogue among the parties to the conflict
that addresses the underlying causes of the Syrian
crisis stands a chance of putting an end to the human
tragedy and to preserving the unity of that country.
Against that backdrop, we think it is high time for the
Security Council to fully play its role to lend renewed
momentum to the search for a political solution to the
crisis, which would enable us to implement the 2012
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
The flow of Syrian refugees into Europe across
the sea — a journey fraught with peril to their
lives — reflects the gravity of the Syrian crisis. Above
and beyond the emotions aroused by the recent shocking
images, this unprecedented migration, with its toll in
desperation and suffering, should move our conscience
to analyse the situation in a realistic way and to take
the necessary steps to find a political solution to the
conflict.
Thirdly, with regard to Libya, Chad reiterates the
need for an urgent political solution that safeguards the
territorial integrity and unity of the country and the
cohesiveness of its people, including the establishment
of a Government of national unity that is able to put
an end to the hostilities. A national reconciliation
agreement remains necessary and pressing to restore
order and security to avoid the country’s collapse. We
continue to believe that there can be no military solution
to the Libyan conflict and that all the parties must act
responsibly and put an end to their use of violence.
The Security Council must send a strong message to
those who wish to undermine the political process by
promoting a military solution as the negotiations are
under way. We urge the international community to
come together with the countries of the region and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union
and the League of Arab States, to enable them to
contribute effectively to the peace process.
Fourthly, as far as the fight against terrorist acts
is concerned, we need to recall that the sanctions list
to date includes 20 Al-Qaida-associated entities in
North Africa and the Middle East. That is alarming.
Despite the numerous Security Council resolutions
and the collective efforts against terrorist groups,

15-2955611/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

unfortunately, we are forced to conclude that the terrorist
threat continues to increase and poses an existentialist
threat to some States. Countries need to cooperate at a
subregional, regional and national level by exchanging
information and by improving their mechanisms for the
extradition of terrorists.
In conclusion, we want to underscore that
the Security Council, which bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, must play a leading role in the prevention
and management of conflicts in the Middle East, North
Africa and elsewhere. Regional organizations such
as the African Union and the League of Arab States
must be fully involved in the prevention and peaceful
settlement of conflicts by setting up and strengthening
a strategic partnership between the United Nations and
regional organizations. The growing interdependence
throughout the world and the links among regional and
local conflicts requires joint coordinated action more
than ever.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. José Manuel García
Margallo, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of the Kingdom of Spain.
Mr. García Margallo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by highlighting the timeliness and
relevance of convening this meeting at a particularly
complex moment. I would also like to underscore that,
in combating the phenomenon of terrorism, it is crucial
that there be leadership, perseverance, determination
and, above all, unity. Without unity, they will defeat us.
Spain has a long and painful experience in
combatting domestic and foreign terror. With regard to
combatting domestic, separatist terrorism, it is worth
recalling that 55 years ago the first victim — a 22-monthold baby girl — died as a result of a bomb explosion in
a railway station. Since then, Spain has suffered more
than 800 deaths at the hands of the terrorists of Euskadi
Ta Askatasuna. With respect to foreign terror, we have
suffered many attacks. Particularly memorable was the
Madrid attack of 11 March 2004, in which 190 people,
the majority of whom were people of humble origins
going to work on local trains, were killed.
There are five lessons that we can learn from this
experience and that can be useful to the international
community. First, as I said yesterday, we do not
negotiate with terrorists; we defeat them. Secondly,
we defeat them with the law — only with the law, but

12/83

30/09/2015

with the full force of the law. Thirdly, international
cooperation is absolutely necessary in terms of
intelligence, the coordination of security forces and the
speediest possible extradition of murderers. Fourthly,
civil society must be involved. Once again, the Spanish
experience shows that, between 1960 and 1997, after
the killings in the Basque country, the victims had to
be buried in silence and in the dark, because often they
were said to be responsible for their own misfortune.
When civil society reacted, things began to change.
Lastly, it is necessary to reveal, show and uncover the
real face of these murderers. They are not soldiers; they
are — I repeat — criminals. They are not believers;
they are blasphemous because religion is always the
language of peace.
Before drawing lessons that could be useful to the
international community, I shall make a few comments
on the current situation. As has been said, more than five
years of war in Syria have resulted in 250,000 deaths,
12.5 million people who need urgent humanitarian
assistance, 8 million internally displaced persons
and 4 million refugees outside the country in Jordan,
Turkey and Lebanon, which is putting those countries
in a extraordinarily difficult situation. I recall the fact
that Lebanon, whose per capita income is one fifth of
that of the European Union, has a refugee population
equal to 25 per cent of its total population. I do not need
to describe Jordan’s situation; anyone who has been to
Zaatari knows what is happening there.
However, the worse part of the situation in Syria
is that the fight between the two forces has created a
vacuum that Daesh and other forces associated with
Al-Qaida have exploited in order to try to establish a
caliphate that would drag us back into the darkest periods
of the Middle Ages, using the most modern techniques
to recruit, finance and broadcast its grisly deeds. The
second phenomenon that we have experienced recently
is the massive flow of refugees who have to flee their
land in search of freedom. This calls into question the
very foundation of the immigration and asylum policy
of the European Union. It demonstrates that we cannot
wait much longer. We must act and act now.
In Libya, we also find a very complicated situation.
Simply put, there has been a lengthy war between the
Tripoli and Tobruk factions that has also been exploited
by Daesh to plant its black flags on the coast of Libya
and has unleashed a flow of illegal migration that is
also calling into question the immigration policy of the
European Union.

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

In Iraq, things are a little better because, as we
see it, there is a legitimate Government which, at our
request, has allowed us to send more than 300 Spanish
troops to train Iraqi forces. In Spain’s opinion, the Iraqi
Government should pursue its inclusive efforts so that
the Sunnis, the former soldiers of Saddam Hussein
and the Kurdish peshmerga will join together with the
regular army in a common effort against a common
enemy. If I can borrow from the title of a famous
pamphlet, what is to be done done? The first issue is that
without the cooperation and international coordination
on the part of everyone — members and non-members
of the coalition — this will not work.
Secondly, it is absolutely necessary to coordinate
the struggle against foreign fighters. To that end, we
recently convened, on 27 and 28 July in Madrid, a
special meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which approved a ministerial statement, which I will
not read out because it is available to the members of the
Security Council. Given its geographical situation and
historical tradition, Spain is closely involved with the
countries of the Mediterranean and the Near East. We
have hosted many meetings with the moderate Syrian
opposition in Cordoba. We have facilitated international
meetings on Libya involving the most important
countries of the world. In Barcelona, we brought the
together 28 countries of the European Union plus eight
from the southern shore of the Mediterranean. And we
have launched institutional reinforcement programmes
to strengthen democratic institutions, in particular the
Masar programme — which means “way” in Arabic — in
North Africa and the Supporting the Inclusive Public
Policies in Sub-Saharan Africa Programme, the Apia
Programme, in sub-Saharan Africa.
The second lesson that we can draw from the Spanish
experience, which is applicable to the situations we are
experiencing, is that it is necessary to respect the rule
of law and to combat impunity. Just yesterday, we met
with experts and representatives of various countries
and non-governmental organizations in order to submit
a draft project for the establishment of an international
criminal court against terrorism. This would be an
international legal instrument designed exclusively to
combat crimes of terrorism with the instruments of
international law. The court would be a complement to
the intervention of the International Criminal Court and
would fill the gaps that have been observed, and would
come into effect only when a State is not in a position

S/PV.7527

to try, prosecute and punish. Therefore, it would be a
subsidiary to national courts.
I have spoken of the Spanish experience and of
the need to involve civil society in combatting terror.
Intercultural and interreligious dialogue represents, in
the view of Spain, a fundamental tool. We therefore
participate with Turkey and many other countries in
the Alliance of Civilizations. We participate with Saudi
Arabia and Austria in the King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz
International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural
Dialogue, and we have organized various initiatives
to support this dialogue and establish a tolerant and
peaceful image of Islam that is a doctrine of love.
We also participated in the debate organized by the
French presidency on the defence of religious minorities
(see S/PV.7419), where we presented, as a specific
initiative that I will reiterate, the establishment of the
post of special representative of the Secretary-General
to combat violent extremism, who would coordinate
the myriad initiatives that are often not coordinated
yet have the same objective, but have little resources
because they lack coordination. In Barcelona on 23 July,
I repeated this same invitation at a meeting attended
by religious leaders, brought together by the Alliance
of Civilizations and the Union for the Mediterranean.
Speaking before the Alliance, I said that the Union for
the Mediterranean brought together 43 countries of the
north and south banks of the Mediterranean and was
therefore a very important forum for analysing these
issues.
I would also like to announce that the Club de
Madrid will meet on 27 and 28 October and will bring
together 100 former Heads of State and Government
from around the world to analyse the terrorist
phenomenon and efforts to combat terror.
I have underscored the fact that it is important to
include public opinion in our efforts and to show it the
real face of the victims. Therefore, we will convene
in the Security Council, under the presidency that we
will assume tomorrow, an Arria-formula meeting for
victims of terrorist violence throughout the world who
will testify about their suffering and pain and what
they expect from us. Now, in this context of involving
civil society in combating terror, we assign particular
importance to the role of women. Therefore, on
13 October the President of the Government of Spain,
Mariano Rajoy, will preside over a Security Council

15-2955613/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

meeting, a high-level debate on women and peace and
security, pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000).
I conclude with a reference to young people. No
young person is born a terrorist. They become terrorists.
Education is thus a vital element. I am not going to give
a lecture on education, but let me just narrate a short
story.
In the Syrian conflict we are seeing almost 500,000
children who are not going to school. That creates a
suitable breeding ground for radicalization and the
fuelling of terrorism. The Security Council and the
United Nations have said that we need to include a
debate on that theme in our discussions. Poverty,
unemployment and living conditions are the root causes
of terrorism. I am not going to give a lecture on poverty
either, but simply say that in a recent visit to Gaza I had
the opportunity to observe that 1.7 million people live
in Gaza who are without jobs, without a future, without
any hope. The majority are under 25 years old, and
90 per cent of those people have no jobs, no activities
and, I insist, no future.
I refer to the importance of social networks and the
Internet. It has been said that the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham is an anachronistic movement in terms
of its objectives and purposes but extraordinarily postmodern in the way it uses social networks. It is up to us
all to make an effort.
I would like to close by saying that we welcome
the efforts of all countries, whether they are part of the
coalition led by the United States of America or not,
to fight together. If we have a common enemy, then let
us have a common front, and let us postpone any other
objective, however legitimate it might be, for the only
goal that should unite us: the defeat as soon as possible
terror in the countries where it is existing.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Linas Linkevičius, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Lithuania.
Mr. Linkevičius (Lithuania): The political and
security situation in the Middle East has rarely been
more dramatic. No other modern conflict has produced
such massive destruction. Over 12 million displaced
and refugees, hundreds of thousands of killed and
wounded, two million children deprived of education,
and a country in ruin — such is the cost of this conflict,
now well into its fifth year.

14/83

30/09/2015

Syria’s neighbours Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon
are bearing the brunt of refugee flows. The capacity
of Jordan and Lebanon in particular to cope with the
flows of refugees is stretched to the limit, threatening
a breakdown of vital services and infrastructure. The
Syrian Government’s war against its own population
has enabled the spread of violent extremism and
terrorism in the country, which is further fuelled by
the influx of foreign terrorist fighters. The fighting
in Yemen and the fragility of the situations in Iraq,
Libya and elsewhere in the region risk expanding the
zone of terror even further, contributing to even greater
displacement.
Syrians make up some 70 per cent of those trying to
cross the Mediterranean. While it is first and foremost
a glaring failure of the Syrian Government to protect
its population, it is also the Security Council’s failure.
The Council should have acted early and forcefully
on the crisis in Syria. Instead, it remained paralysed
by a succession of vetoes aimed at protecting the
perpetrators, not the civilian victims. Those who
cast those vetoes share with the Syrian regime the
heavy responsibility for the deaths, destruction and
displacement of the Syrian people.
My delegation is firmly convinced that the use
of the veto has no place in cases of massive abuses of
human rights, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
genocide. We therefore welcome France’s initiative on
veto restraint. Lithuania also joined Liechtenstein’s
initiative on the code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes.
One cannot pretend to defend the law by practicing
lawlessness. One cannot fight terrorism by attacking and
abusing the civilian population. Extending Al-Assad’s
stay in power, including by foreign military buildup in
Syria, is not a viable solution and can only deepen the
conflict. The Syrian Government and those supporting
it must stop bombing its Syrian people and engage fully
on the implementation of the Geneva Communiqué of
June 2012. Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura has our
full support as he seeks to put the political process back
on track.
While some criticism for Europe’s response to the
refugee crisis is in order, the European Union is doing a
lot to respond to the crisis in a comprehensive manner,
working with countries of origin, transit countries and
countries of destination. As a follow-up to the European

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7527

Agenda on Migration adopted earlier this year, the
European Commission produced a comprehensive
package of proposals to help address the refugee crisis,
including by tackling the root causes that make people
seek refuge.

attacks. I want to stress in particular the role women.
They can serve in the first line of defence against
radicalization and violent extremism, starting from
their families and local communities all the way to
national and international leadership.

We hope the Security Council will support
European actions aimed at tackling the smugglers in
the Mediterranean, who profit unscrupulously and
cynically from human suffering while putting more and
more human lives at risk. Inaction is not an option. The
migrant-smuggling industry expands and develops,
pouring money into the hands of criminal gangs and,
eventually, the hands of terrorists.

Just as they make people flee and seek salvation
elsewhere, protracted conflicts, the breakdown of
governance and the rule of law, oppressive regimes and
rampant corruption, exclusion and abuse of minorities,
extreme inequalities and systematic gross violations
of human rights all play into the hands of extremism
and terrorism. To tackle the threat of terrorism, we
must cut off its life support by addressing those
very underlying causes, as well as the injustices and
lingering grievances that make people vulnerable to
incitement and recruitment.

Lithuania has pledged its share in receiving the
refugees. Necessary preparations are being made as the
first families from Syria and Iraq are being resettled.
At the same time we are providing assistance to and
welcoming refugees from Ukraine’s regions occupied
by Russia’s proxies. Let us not forget that Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine and the illegal annexation
of Crimea caused massive displacement and left five
million people dependent on humanitarian assistance.
The recent criminal decision by Russian-backed illegal
militants in eastern Ukraine to expel United Nations
and other humanitarian agencies will increase the
suffering of the local population even further as the
cold season approaches.
The Council has created an impressive normative
base for combatting terrorism, including resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), whose tenth anniversary
we marked earlier this September. The Council has
also responded to the emergence of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters by reinforcing existing
counterterrorism framework with resolutions 2170
(2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015) and a comprehensive
presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/11) adopted under
the Lithuanian presidency in May. We must now ensure
that no gaps remain between the normative base and its
implementation.
Modern-day terrorists like ISIL can be brutal and
barbaric, but they are also sophisticated in their use of
modern communications technologies for propaganda
and recruitment. To fight them effectively, we must
constantly adjust and adapt our responses and engage
the whole range of actors: Governments, the private
sector, academia, community and religious leaders,
youth, and women, as well as survivors of terrorist

We must also focus on accountability for terrorist
crimes. We can no longer tolerate continued impunity
for terrorist acts, terrorism financing, recruitment
and incitement. Enhancing national and international
capacities needed to go after terrorists and their
sponsors, and better use of existing justice mechanisms,
including the International Criminal Court, must be
part and parcel of anti-terrorism strategies and our
common commitment.
Accountability is a key to deterrence. It is also
the key to doing justice to the victims of terrorism.
Those victims should never be forgotten. They must
inspire us to redouble our efforts in stemming this most
dangerous phenomenon, which threatens humanity and
all the very best that we as humans beings stand for.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Her Excellency Mrs. Delcy Rodríguez Gómez,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mrs. Rodríguez Gómez (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of President
Nicolás Maduro Moros of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important meeting on this subject.
Venezuela has historically condemned terrorism
in all its forms and wherever it originates. As we
reconsider the Middle East and what is happening there,
there is even more reason to welcome the convening of
today’s meeting. The situation there is deeply worrying.
Seventy years after the birth of the United Nations,
I am ashamed to say, we are still talking about the

15-2955615/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

Palestinian issue. But there is still a moral and ethical
debt that needs to be settled there, with the stagnation
of the peace process and what is going on there. What is
going on — and what we want to warn the international
community about — is a very worrying and dangerous
situation. That political conflict, caused by Israel’s
illegal occupation of the Palestinian territory, has
been compounded by violence and attempts to turn the
conflict into a religious one, which could complicate
the situation in the Middle East even further.
We all agree in this Chamber when we hear about
a two-State solution, but the States must be genuinely
equal and sovereign. We cannot put together a two-State
solution in the face of the current unequal situation in
which Zionist terrorists murder the Palestinian people
and discriminate against them. As we sit here, some
Palestinian citizens, boys and girls and women, are
being prevented from gaining access to basic services
that are crucial for their survival and are being subjected
to cruelty and violence. If we truly believe in creating
two States, they must be two equal and sovereign States,
and we must join forces to turn the deadlocked peace
process into a genuine pathway through dialogue and a
peaceful settlement of the situation.
It is extremely disturbing that 70 years after the
founding of this Organization we still witness situations
that not only violate the rights of the Palestinian people
but in which the State of Israel promotes terrorism, which
in turn affects the Israeli people themselves. We cannot
talk about good terrorism and bad terrorism. When we
analyse its causes, we cannot deal with terrorism as
such; we can only react to the consequences, which suit
the various centres of power that control the daily life of
countries and their media and financial resources. We
should also be talking about the social and economic
model that breeds poverty and misery, but we must
also be honest. Terrorist groups do not emerge through
spontaneous reproduction. We would like to know who
is financing and training those terrorist groups and who
is giving them logistical support. That is something that
this multilateral forum should perhaps be investigating.
In a forum such as this, 70 years on, as we look
at the principles governing the conduct of equal and
sovereign States, it is discouraging to listen to the
arrogant, unilateral and belligerent exceptionalism
that we hear. There should be no room for that here.
Either we are a multilateral organization that respects
the conduct and standards of international law and the

16/83

30/09/2015

purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, or we are conducting an exercise in hypocrisy.
What has the Arab Spring done for these peoples?
Has it brought them greater happiness and more
democracy? Because what we are hearing today we have
heard before, all in the name of democracy, freedom
and the people’s welfare. The unilateral, imperialistic
interventions we have witnessed have bypassed this
Organization, contravened the Charter and made people
less equal and more unhappy.
What has been the result in Iraq, in Libya, in
Afghanistan? The destruction of sovereign States. And
now what do we want to do for Syria? The same thing?
Can it be that the terrible photograph of a little Syrian
boy on a seashore does not affect us or touch our souls
and our hearts? How many more children must we
see die? We have heard all of this before. I must say it
frankly to the world, all of those imperialist wars have
been preceded by media wars and lies. It was lies that
led to the interventions by those countries in the Middle
East and North Africa, and 10 years later, they say that
yes, it was a lie, but we made mistakes and we have
learned a lesson. But what we see is that no lessons
have been learned.
What we realize now is that humankind has not
learned the lesson — or, rather, not humankind but
the hegemonic power centres of the world. That is why
President Maduro has called for a new configuration
of geopolitics that can truly guarantee peace, love and
happiness for humankind.
We cannot combat terrorism with more violence.
We know what happens if we fall in line with those
hegemonic centres: we get this kind of theatre. The
consequences are greater misery for the people, more
violations of human rights and greater inequality. If we
are really committed to combating terrorism, we must
do it honestly and frankly, and ensure that the lessons
of the past make us think and act differently. We cannot
continue acting this way, based on lies buttressed by
transnational communications conglomerates and the
belligerent, arrogant imperialistic power centres of
the world. That cannot bring the Syrian people more
happiness.
We must respect the principles of national selfdetermination, territorial integrity and sovereignty,
because if we do not, why have we come here for the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations? Just to
discuss something very different from what it says

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

in the Organization’s founding Charter? Why are we
here, then? We are here to enforce those purposes and
principles, because we know that in that way we can
contribute to humankind and a safer, less violent world,
if we really wish to combat terrorism. Today, in Syria,
there are more than 500 terrorist groups. Who is funding
them? We need an answer to that question. Who is
training them and giving them logistical support? What
we see are the vicious cycles of imperialism. They are
the cycles that first destroy nations and States and then
create a space where terrorist groups can proliferate.
Venezuela calls for such a new configuration. We
must abandon double standards and two-faced morals
and hypocrisy, and join together on this issue honestly
and truly prepared to combat terrorism. There should
be no excuses about how we do not like a particular
leader. The Arab Spring has already showed us what
can happen then. We must stop choosing that false and
immoral course of action. If we truly want a safer and
less violent world, we must fight the causes of terrorism
and not its consequences, which is a pretext to intervene
in other countries and trample on the Charter of the
United Nations.
We call on the United Nations to play its leadership
role and to apply international law to thugs roaming
the world with their violent armies, maintaining illegal
occupations and aggression against peoples.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Mr. Murray McCully, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of New Zealand.
Mr. McCully (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes this Security Council debate on the resolution
of conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa, and
we welcome the fact that it involves Foreign Ministers
from so many members of the Council.
But we do not welcome the fact that today we will
adopt no resolution, and not even agree a presidential
statement; we will not stop the fighting. Sadly, this
is symbolic of the dysfunction and mistrust that has
characterized the Council’s performance on Syria and
too many of the conflicts that rage in the region today.
And it must stop.
In Syria, 250,000 dead people and 12 million
displaced by conflict should tell the Council that it must
stop — that we must work together to find a resolution.
We can all see what the path forward must involve.
On the one hand, we must be pragmatic; we must take

S/PV.7527

the situation as it is and the actors who are there, and
collectively impose a transition process that will enable
institutions and services to operate as we allow Syria
to rebuild. On the other, we must uphold the principles
of justice and international law that would rule out
impunity for those responsible for mass atrocities.
In his introductory remarks to the General
Assembly at this year’s general debate (see A/70/PV.13),
the Secretary- General named five countries whose
deep differences need to find resolution if the conflict
in Syria is to cease. Each of these five countries, along
with most others, has declared its implacable opposition
to the brutal terrorist threat that is the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. To that extent, the concept behind
today’s debate can claim success.
Where it fails is in its inability to unite these key
actors and the members of the Council behind a process
that marries the pragmatism that must be employed to
stop the conflict with the more principled solutions that
will enable Syria to start rebuilding, displaced people to
return, and the other conflicts in the region, involving
largely the same actors, to be addressed — those in
Libya, Iraq, Yemen and Palestine.
Until members of the Council learn to cooperate
to broker these compromises, we will live in a world
which is eternally destabilized by the rivalries of the
Middle East and North Africa; a world of constant
workarounds as substitutes for Council leadership,
and a growing and ultimately deafening demand for
Security Council reform.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to His Excellency Mr. Georges Rebelo Pinto Chikoti,
Minister for External Relations of the Republic of
Angola.
Mr. Chikoti (Angola): First of all, we congratulate
the Russian Federation on its accession to the presidency
of the Security Council. We thank Minister Lavrov for
presiding over such an important and timely debate on
the issue of settling conflicts and countering terrorism
in the Middle East and North Africa.
We also take this opportunity to praise the
Secretary-General for his efforts in the promotion
of peace and assure him of our support in these very
challenging times.
The current refugee crisis affecting much of the
European continent has served as a wake-up call to
the entire international community concerning the

15-2955617/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

importance of resolving conflicts by tackling their
root causes. That is particularly true of the conflicts
that have been plaguing much of the Middle East
and North Africa in recent years. We are aware that
these conflicts have given rise to a number of terrorist
organizations and an extremist ideology that has been
growing stronger due in large measure to increased
social, ethnic and ideological tensions.
What are those roots, and how can we address
them in a comprehensive and sustainable manner,
while respecting the principles and requirements of
international law? Even though the answer to this
question is complex and varies from country to country,
we believe that containing extremism, combatting
socioeconomic inequality and strengthening education
are fundamental approaches to forming sustainable
democratic societies in the region and throughout the
world at large.
We are of the view that extremism in the Middle
East has root causes in foreign interference in the
affairs of States, in policies addressed to regime
change translated into military interventions, and in
the funding and transfer of arms to non-State actors
and opposition groups, as well as other political and
social grievances that have led many people to join
extremist groups out of frustration at these perceived
injustices. On the other hand, we must recognize that
such grievances are also based on historic humiliations
inflicted upon those peoples and are also the cause of
their hatred and intolerance towards Western culture
and civilization and towards other religions and creeds.
Extremist groups, using condemnable terrorist
tactics, seek to impose their culture and values by
leaving no space for diversity, whether religious,
cultural, political or ideological. We therefore believe
that extremism can be successfully countered only by
undermining its ideology of intolerance, undertaking
an ideological struggle to discredit them, empowering
moderate reformists, implementing effective policies
of inclusion and dialogue, achieving change and
mutual political concessions, respecting fundamental
human rights, improving governance and guaranteeing
equitable income policies.
However, the fulfilment of such goals entails, first
and foremost, putting an end to the protracted conflicts
in Iraq, Syria, Yemen, Palestine and Libya, among
others, which are having disastrous political and social
consequences and catastrophic humanitarian effects

18/83

30/09/2015

on the civilian populations of the region and the entire
world.
The Arab Spring, first perceived as an outstanding
process of political and social change intended to bring
a new era of democracy and prosperity to the Middle
East and North Africa, had instead the undesired effect
of the disintegration of States and the rise of extremist
terrorism and criminal organizations. We therefore
believe that gradual change, respect for Government
institutions and the rule of law are better suited to
ensuring positive reforms rather than revolutionary
change. Sudden change, as witnessed during the Arab
Spring, lacked structure and leadership, creating an
environment conducive to protracted power struggles.
The chaos that has prevailed in Libya since 2011
following the forceful removal of the Al-Qadhafi
regime has placed a humanitarian and security crisis
on Europe’s doorstep, which faces a huge influx of
migrants from Africa due to porous borders and the
breakdown of the security structure in the country.
Criminal networks have taken advantage of the situation
and are trafficking migrants across the Mediterranean
Sea on a massive scale, in a perilous voyage to escape
the desperate conditions of war and social deprivation
in their home countries in Africa and the Middle East.
In addition, while taking advantage of the situation,
terrorist organizations such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant/Islamic State, Al-Qaida and others
thrive in such an environments of chaos and use them
as effective recruitment grounds.
If is obvious that terrorism cannot be defeated only
by tackling extremist leaders and holding premature
elections without the conditions for their holding
being met. Extremist ideology must be challenged at
its core, which includes two critical elements. The first
is the lack of education and a high rate of illiteracy in
many Arab and African countries. Education based
on the promotion of critical thinking and analysis
and successful education reform will engender a new
generation of independent-minded citizens, which is a
critical element for establishing and maintaining a stable
democracy and making effective the multidimensional
fight against extremism. The second is to improve
the international response mechanism via a coherent
and unified structure as a barrier to prevent conflicts
from spiralling out of control, as is the case in Syria.
Such a mechanism, to be spearheaded by the Security
Council, should support States in need of political and

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

social reform, while respecting their sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate our desire to
help facilitate a political solution to the crisis in Libya
and to the devastating conflicts in the Middle East.
In the meantime, something must be done to curtail
the rise of nationalism in Europe upon the arrival of
hundreds of thousands of refugees and migrants, by
raising awareness among the European population of
the causes of such a phenomenon and by promoting the
values of tolerance and understanding of the plight of
these destitute people in absolute need of help. Moreover,
the international community should drastically change
many of the options that have been at the heart of its
approach to dealing with the situations that prevail in
many countries of the Middle East and Africa subject to
conflict and deterioration in the humanitarian situation.
Proxy wars by regional Powers, which undermine the
often-fragile social cohesion of multicultural societies,
have also served the ranks of extremists and terrorists
by stoking ethnic tensions. The Security Council, which
unfortunately has been deeply divided on the issue of
finding appropriate solutions to the conflicts prevailing
in the Middle East and North Africa, should lead by
example and reaffirm the importance of the peaceful
settlement of disputes as stipulated in Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations. The Government of
Angola reaffirms its commitment to actively support
the world coalition to fight the terrorist threat and the
spread of extremist ideologies, taking into account the
fact that no country is safe from such a threat.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to His Excellency Dato Sri Anifah Aman,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia.
Dato Sri Anifah Aman (Malaysia): I thank
the Russian Federation for convening this meeting.
Malaysia welcomes this initiative, through which we
hope the Security Council can hold constructive and
fruitful discussions on the contemporary conflicts in
the Middle East and North Africa region. Revisiting
underlying causes connected to the seemingly
intractable conflicts in the Middle East and North
Africa region at this juncture is a timely initiative. The
region and affected countries and societies are perhaps
worse off today than when those conflicts began.
Your call, Mr. President, for a comprehensive
analysis of the causes of conflicts, for sharing and
exchanging views on possible solutions and for a

S/PV.7527

reaffirmation of our common commitment to counter
terrorist threats in and beyond the Middle East and
North Africa region is, I believe, a useful exercise for
the Council. Although the scope is ambitious, we are
fully supportive.
Malaysia reiterates its fullest condemnation of all
acts, methods and practices of terrorism and reaffirms
its commitment to combat terrorism in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
We strongly reject associating terrorism with any race,
culture or religion.
There is no one-size-fits-all framework in analysing
or addressing the various conflicts in the Middle East
and North Africa region. Nevertheless, we may infer
some commonalities to better inform our common
efforts in countering terrorism and violent extremism.
First, due to current political and security instability,
countries such as Iraq, Libya, Syria and Yemen are
seen as fertile ground by the terrorists. Terrorist groups
exploit the political and security vacuum to increase
recruitment, expand territorial control and smuggle in
weapons. In those cases, terrorism is not the root cause
of conflict but symptomatic of political instability.
Secondly, the presence of terrorist groups in those
and other affected countries has deepened sectarian
divisions, thereby exacerbating political and social
instability. The longer such divisions fester — sowing
discord and fear among the populations — the longer
it takes for the torn social fabric to be mended. Left
unchecked, that will further prolong instability and
serve the terrorists’ agenda.
Thirdly, the pre-existing situation of gross human
rights violations and the dire humanitarian predicament
in the affected countries provides a very compelling
narrative for recruitment. While the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters is not new, the current scale
of their involvement in the conflicts in the Middle East
and North Africa region is unprecedented.
Furthermore, the terrorists’ narrative and
propaganda, particularly by Daesh, is expertly
communicated at a global level through social media
and messaging platforms. To illustrate the pernicious
nature and effects of such messaging, consider
that in Malaysia, a multi-ethnic, multireligious and
multicultural country that is quite geographically
distant from the Middle East and North Africa region,
authorities have arrested more than 100 persons since

15-2955619/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

2012 who are suspected of linkages with Daesh and for
being or supporting foreign terrorist fighters.
As a further example, a 26-year-old woman, a doctor,
was reported to have left her relatively comfortable
middle-class life to marry a Daesh fighter in the Middle
East whom she had never met and whose language she
does not speak. She even detailed her experiences as
a Daesh “wife” on social media and encouraged other
young women to do the same. In a chilling tweet she
said, “A life without terror is like drinking sea water.
It keeps you thirsty and causes you to be dehydrated.”
Against such deeply ingrained extremism, it seems
clear to me that the war must be won not through the
force of arms, but through a triumph of minds, hearts
and wills.
At the national level, Malaysia has intensified
efforts to prevent terrorist groups and cells from
operating in the country, particularly for recruitment
and fundraising purposes. In November last year, the
Government presented a white paper in Malaysia’s
Parliament on the threat posed by Daesh and on possible
responses. At the same time, existing legislation
has been strengthened, including on countering and
preventing the financing of terrorism. New legislation
has also been enacted — namely, the prevention of
terrorism act of 2015 and the special measures against
terrorism in foreign countries cct of 2015 — with a view
to addressing the foreign terrorist fighters phenomenon.
A key feature of the prevention of terrorsim act that I
want to share with the Council concerns its provisions
on rehabilitation and de-radicalization. The assumption
underlying those provisions is rooted in the belief that
the fight against terrorism cannot be won through force
or punitive measures alone.
On the social and education front, authorities are
engaging closely with religious and community leaders
to nip radicalization and extremism in the bud, as well
as to disseminate clear and accurate information on the
true teachings of the various faiths and religions.
In terms of capacity for outreach, awarenessraising and research, we are fortunate to have the
Southeast Asia Regional Centre for Counter-Terrorism
in Kuala Lumpur. Additionally, as stated by my Prime
Minister at yesterday’s summit on countering the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and countering
violent extremism, Malaysia is actively exploring the
possibility of establishing a regional digital countermessaging communications centre.

20/83

30/09/2015

Malaysia remains convinced that, in the context
of the situation in the Middle East, the threat posed
by terrorism can be effectively addressed by the
international community only if it is prepared to take
a self-critical and unbiased look at the root causes of
terrorism and act to redress grievances, injustices and
gross violations of human rights.
We cannot allow the plight of long-suffering
Palestinians, living under occupation, to be cynically
exploited by terrorist groups and according to their
narrative, couched in terms of good versus evil. In
our view, a just and durable solution to the situation
in Palestine is long-overdue. At this point in time,
prolonged occupation also fuels the terrorist narrative
and may also contribute to radicalization.
Malaysia looks forward to engaging with Council
members on the draft resolution of which the President
spoke about earlier. Malaysia remains committed to
achieving unity of purpose and of action by the Council.
In conclusion, I reiterate Malaysia’s firm belief
that, in order for the Council to continue to play a
constructive and positive role in conflicts in the Middle
East and North Africa region, it must find the will to
overcome differences and speak in one voice.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. John Kerry, Secretary of
State of the United States of America.
Mr. Kerry (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for this chance to address my
colleagues on the Security Council. I appreciate the
fact that Russia’s presidency has chosen to focus on
this issue. I welcome the opportunity to talk about the
urgent challenge of countering terrorism in the Middle
East, North Africa and elsewhere.
This is a topic that the Council has explored many
times. Going back to the attacks of 11 September 2001,
and even prior to that, we have come together fairly
often to condemn terrorism and to take concerted action
to counter violent extremist organizations. Therefore,
this is not a debate about goals — I do not think. We all
oppose the aggressive ambitions of organizations such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
‎ A l-Qaida, as well as well as groups that imitate them
or are affiliated with them. We all oppose the atrocities
that they commit, and we all want to end the suffering
that they continue to inflict. There is no debate about
that. The question that we face is how one best does

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7527

that. There are basic principles that we believe should
guide our strategy.

and corruption robs the populations of their due and
possibilities.

First, in confronting terrorism, we have to take a
comprehensive approach. That was quite eloquently
spoken about by our Heads of State at the summit on
countering violent extremism that President Obama
hosted. There was a great deal of discussion. I thought
that there were some very articulate statements about
how one should approach the root causes. We have to
deny safehavens, disrupt the flow of foreign fighters,
block access to financing and expose the lies that
terrorist groups propagate. The latter is particularly
challenging in this world of constant media and non-stop
access, 24/7/365. We are living in a very different
world, and terrorists have learned how to exploit media
in all kinds of ways.

In each of those areas, we intend to work hard with
all members of the Security Council and with others not
present to improve our chance for success by working
with the concerned elements of civil society, including
non-governmental organizations, religious leaders and
the private sector. Meanwhile, we have to continue our
efforts to alleviate the immediate hardships that terrorist
are causing. While we have been pushing humanitarian
relief into areas, the international community absolutely
has to do more. We are staring at a humanitarian
catastrophe unfolding not in one or two places, but
simultaneously in multiple places. The humanitarian
disaster that we are witnessing, in and of itself, should
be enough reason to take on ISIL. Over the past several
days, that has been a major topic of our discussions
here. But it has to remain a core concern for all of us
in the weeks to come. Every Nation can do more. Both
resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) — everyone
around this table voted for them — clearly require
humanitarian access to besieged areas and specifically
call for an end to barrel bombs and the use of starvation
as a weapon of war.

We also need to exert pressure in support of peace,
perhaps one of the most important components of our
responsibility, in places such as Libya, for instance,
where instability fuels the kind of chaos and fear in
which extremist organizations thrive. We see that now
with the presence of ISIL in Libya. Accordingly, that
is the fundamental strategy that we have laid out for
countering violent extremism. We have adopted that
strategy. We are strongly engaged in implementing it.
We welcome the large number of nations that have joined
as international actors in thecounter-ISIL coalition, the
Global Counterterrorism Forum and other regional
organizations. But, obviously, more needs to be done.
We have been able to counter some foreign fighters
and keep them from travelling, but still too many of them
have been able to travel and reach their destinations. We
have been able to slow down and stop some elements of
the financing, but too much money is still able to reach
terrorist activities and actors. Our goal is to take urgent
actions against immediate threats, while also facing up
to longer-term measures that prevent the recruitment of
future generations of terrorists, improve governance and
enhance economic opportunities so that radicalization
is less likely. That is an enormous challenge for all of
us; we know it. There are countless countries in which
60 to 65 per cent of the population are under the age
of 30 or 25, and in other cases under the age of 18.
Unless they find opportunities and options, their minds
will be stolen and their opportunities will be robbed
forever by bad actors who grab them in that vacuum.
We also need to improve governance and enhance
economic opportunities so that radicalization is less
likely. Too many places still see too much corruption,

I would now like to add a few thoughts specifically
pertaining to Syria, ISIL and Russia. The United States
supports any genuine effort to fight ISIL and Al-Qaidaaffiliated groups, especially the Al-Nusra Front. If
Russia’s recent actions, and those now ongoing, reflect
a genuine commitment to defeat that organization, then
we are prepared to welcome those efforts and find a
way to de-conflict our operations, thereby multiplying
the military pressure on ISIL and affiliated groups.
But we must not and will not be confused in our fight
against ISIL with support for Al-Assad. Moreover, we
have also made clear that we would have grave concerns
should Russia strike areas where ISIL- and Al-Qaidaaffiliated targets are not operating. Strikes of that kind
would bring into question Russia’s real intentions in
fighting ISIL or protecting the Al-Assad regime.
We have informed Russia that we are prepared to
hold these de-confliction talks as early as possible this
week. But let me be clear: the United States and the
coalition will continue our ongoing air operations, as
we have from the very beginning. We have conducted
a number of strikes against ISIL targets in Syria over
the past 24 hours, including just an hour ago, and these
strikes will continue.

15-2955621/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

Let me be clear: the coalition that we have built,
more than 60 countries strong, has been taking on ISIL
for more than a year by liberating Sinjar mountain,
liberating Kobani, liberating Tikrit, where now more
than 100,000 residents have been able to return to
their homes and resume their lives, defending Mosul
dam, defending Haditha, protecting Baghdad, rescuing
endangered minorities, killing ISIL leaders and
facilitators, and taking away the entire northern border
of Syria for ISIL east of the Euphrates River.
At the same time, we have mounted a comprehensive
campaign to cut terrorist financing, curb the recruitment
of foreign fighters and expose the lies that ISIL has
perpetrated. Today, even as we speak, south of Kirkuk,
Kurdish peshmerga are heroically liberating villages
from ISIL under the cover of coalition airstrikes. In
addition, we continue to admire the courage and the
resilience that has been demonstrated for four long years
of struggle by the legitimate opposition to Al-Assad.
Let me remind the Council that coalition air
operations are grounded in well-established military
procedures firmly based in international law and the
requests of neighbouring States for collective selfdefence under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
The foundation has not changed, and we will continue
our mission with the full sanction of international law.
Pursuant to these procedures in Syria over the past year,
the coalition has now conducted nearly 3,000 airstrikes
against ISIL targets, and we are now in position, with
France, Australia, Canada, Turkey and other coalition
partners joining the campaign, to dramatically
accelerate our efforts. That is what we will do.
Over the coming weeks, we will be continuing our
flights out of Incirlik base in Turkey to apply constant
pressure on strategic areas held by ISIL in northwest Syria. We will also be sustaining our support to
anti-ISIL fighters in north-east Syria. These efforts
will put greater pressure on ISIL’s operational areas,
and we will ensure, through precision airstrikes, that
ISIL leaders do not have any sanctuary anywhere on
the ground in Syria.
So ISIL will soon face increasing pressure from
multiple directions across the battlefield in Syria and
Iraq. But as we have said from the start, and as the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) codifies,
this fight cannot be won in the military sphere. It will
require a political solution to the crisis of Syria.

22/83

30/09/2015

One thing is certain: the vast majority of States
represented around this table know that the ISIL forces
and ISIL itself cannot be defeated as long as Bashar
Al-Assad remains president of Syria. It cannot happen
by definition of the lines of this battle. It cannot happen
because of who has lined up with whom and because
of the nature of these protagonists. The reason for that
is defined in the beginning by how this fight itself
began. This fight began when young people, young
Syrians looking for a future, wanting nothing more
than opportunity in jobs and education, went out to
demonstrate for the future and to claim the aspirations
of young people, and Al-Assad sent his thugs out to
beat them up. The parents were outraged by the fact
that their children, demonstrating peacefully, had been
beaten up, and they went out with their kids, and they
were met with bullets. That is how this whole thing
began — people in a country looking for a future who
are instead met with repression, with torture, with
gassing, with barrel bombs. Al-Assad will never be
accepted by those whom he has harmed; it will never
be possible for him to become a legitimate leader in
future or to lead a reconciliation or unification of the
country. That cannot happen until he makes clear his
willingness to actually heal the nation, end the war and
decline to be part of the long-term future.
Today we must be focused on finding a solution
that will stop the killing and lay the groundwork for
a Government that the Syrian people themselves can
support. We know that the terrorists can neither unite
the country nor govern it. We know that Al-Assad can
neither unite the country nor govern it. Neither extreme
offers the solution that we need and want. What is more,
our ability to develop a credible international political
process would be a farce from the beginning, incredible
enough that it would not stop people from fighting,
if it were perceived as a way to extend or strengthen
Al-Assad’s hold on power.
As President Obama said on Monday, the United
States is prepared to work with any nation, including
Russia and Iran, to resolve the conflict, but we must
recognize that there cannot be, after so much bloodshed,
so much carnage, a simple return to the prewar status
quo. My colleagues from the Government of Russia
have argued that we must support Al-Assad in order
to defeat ISIL. But the reality is that Al-Assad has
rarely chosen himself to fight ISIL. As the terrorists
made inroads throughout large swathes of Syria and
Iraq, raping, enslaving and murdering civilians along

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

the way, the Syrian regime did not try to stop them.
Instead, it focused all of its military power on moderate
opposition groups that were fighting for a voice in
Syria.
Make no mistake: the answer to the Syrian civil war
cannot be found in a military alliance with Al-Assad.
But I am convinced that it can be found through a
broadly supported diplomatic initiative aimed at a
negotiated political transition, a transition that has been
accepted by the Security Council and by participants
of the Permanent Five, consistent with the Geneva
communiqué, which would unite all Syrians who reject
dictatorship and terrorism and want to build a stable
and united society.
So, in conclusion, I call on all Governments
concerned, including Russia and Syria, to support a
United Nations initiative to broker a political transition.
Further delay is unconscionable. The opportunity is
before us, and if we can succeed in marginalizing the
terrorists in Syria and in bringing the country together,
we can all of us together do exactly what this was set
up to do — the Security Council and this institution.
We could strike a huge blow against violent extremism,
not only in Syria but also in Iraq, across the Middle
East and around the world. Nothing would be more in
keeping with the high purpose for which the Council
was created 70 years ago, and nothing would better
serve the interests of the people that all of us represent.
I hope that we can achieve that.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Mr. Philip Hammond, Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom.
Mr. Hammond (United Kingdom): I welcome the
opportunity to contribute to this important debate. None
of us doubts that violent extremist ideologies across
North Africa and the Middle East constitute a grave
threat to international peace and security, regional
stability and peaceful civilian life across the world.
In confronting them, we are waging a generational
struggle in which we will prevail only if we speak with
one voice and act with one will.
At the same time, we have to give hope to those
who despair of a better future and may be tempted to
join the violent extremists, whether they are frustrated
Palestinians who see no hope of resuming the Middle
East peace process, Iraqi Sunnis who await the genuine
inclusiveness that Prime Minister Al Abadi has

S/PV.7527

promised, or Syrian moderate oppositionists who see
no other way to fight Al-Assad.
The coalition to fight the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) being led by the United States
has brought together more than 60 countries, from
the region and beyond, to take the fight to ISIL. The
United Kingdom has played a major role in delivering
coalition air strikes in Iraq and remains committed to
the coalition as the best mechanism to mount a unified
and comprehensive response. We have already met with
some tangible success, helping to halt ISIL’s precipitous
advance across Iraq last year and over time removing its
freedom to operate in more than 30 per cent of the Iraqi
territory that it once held, as well as cutting financing
sources and countering its social media propaganda.
But there is much more to do, and we do not shrink
from the reality that this will be a long haul.
There is also universal agreement that Syrians have
suffered too much for far too long. We must come to
their aid. I want to take this opportunity to acknowledge
the generosity of Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon, in
particular, in hosting millions of refugees fleeing the
violence of the Syrian civil war over years. The United
Kingdom has given over £1.6 billion in humanitarian
assistance towards the Syrian crisis and neighbouring
countries hosting refugees.
The crisis in Syria is reverberating globally, both
in the violent extremism that it has helped foster and
the migration crisis that it has precipitated. There will
be no lasting solutions to these challenges without
lasting peace and stability in Syria. We have to do more
than respond to the humanitarian consequences of the
conflict if we are to achieve that stability.
But to help Syria navigate its way out of this crisis,
we must be clear about how it arrived there in the first
place. It was the Al-Assad regime that led Syria into the
crisis. Its brutal repression of peaceful protesters, which
we just heard about from Secretary Kerry, followed by
the years of indiscriminate attacks on civilians that
ensued, especially through the indiscriminate use of
barrel bombs, was the root cause. The Al-Assad regime
created the environment in which extremism, and ISIL
in particular, have flourished.
We therefore reject the advice of those who say the
poison of Al-Assad is the cure for the cancer of ISIL. It
cannot be. It was Al-Assad who released jihadis in the
early stages of the conflict. It is Al-Assad who continues
to trade with ISIL even now. And it is Al-Assad’s forces

15-2955623/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

that are killing more civilians in Syria each month
than any other actor. Al-Assad has been and remains
one of ISIL’s greatest recruiting sergeants, and his
forces remain focused on the destruction of moderate
opposition groups and civilian population centres. Any
attempt to ally with Al-Assad against ISIL will only
strengthen ISIL, making it de facto leaders of the Sunni
resistance to the Al-Assad regime.
We owe it to the Syrian people to secure a future
free both of the terrorism of ISIL and the tyranny of
Al-Assad, because Syria can be an effective partner
in overcoming violent extremism only if it has a
representative Government, a Government capable of
working with the international community to confront
ISIL militarily and counter its twisted narrative. The
best contribution Al-Assad and those around him can
now make is to put their country’s interests before their
own and step aside to allow a political transition that
will end the civil war and allow Syrians to unite in the
struggle against Islamist extremism. What is needed is a
transition that will provide representative and inclusive
Government and enable the Syrian people to begin the
task of rebuilding their nation. The best contribution we
can make is to support the efforts of Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura in negotiating
such a transition, while standing ready to work with all
partners to make this happen.
Over the last few weeks, the realities on the
ground in Syria have changed. Russian intervention
has strengthened regime morale and reinforced regime
capability. Russia has taken a major decision and
assumed a heavy responsibility by this public propping
up of Al-Assad while he continues to terrorize his
own people. The international community will expect
Russia to use the increased influence it has to stop the
use of weapons like barrel bombs that have targeted and
killed thousands of innocent civilians and prevent any
use of chemicals as weapons by the regime.
We have heard over the last few days about Russia’s
intention to use force against ISIL, and we welcome
that focus. But for the reasons I have already outlined,
it is not possible to be an effective part of the fight
against ISIL and at the same time — with the same
force — be attacking the moderate oppositionists
resisting the oppression of the Al-Assad regime. To
say it clearly: actions in support of the regime are
incompatible with the effective prosecution of the war
against ISIL in Syria. This is not a moral judgment, it is
a pragmatic judgment.

24/83

30/09/2015

We heard this morning of the first Russian air strikes
in Syria. Russia will be well aware of the message that
those strikes will deliver. The targets of those strikes
will not have been selected carelessly or at random. It
is very important that Russia be able to confirm to the
international community that the military action it has
undertaken in Syria this morning is directed at ISIL and
Al-Qaida-affiliated targets only, and not at moderate
opponents of the Al-Assad regime.
I have also listened to those who say that the Syrian
people should decide in elections whether Al-Assad
stays or goes. I have to say that this is an illusion. It
denies the reality on the ground. How can there be fair
elections in a country that has lost a quarter of a million
dead and has 12 million of its citizens displaced, many
of them outside its borders? Healing those wounds can
start only when Al-Assad leaves, whether that is at the
start of a transition or later in the process.
There is of course a way forward. If we can see
an end to the barrel bombing and the indiscriminate
attacks on civilians, if we can encourage de-escalation
on the battlefield so as to reduce casualties, if we can
at the same time embark upon a political process that
leads to a new Syria with a new Government without
Al-Assad, then we could focus opposition strength on
fighting ISIL. The question for the Council is whether
those who have the influence to deliver this outcome
are willing to use that influence to do so. I call upon all
Security Council members to unite in order to deliver a
future for Syria.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Heraldo Muñoz, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Chile.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, and the Russian Federation for
convening today’s open debate, which gives us an
opportunity to reflect on how terrorism accentuates
the precariousness of societies destabilized by conflict.
The Security Council must always be prepared to take
collective, preventive and effective action to safeguard
international peace and security.
The situation in the Middle East and North
Africa is a cause for concern for the international
community — who can doubt that? — because the
activities of armed and terrorist groups are worsening
the cycles of instability and multiple tensions among
communities that need to strengthen a coexistence
based on cohesion, inclusiveness and diversity,

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

as shared principles and values. Those principles
represent the heritage of humankind. Their application
is essential in the efforts to ensure confidence and
trust in the region, halt the renting of the social fabric
and create an atmosphere of better cooperation, or at
least understanding, among States, religions and ethnic
groups.
The conflicts in the region have been worsened by
terrorism associated with fundamentalism, which has
threatened the very existence of countries when such
groups control territory and establish an Administration
based on terror and intolerance. Recent experience has
shown us that the use of force can reduce the military
capacity of terrorist groups, but it cannot prevent the
diffusion of ideas to generate new recruits and inspire
violent ambitions in people vulnerable to their message
of extremism. It is therefore imperative to replace their
terrorist ideology by an alliance of shared values that
includes a preventive, multinational focus that would
promote specific actions at the local, national and global
levels to encourage interreligious and intercultural
dialogue.
The voices of those in civil society with an
influence at the community level can play an important
role in that task. That central notion was addressed by
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Council members
meeting at the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
meeting held in Madrid in July. The meeting also
took up the issue of foreign terrorist fighters, with a
draft ministerial declaration having been prepared for
adoption by the CTC. This is an issue on which it seems
to us that cooperation is essential.
The Islamic State is a destabilizing factor in the
Syrian and Iraqi conflicts. Their presence and spread
into other countries and regions is alarming. In the
areas that they control, they are deceptively presenting
themselves as a political and social movement that
is filling an order and unity vacuum in communities
polarized by conflict that lack governance and
economic, political and social opportunities.
I would like to recall that, during Chile’s presidency
of the Council in January, we identified the linkage
between inclusive development and international
peace and security (see S/PV.7361). We did so because
we believe that the underlying causes of these crises
are related to various forms of exclusion — whether
socioeconomic, gender-based, ethnic, tribal, religious
or ideological — that can have an impact on local and

S/PV.7527

global levels as well, thereby posing a greater challenge.
It is therefore essential to address these failings
urgently. Whether or not it involves domestic processes,
for which each State has the primary responsibility,
the international community and the Security Council
should be part of a collective effort. It requires the joint,
concerted and effective action of the Council and the
entire international community to deal with the gravest
humanitarian problems afflicting millions of people in
the Middle East and North Africa.
Chile will make its contribution to host Syrian
refugees. I would like to highlight that Chile has already
made a contribution by receiving Iraqi refugees. But it
is also necessary for there to be real commitment on
the part of political actors in every affected State so
as to stop the violence, resolve differences through
dialogue and implement the resolutions of the
Council. In that regard, we certainly appreciate the
efforts of the Secretary-General’s Envoys and Special
Representatives.
Chile believes that there are factors that encourage
terrorism. It is urgent to resume the peace talks between
Israel and Palestine on the basis of two sovereign States
living alongside one another in peace and security.
Turning away from that path will only bring more
conflict and terror.
We would also like to express our decisive support
in continuing to work with the international community
to eradicate terrorism, which violates fundamental
values. And I want to reassert the importance that all
measures in this fight should always be undertaken
while respecting the rule of law, in conformity with
international law, particularly international human
rights law, the rights of refugees and international
humanitarian law as set out in Human Rights Council
resolution 29/9.
The Security Council has worked tirelessly to
achieve the necessary consensus. It has adopted
resolutions to strengthen the multilateral mechanism
to combat terrorism and the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters. That strategy must also be bolstered. The
inescapable challenge remains focusing efforts to
ensure the full and effective implementation of those
resolutions. That responsibility lies with all States
Members of the Organization. We know that it is
complex and not easy, but we are facing a global threat
that is aggravated by the attempt to impose religious

15-2955625/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

convictions and interpretations. There is no room for
indifference or inaction.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that prevention
is a central element in opening up avenues for greater
understanding and cooperation aimed at discrediting
the notion of terrorism being an alternative to motivate
those who aspire to a more inclusive society with
greater opportunities.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
and the delegation of the Russian Federation for
organizing this debate on a subject of remarkable
significance for international peace and security. This
debate is propitious, and the unprecedented presence of
so many Ministers in this forum serves to accentuate
the global determination for concerted action.
Today’s debate is taking place against the backdrop
of conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa that
pose a great threat to the peace and security of the
entire region and beyond. Those conflicts have been
compounded by the activities of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and other terrorist
groups operating across the region.
Of all the conflicts in the Middle East, the most
protracted is the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The lack
of progress in the Middle East peace process is one of
the drivers of instability in that region. The current
stalemate does not offer a sustainable solution to the
question of Palestine. What is required is political
will on the part of Israeli and Palestinian leaders to
return to negotiations on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
the Quartet road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and
existing agreements between them. That is the only
path to a sustainable and peaceful resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We take this opportunity
to reaffirm our unwavering support for a two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine existing side by side
in peace and security.
The lack of progress in the Middle East peace
process has in turn heightened the threat of terrorism,
especially manifested in the Middle East and North
African regions. Attacks by ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front,
Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups have claimed the
lives of thousands of civilians and displaced many
more. Those attacks have been orchestrated by violent
extremists who perpetrate acts of anarchy, insecurity
and injustice under the banner of religion. They target
women, children and other vulnerable groups. They

26/83

30/09/2015

commit war crimes and crimes against humanity with
impunity. The brutality of those groups offends our
common humanity and demands that the international
community take decisive action to neutralize them.
In recent times, terrorist groups have also developed
a penchant for acquiring property and territory.
The emergence of ISIL and its control of territory in
Syria and Iraq have changed the political and security
landscape of the Middle East. ISIL has become a grave
threat to the unity and territorial integrity of Syria and
Iraq. Terrorist groups also threaten Libya and Yemen.
In all those cases, those groups have taken advantage of
the political and security vacuum created by conflicts
to establish themselves and advance their hideous
agenda. The need for the international community to
address those threats is today very urgent.
Another dimension of the terrorist threat is the
proliferation of foreign terrorist fighters. Studies
indicate that this is not a new phenomenon. Many
of today’s foreign terrorist fighters have fought as
comrades in other developing networks in the process.
It is those networks, aided by modern information
and communication technology, that are now being
exploited to recruit new fighters.
As of 2013, it was estimated that there were over
5,000 foreign terrorist fighters in Syria alone. Reports
indicate that more than 25,000 foreign terrorist fighters
from over 100 countries may now be engaged in the
Middle East and North African regions alongside local
terrorist groups.
The indication today is that foreign terrorist
fighters represent a threat on several levels: first, in
their States of origin; secondly, in transit States; and,
thirdly, in the destination States. Any effort to address
this menace will require cooperation, not only among
the affected States but indeed by the entire international
community.
Ultimately, what is required to counter the terrorist
threat is enhanced cooperation in law enforcement,
intelligence sharing and capacity-building. The relevant
Security Council resolutions, the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and other regional
instruments already provide an adequate framework
for the necessary international cooperation. We do not
need new road maps.
We are confident that, with all States working
concertedly and with closer coordination by the

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and other United Nations counter-terrorism bodies,
the challenge of terrorism in the Middle East, North
Africa and other parts of the world, which exacerbates
conflict, can be decisively addressed. We hope that this
is a beginning.
The President (spoke in Russian): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate their texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber. I also ask that speakers
deliver their statements at a reasonable speed so that
accurate interpretation can be provided.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
continuing the open debate through the lunch hour, as
we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim
Al-Jaafari, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Iraq.
Mr. Al-Jaafari (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the Russian Federation
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We also thank the Russian
presidency for its transparent efforts in organizing
the Council’s work. I also thank Nigeria for its efforts
during its presidency of the Security Council last month.
I also commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on his
briefing on the subject of terrorism.
We have reiterated to the Security Council the
importance of promoting cooperation among all
States. Any hesitation will only strengthen terrorist
organizations and enable their expansion to other
regions and States. The most recent unfortunate
incidents — whether in Tunisia, Egypt, Syria, France
or in other countries and regions — are proof of what
we have said on many occasions.
My country, Iraq, on its own behalf and on behalf
of States throughout the world, has been combating
terrorism and extremism. That leads us to underscore,
once again, the need to promote international
cooperation. We must implement the commitments
and resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015),
which condemn the recruitment of fighters by the Daesh

S/PV.7527

terrorist organization and establish the obligation of
States to prevent the flow of foreign terrorist fighters
and limit the funding for the operations of organizations
such as Daesh and other associated armed groups via
the sale of oil and the trafficking in works of art and
other forms of robbery and illicit acts.
The attacks by Daesh against the Government of
Iraq and that terrorist organization’s occupation of
our cities and towns has led to an exodus of more than
2.5 million citizens who have fled the group’s savagery.
The Government of Iraq is working to take every
possible step to protect displaced persons, including
children, women, religious and ethnic minorities,
and to pave the way for their return by ensuring their
security. The Government has also taken steps to meet
the urgent needs of a growing number of internally
displaced persons, despite Iraq’s budget deficit as a
result of the decrease in the price of oil, which is the
major source of our budgetary income. We also have
significant military budgetary expenses.
Iraq is facing enormous and dangerous challenges
because of the savage terrorist attacks that directly
target markets, schools, hospitals and thousands of
innocent civilians. The terrorists systematically violate
human rights, and some of their violations can be
considered war crimes and crimes against humanity.
My country’s Government continues to provide
support at many levels. We assist local communities
so that they can take on more responsibility in
recovering the areas controlled by Daesh. We have
also taken measures to ensure stability in the areas that
have been recovered from Daesh and to ensure their
reconstruction. My Government is working to promote
efforts and participation at the national level aimed
at achieving greater reconciliation by holding regular
meetings in order to reach consensus on a global
strategy to enhance national unity and to promote
peace and stability.
We are convinced that national unity is the most
effective way to tackle violent extremism in Iraq. The
occupation of Mosul took place 15 months ago, and the
international coalition was established 12 months ago.
The Iraqi forces are continuing their heroic struggle to
defeat the Daesh terrorist organization with the support
of the friendly air forces of the international coalition.
That has led to the defeat of Daesh in the region that
forms a ring around Baghdad, as well as Baiji, Ishaqi,
Salah Al-Din and Fallujah.

15-2955627/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

I would like to draw attention to the number of
States from which terrorists are flowing in. Last year
there were 82 such States; today there are 100. That
situation requires additional rosbust measures on the
part of those countries. Terrorism now exists in a
broader swathe of territory, extending into Europe,
Canada and Australia. It is no longer limited to a single
State of the Middle East.
Finally, my country’s Government thanks those
countries taking part in the international coalition, as
well as the States of the European Union.
We also underscore that the violation of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque is a very dangerous incident. We are
compelled to raise this issue once again because there is
an intention to violate religious sites in order to further
finance terrorism.
Iraq’s experience is very important for the
coexistence between Shiites and Sunnis. Iraq has a
rich history of coexistence among different religions.
We therefore thank all the countries that have taken
part in the international coalition and the States
that are combating terrorism for their logistical and
military support to my Government, our army and our
people. We thank them for their efforts, which have
enhanced Iraq’s own efforts aimed at recovering the
territory occupied by the Daesh terrorist group. We
thank the Security Council for urging the international
community to assist Iraq in combating Daesh and
associated armed groups.
We call on the international community and
regional partners to work to combat and defeat
terrorism. We cannot put an end to terrorism unless we
have a legitimate and coherent structure that includes
the participation of all States and international and
regional organizations and that can ensure more
effective cooperation.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Sheikh Sabah Khalid Al Hamad
Al Sabah, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the State of Kuwait.
Mr. Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I am
honoured to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), in Kuwait’s
capacity as Chair the OIC Council of Foreign Ministers
at its current session.
At the outset, I am pleased to congratulate you, Sir,
on your successful presidency of the Security Council

28/83

30/09/2015

during this month, and on the concept note (S/2015/678,
annex) prepared on the subject of this important
meeting. We also thank the delegation of Nigeria, a
member State of the OIC, for presiding over the Council
and the successful conduct of its work during the past
month.
The settlement of conflicts in the Middle East
and North Africa and countering terrorist threat in
the region are the prime concern of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and its members. Those issues
top the list of priorities in the Organization’s meetings,
and many meetings have been held to discuss them.
The OIC has adopted many resolutions and initiatives
to deal with the issues in regular and extraordinary
sessions. It has made efforts in supporting those of the
United Nations and its various bodies aimed at finding
solutions to the conflicts that have spread across the
region and threaten international peace and security.
The circumstances prevailing in the region
are exceptional and difficult. There are enormous
unprecedented security and political risks and
challenges. The violence and turmoil that erupted
in more than one country over the past few years are
still going on unabated and have caused utter chaos
and instability, producing dangerous fallout and
consequences that everyone is suffering from.
Due to the instability and the continued circle of
violence and fighting, many countries in the region
have witnessed a remarkable decrease in various levels
of economic and social growth, thus exacerbating the
plight of the peoples in the affected countries. Currently,
millions of people are displaced persons, refugees
or immigrants. For the first time, the international
community is facing a humanitarian crisis of great
magnitude, wherein the number of people in the world
in need of humanitarian assistance exceeds 60 million,
the majority of whom are from the Middle East and
North Africa.
The tragic circumstances witnessed by the region
have provided fertile ground for terrorist and extremist
groups, who exploit them to disseminate their aberrant
and destructive thoughts. They have used parts of the
areas under their control as a launching pad to commit
the most horrible crimes, such as killing, displacing
and terrorizing the innocent and committing serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law.

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Some terrorist groups justify their heinous and
extremist acts as being inspired by the teachings of the
true Islamic religion, although they are far removed
from the principals and the basic concepts of the
tolerant Islamic Sharia. Such acts run counter to all
moral values and principles and pillars of our Islamic
teachings. The Islamic religion is a religion of love and
peace that calls for tolerance, solidarity and moderation;
it rejects fanaticism and extremism. Therefore, all the
Islamic States condemn terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations wherever it is committed, regardless of
its motives and justifications.
The Organization also rejects linking the crimes
committed by such groups with the Islamic religion.
Terrorism has no religion and is not tied to any one
country, race or culture. It cannot be fought through
confrontation or conflict with a great religion like Islam,
stoking feelings of hatred and incitement and promoting
erroneous concepts about Islam that contribute to the
growth of Islamophobia across Western countries,
because of which millions of members of the Islamic
communities suffer.
In the framework of combating terrorism and
extremism, the OIC has established partnerships with
international and regional organizations and with
relevant governmental centres for combating terrorism
and extremism. It has convened numerous meetings and
taken initiatives to highlight the values of moderation,
justice and equality and is paying the necessary
attention to studying the phenomenon of terrorism
and extremism. The OIC has devised practical plans
to deal with the various dimensions and roots of that
phenomenon. In addition, an emergency meeting of
the OIC Executive Committee was convened at the
ministerial level on 15 February 2015. Another special
meeting was held in the State of Kuwait on 15 May
2015 to develop an active strategy to counter terrorism,
violent extremism and Islamophobia.
The failure of the international community,
represented by the Security Council, to resolve
conflicts and grave political and security crises in the
region has contributed to the exacerbation of suffering
and to a further deterioration of the economic and
social conditions. As time passes, those crises have
become more intertwined, difficult and complicated,
thus increasing the costs incurred by the international
community in attempts to resolve them and to limit
their consequences and their negative impact on
international peace and security.

S/PV.7527

Perhaps the most outstanding example of that failure
is the fact that the Palestinian question, the core of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, has remained without solution.
The stalemate in the peace process and the persistence
of the occupying Power in pursuing its practices and
settlement policies, its blockade of the Gaza Strip and
its continued aggression against the Palestinian people
and their properties — in gross violation of international
law and United Nations resolutions and without any
accountability for or condemnation of such acts — have
created of a state of despair and distrust in international
justice. That failure has also undermined credibility of
the international community with regard to standing
by the Palestinian people in their quest to obtain their
legitimate rights. The latest aggression against the
sanctity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, without any regard for
the feelings of the Islamic world, is merely one link in a
chain of oppressive and systematic measures to Judaize
the city of Jerusalem and alter its demographic nature.
In conclusion, we call upon the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities, as stipulated by the Charter
of the United Nations, and to work on implementing its
resolutions in support of the rights of the Palestinian
people. That includes their right to self-determination
and the establishment of an independent State on their
territory, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as
the full Israeli withdrawal from Palestinian and Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including the Syrian
Arab Golan and the occupied Lebanese territories, and
finding an equitable and just solution to the question
of the Palestinian refugees, according to the relevant
resolutions of international legitimacy.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Walid Al-Moualem,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Al-Moualem (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to commend you, Sir, on
convening this meeting of the Security Council on the
maintenance of international peace and security under
the theme “Settlement of conflicts in the Middle East
and North Africa and countering the terrorist threat in
the region”.
The Charter of the United Nations confers upon
the Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. What
has the Council done to combat terrorism, which is
seen in Syria and Iraq and now is spreading to other

15-2955629/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

countries of the world? What has the Council done to
implement its resolutions, especially resolutions 2170
(2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015), so as to help our
people, who are paying a high price with their own
lives and through the destruction of their heritage?
What has the Council done for the men, women and
children suffering from terrorism in Syria? What has it
done to stop the countries that are supporting terrorism
and facilitating the members of Daesh, Al-Nusra and
other armed groups affiliated with Al-Qaida, which are
committing atrocious crimes in Syria and Iraq? If we
compare the current situation of those groups to what it
was before those resolutions were adopted, I think we
would be right in asking whether the resolutions have
constrained their actions in any way. And the answer
to that is no. In fact, these armed groups have been
strengthened. They are more powerful, brutal and cruel
and they are better armed.
Let us review what some of the permanent members
of the Council have done in that regard, in leading
an international coalition. What has that coalition
achieved, one year after it was formed and close to a
year since it began its air strikes, which we have heard
about but whose results have not really been apparent?
The answer is that those countries are conducting their
actions in the name of a strategy that is supposedly
aimed at destroying Daesh in Iraq and Syria. But its
real aim is quite different, and the evidence for that
is that these organizations have become stronger.
They are better financed and armed and, as I have
already said, more brutal than ever. The countries
that support and finance those groups have continued
to finance, protect and support them. Those countries
include, in particular, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and
other Western countries well known to the Council.
Those who really do want to fight terrorism in Syria
should coordinate and cooperate their efforts with the
Government of Syria, whose army and military are
fighting terrorism and doing their duty by protecting
the people against the terrorist groups.
The actions of the United Kingdom and France
in Syrian air space are contrary to the Charter of
the United Nations and international law, as well as
a flagrant violation of Syria’s national sovereignty.
Those who genuinely wish to combat terrorism must
coordinate their efforts with the Syrian Government.
What we heard today from the representative of France
clearly illustrates the true role that France has played in
supporting terrorism. Such sentiments are inappropriate

30/83

30/09/2015

and should be considered unworthy of a permanent
member of the Security Council. The international
community is already aware of the destructive role that
France has played in Libya.
On the other hand, we strongly endorse the initiative
of President Putin, who has called for the creation of a
regional and international coalition to fight terrorism,
as personified by Daesh and the Al-Nusra Front,
in order to put an end to the very existence of those
groups, with, of course Syria’s essential participation.
We urge the countries of the region to comply with the
Security Council’s resolutions on combating terrorism,
in a preventive, defensive role, and to join with this
coalition. In that regard, I fully endorse Foreign
Minister Lavrov’s comments on the launch of military
action against terrorism in Syria, at Syria’s request and
again in coordination with the Government.
Syria will continue its fight against the terrorism
represented by Daesh, the Al-Nusra Front and other
Al-Qaida affiliates, regardless of the price we may
have to pay. I would like to urge the Council to fight on
the side of truth and implement its resolutions so that
we can put an end to the influx of terrorists coming to
Syria to build what they call a caliphate. That caliphate
will not end at the borders of Iraq or Syria. The leaders
of the movement have stated clearly that they want to
conquer Mecca and the whole of Europe. If we do not
confront them, their atrocious crimes will not emd at
the borders of Iraq, Syria or Libya. They will spread
everywhere, and the terrorists will come knocking at
the doors of those who supported them.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Frank-Walter Steinmeier,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of
Germany.
Mr. Steinmeier (Germany): We have been
speaking of the many conflicts haunting the Middle
East, especially the terrible Syrian war, now in its fifth
year. Yes, there is much we have to do, and there is
much we have failed to achieve so far. But let me start
with one thing that we have achieved, and that is the
nuclear agreement with Iran. After more than 10 years
of negotiation, that agreement has shown that diplomacy
can overcome even the deepest rift if we give it a
chance. It is crucial that we now use that momentum,
that flicker of hope, to work towards a political solution
in Syria as well.

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Today’s debate has revealed some significant
differences, but it has also highlighted common
interests. First and foremost, we must engage in a
broad and meaningful political process before the final
collapse of all the remaining State structures — which
the devastated country of Syria will have to rebuild one
day — and before the vicious ideology of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) can gain more
ground amid the ruins of Syrian society. In order to find
a starting point for that political process, we can build
on decisions that have been unanimously adopted here
in the Security Council, and in particular resolution
2139 (2014) of last year.
Today the Council must join forces to see that
the resolution is implemented, including ensuring
humanitarian access and banning barrel bombs. The
standing channels of communication proposed by
Foreign Minister Lavrov today should also be used in
that effort, and I understood Secretary Kerry to have
been hinting at the same direction when he offered
de-confliction talks. Based on such cooperation, we
must then explore together how best to pave the way
for a peaceful and inclusive political transition in
Syria. Building on extensive consultations, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura,
has laid out a road map for the process that Germany
wholeheartedly supports.
Germany does not want to see the Security Council
divided on a matter of such importance. In the face of
unspeakable human suffering, we in the United Nations
all need to live up to our responsibility. I therefore urge
the Council to ensure that we all support an initiative
driven by the United Nations for a political transition
in Syria.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Sameh Hassan Shokry
Selim, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab
Republic of Egypt.
Mr. Selim (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
presence here today of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
to participate at this meeting at the invitation of the
Russian Federation to discuss the issue of the settlement
of conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa and
countering the terrorist threat in the region shows
that the region requires unity from the international
community in order to confront that threat. It also
requires broader implementation and involvement by
the Security Council in the crisis in the region.

S/PV.7527

I should like to express my gratitude to His
Excellency Mr. Sergy Lavrov, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation, for the invitation to
be here.
We hope to be a member of the Security Council
in the period 2016-2017, and therefore to be involved
in confronting the threat of terrorism, which we have
known well and which we have confronted for decades.
We are also interested in the settlement of
regional conflicts before bloody conflicts affect State
sovereignty, which can ultimately have an impact
on the interests of all peoples. I believe the Russian
spokesperson was right when she stated on 27 August
that there was a need to comprehensively assess the
nature of conflicts and to determine the necessary steps
to restore national stability based on the principles of
the United Nations.
We in Egypt share that vision. When Moscow
affirms that regional crises can be effectively and truly
resolved — and this meeting represents an important
effort by the Security Council — we must act on a
consensus basis in order to put an end to conflicts in the
region. Such conflicts prevent the people of the region
from moving towards modernity, with all that entails
for international peace and security.
In making such laudalbe efforts, I believe that we
should look again at the regional picture beginning
in 2011. At that time some believed that the current
politicizing of the region would have the support of
the peoples. Some also thought that those trends were
moderate and capable of containing and marginalizing
the forces of extremism and terror that kill and destroy.
There is no doubt that those so-called Islamic
trends ran counter to the ability to govern and they have
shown that they have not understood the dynamics or
the history of our peoples. They take over power and
in an absolutist manner work against their own idea of
patriotism. They act against the people and associate
themselves with the most extreme forces.
The people then turned against them. Some thought
that those currents would come to power in the region,
and that did not take into account the diversity of
circumstances in Arab countries. Egyptian society for
its part, for example, refused to politicize religion and
refused to hand over the country to a clique that tried to
subject Egyptians. What can we say about the mosaic
society in Syria that buttressed the crisis? To be frank,

15-2955631/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

other factors were at play. We must understand that as
well.
Therefore we must accept diversity in the Arab
world. Our country has never wanted to politicize
the region, as I was saying, especially when that is
intended to subjugate the population. Syrian society is
very diversified, and that has reinforced the crisis. To
be frank, as we have tried to be, this conflict involved
other factors, some of which were internal in nature,
because some regimes in the region have lasted for
decades without reviewing their policies or the nature
of their relationship with their peoples and the regional
scope. There has also been an expansion of corruption,
opportunism and the marginalization of important
sectors of society. At the same time, the people have
become aware of their rights. This came together with
revolution and with knowledge of social media, and it is
only natural for those groups to express their ambitions
and to decide to restore their rights. Given that regional
situation, we can only call it a catastrophe. All factors
need to be addressed together.
Occupation, calls for independence, decades-long
repression and disregard of the necessary factors have
given rise to an explosive crisis. To live in peace and
stability in the Middle East is possible, but it requires
that the Palestinian people regain their rights, their
independent State and all the other rights enjoyed by
citizens of other countries. That would do away with
the polarization of extremist forces.
Whereas in Syria several wars — against terrorism,
the fight against the regime and the fight against the
moderate opposition — have merged into one, the latter
is in conflict with the regime and is waging a reciprocal
war. The multiplicity of wars is an element that further
attracts terrorists and extremists to Syrian soil and
further complicates efforts at a settlement.
What makes it possible to fight terrorism effectively
is to simplify those conflicts so that there is only one
war between two fronts, one under the flag of the State
and the other one which unites the forces of extremism
and terror. Then one can give full support to the first
front made up of the international community and the
people and then we can create a front together with the
Syrian State through the transition committee embodied
in the Geneva decision. That will allow everyone to join
that effort.
The same situation applies to Iraq. Prime Minister
Al-Abadi tries to build a united front vis-à-vis

32/83

30/09/2015

terrorism; but things are not easy in any of the conflicts
of the region because of the confessional polarization
that has existed since the war in Iraq in 2003 and the
assassination of the LebanesePrime Minister, Rafik
Hariri in 2005. In Beirut in 2008 all of this was followed
by four years of conflict, and even the imposition of a
process in Yemen.
All this makes it necessary to return to the rule of
law and a situation that guarantees rights to all citizens
without exception. That is the only way out to ensure a
certain modicum of stability in the region.
We must not allow conflicts to become broader
between the Shiite and the Sunni communities, which
are both noble. We cannot politicize religion and use it as
a weapon. The situation in Libya, despite the differences
in nature and the absence of the religious factor in the
conflict, requires creating the same broader front to
face terrorism. That is what the United Nations Mission
attempts, but that requires international resolve.
The invitation by Russia to this meeting is a
foundation on the basis of which we can build in order
to involve the Council in all the factors in the region
to ensure a good outcome. I hope that we all take the
opportunity of this window in order to become partners
to fight Daesh and to establish stability in the Middle
East and safeguard the State.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Her Excellency Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy.
Ms. Mogherini: I thank you, Mr. President, for
bringing this discussion within the United Nations
framework. That is a step the European Union
appreciates.
It is time for the international community and for
all of us to take a step forward. It is time, we believe,
to leave behind the divisions of the past. Today we
are here to discuss two top priorities for all of us: the
political solution of conflicts in the Middle East and
North Africa and the fight against terrorist groups such
as Daesh and Al-Qaida’s affiliates.
For too long these two priorities were perceived as
conflicting goals. For too long we discussed whether
to prioritize the political processes or the fight against
Daesh and terrorism. These divisions over the years
have weakened our action on both tracks. They weaken
the international community. I believe we can now

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

finally be ready to move on. I believe we are now
finally ready to realize that these two goals can only
go hand in hand and that they are, and have to be, our
real focus while we mobilize at the same time all the
humanitarian support needed to respond to the urgent
needs of the symptoms of this crisis, starting from the
humanitarian situation of the huge number of refugees
that are hosted in the region and in Europe.
The two top priorities are fighting terrorism and
finding political solutions to the main crisis — starting
from the two key ones, the one in Libya and the one
in Syria. It is absolutely necessary to address the
military dimension of the threats posed by Daesh and
Al-Qaida. The European Union in itself is not directly
involved in the anti-Daesh military campaign. But, as
members know, a number of our member States are;
and the European Union itself as such is concretely
working on some complementary dimensions of this
collective effort, in full cooperation with our regional
and international partners.
That means, for instance cutting off the supply lines
of terrorist groups. We have provided more than 1,300
intelligence leads on foreign fighters and other terrorists
in Syria and Iraq. We are assisting our partners on
criminal justice issues and in improving their capacity
to investigate and prosecute foreign fighters. We are
supporting the different security agencies in Iraq to
better share information and coordinate their efforts.
We are working on another crucial element, namely,
stabilizing liberated areas. That also means building
a future for the territories liberated from Daesh. The
European Union has launched the first concrete action
to remove mines and improvised explosive devices in
the Iraqi regions freed from Daesh. Together with the
United Nations Mine Action Service, the European
Union is coordinating the work on booby traps.
Our action is aimed at helping people return to
their homes once their homes are safe and at starting to
rebuild their communities and countries. The European
Union is engaged in very concrete terms on the ground,
but we all know very well that, in this aspect of the
fight, military power will not be enough to defeat
Daesh. Military might alone will not solve the crisis,
either in Syria or elsewhere. In Syria it is urgent to start
the process leading to a peaceful, inclusive political
transition.
International and regional Powers must take on
their responsibility in that respect. Different regional

S/PV.7527

and international actors have substantial influence on
the Syrian parties. It is time now to bring them all to
the table for serious, substantial negotiations inside the
United Nations-led framework.
Let us focus on the way forward. Let us be united
and concrete. If we, the international community,
cannot manage to do it, and to do it in a united way,
how can we think we can unite the region and the actors
in Syria on a common agenda that can defeat Daesh
and bring peace and democracy to the country? That is
the question. That is why the European Union supports
the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy. We are working
together with Mr. Staffan de Mistura and his team in a
very active way to start the process start and advance
with strength and a sense of urgency. We actively
support his work and actively support his proposal on
the working groups and on a contact group on Syria.
All regional and international Powers should put
their rivalries aside and find ways to cooperate on a
common agenda built on a collective interest in security,
peace and democracy. Only in a more cooperative
regional environment can we hope to build peace in
Syria and defeat Daesh. That is true for reconciliation
processes not only in Syria but throughout the Middle
East and North Africa.
In Iraq and in Libya we need a Government of
national accord to start not within weeks but within
days to stop the internal divisions, to fight Daesh and
to begin rebuilding the country. Daesh has nothing to
do with the history of Libya. It built its strengths on the
civil war and the divisions among factions and militias.
Unity among Libya’s actors and factions is the most
effective and the only weapon against Daesh. Daesh
needs to ally with local militias to keep control of the
ground. Where it does not manage to find allies, Daesh
is easier to eradicate. It is politics that holds the key to
its defeat.
Conflicts only strengthen terrorist groups. That is
what war does. Conflicts are powerful and probably
the most powerful source of radicalization. Think of
the conflict between the Israelis and the Palestinians,
including the most recent flare-ups. That is why the
European Union believes that relaunching the Middle
East peace process and achieving results both for the
Israelis and the Palestinian people could send a very
powerful message of reconciliation to the whole region
and far beyond that, to the world.

15-2955633/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

For those reasons, we have decided to work together
with our partners in the Quartet to hold a principals’
meeting here today in New York and to invite Jordan,
Egypt, Saudi Arabia and the League of Arab States
to work together in a regional framework. The whole
region has an interest in this, and leverage to put an
end — hopefully a happy one — to this conflict.
The key is political will and unity among the
regional international players. But we know that the
current crisis is not only political, it is also cultural.
Over past years and decades too many forces have bet
on the rise of sectarianism, with the disastrous results
that we all see. That trend must be reversed. We need
to help communities stick together, and not tear them
apart. We need inclusive societies and democratic
political processes. All communities and minorities
must be granted security, freedom and the right to
contribute to their country’s public life, if we want
resilient and strong societies across the region.
Only democracy and inclusiveness bring about
stability, and they are the most powerful weapons
against terror. Too many times we are faced with a
narrative opposing democracy and security. That is
a false dilemma. We know that very well in Europe.
A society can be stable and safe only when it is fully
democratic.
The region and the world need a new order, and
this crisis might be an opportunity. There might be
differences among us. There have also been differences
around this table this morning. But as Foreign Minister
Steinmeir mentioned just a few interventions ago, there
are also many things on which we can unite. We have
differences also on how a new order in the region and in
the world should look, but I believe there is something
on which we can all agree. The only alternative to a new
world order, and a new regional order, is chaos. That is
the enemy we are fighting today — perennial conflict,
constant instability, global disorder — our common
enemy is chaos. At this seventieth anniversary of the
foundation of the United Nations let us join forces, as
we did successfully in the Iranian deal negotiations. Let
us all choose cooperation over conflict. Finally, let us
build a cooperative world order. Europe is ready.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia.

34/83

30/09/2015

Mr. Dačić (Serbia): I am honoured to participate
in today’s meeting of the Security Council convened
to discuss the maintenance of international peace and
security, and specifically the settlement of conflicts
in the Middle East and North Africa and the struggle
against terrorism in the region. The importance of this
meeting is amplified by the consideration of some of
the most challenging issues of the present-day world
that are closely connected with the migrant wave that
we are currently facing.
I take this opportunity to extend my gratitude to
the Russian Federation, and Foreign Minister Lavrov in
particular, for organizing this important meeting, the
holding of which highlights the need for the continued
attention and commitment by United Nations States
Members to questions of regional and global security
in a world of increasing global interdependence.
The current situation in the Middle East and North
Africa makes it incumbent upon us to intensify our
common efforts to solve this crisis and bring about longterm stabilization in the region. For some time now, the
region of the Middle East and North Africa has been
the epicentre of instability, characterized by political,
social, economic, inter-ethnic and ideological tensions.
Many of its countries are increasingly becoming
breeding grounds for terrorist groups that practice
violent extremism. Evidently, these developments
present a challenge not only for the region but also for
the entire international community, both with respect to
peace and weapons proliferation and in the humanitarian
field. The lack of serious dialogue, based on genuine
readiness to compromise, serves only to exacerbate and
radicalize the situation, increase tensions and intensify
extremisms of each and every stripe.
Serbia is firmly committed to addressing presentday security challenges. Aware of the complexity and
interrelatedness of internal crises and their effect on
and potential to spawn terrorism, we have coordinated
our efforts internationally in an effort to find a
comprehensive response. We have friends of many
decades in the Middle East and North Africa — no small
reason for our determination to make a constructive
contribution alongside our partners the world over to
the suppression of terrorist threats and all types of
extremism and to dialogue aimed at finding political,
sustainable solutions for the current crises in the
Middle East and North Africa. We strongly support
concerted actions to be taken through the institutions

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the United Nations system, the indisputable world
leader in this regard.
We are all experiencing the consequences of these
crises. The migrant wave from the conflict-ridden areas
flooding many European countries has not by-passed
my country either, which has found itself in the path of
the wave. The migrant crisis bursting through and over
the political, cultural and administrative borders of
States speaks tellingly of the interrelatedness of faraway
countries and peoples and highlights the consequent
need for a responsible and energetic approach to the
quest for a lasting and comprehensive solution to this
burning issue. Partial and limited local steps are not
a solution; cooperation and coordination of our efforts
internationally and stabilization of crisis areas, the
Middle East and North Africa in particular, are.
Independent of the new wave, Serbia has been
home to 44,000 refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia for two decades now, as well as to 204,000
internally displaced persons from Kosovo and Metohija.
Yet it has demonstrated its readiness to address the
situation, within its powers and possibilities, and do
responsibly what it should and could do every step of
the way. We have received recognition and acclaim
from throughout the world for the manner in which we
treated these men and women. However, Serbia cannot
bear the burden all by itself. We are short of capacities
and accommodation, human and financial. Since the
beginning of the year more than 170,000 registered
migrants have entered Serbia, and somewhat more than
500 have submitted requests for asylum.
I agree with those who qualify these developments
as yet another mass migration of peoples. They leave
States weakened by protracted political instability,
conflicts, bad economies and activities of terrorist
groups. There are evidently systemic problems that
cause people to leave their homes in these numbers and
in this way. In the process of solving these problems,
the support of all of us, the Member States of the
most important multilateral global Organization, is of
paramount importance.
We ought to use our meeting today to exchange
views and define the next steps in our efforts to render
full support to the stabilization of the conditions in the
region in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of international law. Also,
this meeting provides yet another opportunity for all
of us to underscore our commitment to helping the

S/PV.7527

countries of the region find ways and means to respond
to the current security and other challenges and arrive
at a solution jointly and by building mutual confidence.
In that context, it is clear that we need concerted
international efforts, especially efforts aimed at
encouraging dialogue and solving political and security
crises. Without the dialogue and the support of the
international community, we cannot expect to find a
proper answer to the deepening and complex crisis that
we are being faced with.
Stepping up activities to promote the culture of
peace, mutual understanding and confidence in the
region must be done alongside the efforts to encourage
readiness to concessions and compromise. By its own
example, my country has demonstrated very clearly
what results can be achieved with hard work and
dedication to strengthening regional confidence and
tolerance. We are ready to make a contribution in that
regard on a broader international plan.
Peace cannot be achieved by force. For it we need
mutual understanding and agreements. Talk alone,
though, will not suffice; belief and joint work will.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Mohammad Javad Zarif,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): In our
globalized world, in which threats recognize no
borders, violent extremism continues to spread and to
implicate regions near and far. A tidal wave of refugees
and migrants in Europe and tens of thousands of
terrorist foreign fighters moving between the region’s
hot spots and their own societies are indicative of the
rapid deglobalizing nature of this crisis. It is alarming
that, according to a recent estimate, the trend of foreign
terrorist fighters travelling mostly to Iraq and Syria is
still upward. It indicates that international efforts to
curb the flow have been far from sufficient.
No member of the international community can
feel safe from the fallout of the crisis in our region. As
the threat is global, thwarting it too requires a serious,
well-thought-out and coordinated global effort. Success
requires a new mindset, away from the old paradigm of
exclusion governed by a zero-sum mentality that has
only produced negative-sum outcomes.
Mindful of the need to address the threat globally,
my President in his address to the General Assembly

15-2955635/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

(see A/70/PV.13) reiterated his call for a united front
against violent extremism and proposed to draft a
comprehensive plan of action on how to proceed. That
is imperative, especially in view of the persistence of
the threat, the appalling humanitarian consequences
and the fact that the present international coalition is
failing to achieve its goals.
The plan of action should translate the broad
international consensus on the need to uproot violent
extremism into targeted and effective actions, which
have so far proved elusive. Based on the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, and while providing
for a readjustment in mindsets and a new paradigm,
the plan of action should aim to support a cultural and
ideological front against extreme ideologies, address
such contributing factors as dictatorship, poverty,
corruption and discrimination, counter Islamophobia
and engage all regional States and international actors
to deny extremists access to funds, recruits and free
movement across borders. It should also address the
continued occupation of Palestine and the Israeli
atrocities against the Palestinian people over so many
decades, which have fuelled extremism and other crises
in the region and beyond.
Let me conclude by stressing that we in Iran are fully
aware that extremism, terrorism, Takfiri mentality and
sectarianism are common challenges that threaten all of
us in the region and beyond and require our collective
response. We regret that one or two of our neighbours
have failed to recognize the threat and our common
destiny and exhibit irresponsibility, manifested in their
regional posture and, most recently, in the treatment of
the victims of the recent disaster in Mecca. The world
has not yet forgotten their complicity in the creation
of Al-Qaida and the Taliban and in Saddam Hussein’s
crimes against my people and his own. Those were the
major contributing factors in the dangerous emergence
of Takfiri extremism.
But Iranians are prudent enough to recognize
that we should not live in the past and must engage in
serious dialogue and regional cooperation, because we
truly believe that the security of our neighbours is our
own security. We certainly hope that the one or two
left-outs in our neighbourhood will embrace this reality
and respond positively to the call for responsible action,
dialogue and regional cooperation.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Feridun Sinirlioğlu,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey.
36/83

30/09/2015

Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): For centuries, the
peoples of the Middle East and North Africa lived
together in peace and harmony regardless of race,
religion, language, sect or ethnicity. They did so and
flourished politically, economically, socially and
intellectually — always with a sense of shared destiny
and all the while embracing their differences as a
perpetual source of wealth, and not weakness.
Today’s reality differs dramatically from that
history, and the region is confronted with many complex
challenges. Sectarian and divisive policies, brutal
oppression of legitimate demands for democracy and
unresolved conflicts resulting in mass displacements,
coupled with feelings of resentment due to growing
discrimination and xenophobia in other parts of the
world, have combined to create a breeding ground for
violent extremism and terrorism.
We should be clear on two points. First, terrorism
and extremism are not a Middle Eastern/North African
phenomenon. Terrorism cannot and should not be
associated with any religion, nationality, ethnic group
or geographic region. Secondly, no region in the
world is immune from violence today. Terrorism is a
global and transnational phenomenon that needs to be
addressed through effective bilateral and multilateral
cooperation.
Terrorist groups such as Daesh cannot be defeated
without addressing the root causes that created it.
Daesh is an overriding national security threat for
Turkey, together with other terrorist organizations like
the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) and Revolutionary
People’s Liberation Party-Front (DHKP-C), which
operate in the same environment. Since its creation,
while many other partners struggle to understand the
threat, Turkish authorities spared no effort to counter
Daesh. Currently, we have been carrying out joint
air operations against terrorist targets as part of the
international coalition that brings together more than
60 countries.
While fighting Daesh, we should harbour no
illusions about the conditions that led to its rise. Daesh
did not suddenly spontaneously appear out of nowhere
and spread like a cancer on its own. It was aided and
abetted by the politically defunct totalitarian Al-Assad
regime, which, in its desperate drive to retain power
at all costs, has deployed any means available to it,
including chemical weapons and barrel bombs, to kill,
maim, oppress and otherwise terrorize its own people
into submission.
15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

The suppression of the democratic aspirations of
the Syrian people, divisive sectarian policies and the
war crimes and massive violations of human rights that
have been committed with impunity by the Al-Assad
regime have combined to create fertile ground for
radicalization, extremism and the recruitment of foreign
terrorist fighters by Daesh. In fact, it was the tactical
cooperation and operational air support by the terrorist
Al-Assad regime and its sectarian collaborators that
enabled Daesh’s rapid expansion in Syria.
The reprehensible methods and actions of Daesh
should not confuse us about what we should prioritize
as we move forward. The international community and
the Security Council need to address the root cause of
the problem in Syria through resolute action. Here are
the main parameters of a comprehensive strategy for a
way forward.
First, we must do all we can to downgrade and
defeat terrorist organizations like Daesh, the PKK,
the DHKP-C and their kind. There can be no room for
moral relativism in the fight against terror.
Secondly, we need to create safe areas in Syria
that have been cleared from Daesh, where protection
will also be provided to the civilian population against
attacks from the air. Such zones, if implemented with
determination, can keep Syrians in Syria, lead to the
voluntary return of refugees and encourage people to
believe again in a stable future for their country.
Thirdly, we should all work for a solution to
the conflict that meets the legitimate demands and
aspirations of the Syrian people and ensures a managed
and orderly transition to real political change. The
political process we should vitalize would lead to a
united, democratic, secular, non-sectarian, multicultural
Syria without Al-Assad. An outcome based on those
principles will be the best guarantee to reverse the tide
of extremism and eradicate once and for all the terrorist
threat that Syria has become home to.
In Iraq, the Government needs to be supported with
the challenges it faces, and the Iraqi Government must
effectively embrace all segments of society. In Libya,
national reconciliation and the formation of a national
unity government would be the most effective response
to terrorism and all other scourges.
We cannot ignore the plight of the Palestinians
who are living under occupation. We need to keep in
mind that the historical injustice perpetrated against
the Palestinian people is fueling hatred, alienation and

S/PV.7527

radicalism across the region. It is time for a resolution
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict based on the twoState vision, without further delay.
Despite all challenges, we are confident that the
proud peoples of the Middle East and North Africa will
succeed in their efforts to revitalize their deep-rooted
culture of tolerance and peaceful coexistence.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Gebran Bassil, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Emigrants of the Lebanese
Republic.
Mr. Bassil (Lebanon): I thank the Russian
Federation for convening this meeting.
Lebanon believes that the fight against terrorism
is an international one, considering that terrorism is an
international menace to peace and security. Eradicating
terrorism from the Middle East and North Africa is a
prerequisite for stopping its rapid expansion through the
world. The fight against terrorism in the Middle East
and North Africa cannot be won without the countries
of the region.
Lebanon has fully engaged in the fight to drag
our country and people away from radicalism and
fundamentalism. We have mobilized our troops and
our boots are on the ground. We have resorted to
our values of openness and tolerance to counter the
message of hatred and inhumanity. We have supported
actions aimed at defeating the ideological and financial
sponsors of these organizations. Lebanon is at the
forefront of this battle.
Daesh and Al-Nusra have been holding
hostages — 26 members of our armed forces — since
August 2014. Our troops have been engaged in daily
fights on our eastern borders, and our intelligence
services are tracking dormant and active cells inside the
country. Our strategy against terrorism is to engaged
in the fight for the promotion of our values and our
message. We are fighting to preserve the existence of
our people since the spread of terror, combined with a
mass influx of forcefully displaced persons, represents
an existential threat. We are fighting to protects the
rights of minorities. Diversity in the Middle East is at
the foundation of the region’s identity. It is also a source
of inspiration for other countries and nations all over
the world.
The system of collective security set up in the
aftermath of the Second World War has failed to protect

15-2955637/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

us. Do we need to search for a protection system every
100 years, or do we develop our own self-protection
system through our scale of values and our ability to
live together, while preserving our rights and roles.
We have opted for the second. We are fighting to
safeguard our collective values and to demonstrate
that obscurantism cannot prevail over humanism. We
are fighting because we are convinced that the fall of
Lebanon, as the last bastion of diversity in the Middle
East, would inevitably lead to the uncontrolled spread
of terror to neighbouring Europe and, further, to the
rest of the world.
We are fighting to reverse the current trend that
is emptying the Middle East of its essential social
components. We believe that this phenomenon is
leading to irreversible changes that will affect all of us.
If the Middle East were to sink into perpetrual violence
between sectarian, closed entities, we cannot imagine
the world living peacefully. What would the world look
like if the message of Lebanon were to disappear?
We will keep on fighting, but we will not be able to
sustain the fight if we are left on our own — or rather,
betrayed. We will not be able to keep up the pace of our
struggle if the international community keeps on with
its policy of double standards, especially when it comes
to the Arab-Israeli conflict. We will not be able to win
if the major policy-movers remain shortsighted to the
implications of the spread of terror.
Combat was not our choice; it was imposed on
us. We believe in dialogue and we see in peaceful
engagement and in bridge-building the best answer to
violence. We believe in political dialogue and we have
faith in diplomatic means to resolve conflicts. The
examples of the nuclear deal and the Cuban crisis are a
confirmation that confrontation is not an option, since
it will lead only to the victory of terrorism. We call for
political solutions. A forceful approach will not work.
A forced solution will not last. An induced political
solution will not flourish.
Only a solution from within — from the
people — will succeed and put us all at our ease. That
can be achieved only if we resort to democracy, offering
first to the people the freedom to choose their leaders
and their regimes and, secondly, respecting the choices
they make. The success of the fight against terror needs
the conjunction of two legitimacies. One is the moral
legitimacy of values, which we take for granted; the

38/83

30/09/2015

other is the political legitimacy of regimes, and their
additional efforts are needed.
The clock is ticking and violence is spilling over.
Refugees are spilling over. This cannot be contained
geographically; it is an ideology that we contain and
counter through the antidote models like Lebanon. It is
the fragile balance between the peoples of the Middle
East that is at stake. It is peace in the world that is
threatened.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Paolo Gentiloni, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
the Italian Republic.
Mr. Gentiloni (Italy): One year ago, the advent of
the extremist, sectarian and brutal entity Daesh brought
the terrorist threat to new, unprecedented levels in the
Middle East and North Africa. To counter the rapid
expansion of that organization, Italy assured its resolute
and concrete support to the international coalition
against Daesh, providing humanitarian assistance,
making a qualified contribution to military activities,
and supporting the stabilization efforts. To date, some
important results have been achieved, showing the
effectiveness of a vast, collective action. Nevertheless,
more effort is still required.
Concerning the great tragedy taking place in Syria,
we cannot but reiterate that the ever-increasing violence
on the ground is causing immense suffering for the
civilian population. Despite some sporadic and very
limited ceasefires, our assessment is that the conflict
is bound to continue unless we help the Syrians find a
lasting and inclusive political solution to the conflict.
We believe that the international community should
step up its support for the endeavour of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staff de
Mistura, to broker a credible and viable transition, in
line with the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex).
We encourage regional players, especially those who
have a greater influence on the Syrian parties, to
increase their efforts to facilitate a political settlement.
A Syria without a clear way forward is in nobody’s
interest.
Concerning Iraq, major challenges remain before
us. We need to uphold, in an effective and sustainable
way, the reform process undertaken by Prime Minister
Al Abadi aimed at increasing inclusivity and promoting
reconciliation. As we move to clear the Daesh presence

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7527

from progressively larger areas, we must ensure that
they will be effectively held and not subject to a Daesh
attempt at renewed conquest. In that regard, Italy is
expanding its efforts to train Iraqi police, whose role
will prove critical to stabilize liberated areas and allow
displaced persons to return to their homes safely and
without fear of retribution.

the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to agree on the formation of a Government of national
accord, whose priorities will include restoring peace
and stability and combating terrorism. Along with the
people of Libya, the legitimate authorities seek further
support to combat terrorism alongside pursuing the
political track in the Libyan crisis.

We also need to carefully monitor and prevent any
further expansion of Daesh throughout the region, most
notably in Libya, where internal divisions and infighting
are creating the space for that group to prosper. The
Libyan crisis poses a major challenge to the stability
of a vast region that spans from the Middle East, to
sub-Saharan Africa and to Europe itself. Without a
political settlement, none of the problems in Libya will
ever find a durable solution. That is why Libya urgently
needs a decision from Libyans to choose a Government
of national accord that is able to undertake a critical
stabilization process, curb human trafficking and take
the lead in fighting terrorism.

I wish to reiterate what I said here in the Chamber
on 19 December 2014 (see S/PV.7351) during the special
meeting convened by the Chadian presidency on the
issue of terrorism.

Lebanon is another country of the region that is
increasingly affected by instability. The ramifications
of the Syrian crisis in Lebanon risk worsening the
prolonged political crisis.
While we remain steadfast in our fight against
Daesh and all terrorist organizations in North Africa
and in the Middle East, we should continue to advocate
dialogue and reconciliation as key ingredients for a
peaceful future in the region. In that regard, broader
global cooperation could strengthen our fight against
terrorism. Italy considers the Russian Federation’s
draft resolution a potential step in the right direction.
We need a common and unifying goal, as well as to
concentrate our efforts against Daesh and to support
political change through a transition in Syria.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Mohamed El Hadi
Dayri, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Libya.
Mr. Dayri (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to begin, Sir, by extending my congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We also thank you for choosing this
important issue for today’s debate.
I would like to emphasize the position of the
legitimate authorities of Libya with regard to our
commitment to a national dialogue as sponsored by

First, there is a need to conclude a comprehensive
strategy against Daesh. All morning we have heard
about the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and
other terrorist organizations in those countries. I also
heard a reference to ISIS in Libya, without specific
mention of what is to be done in Libya. Everyone agrees
on the need to form a Government of national accord,
and we are committed to that as a national priority and,
as I just said, as being crucial to face the numerous
challenges we are confronting in Libya today. However,
that is not enough. We in fact want a comprehensive
strategy against ISIS, not just in Syria and Iraq but in
Libya, Tunisia and other places in the region plagued
by terrorism. Since October, when a group announced
its affiliation in ISIS in Derna, eastern Libya, ISIS has
been expanding and receiving the support of hundreds
of terrorist fighters flooding into that city and into
Benghazi and Sirte. As I said last December, I reiterate
today that ISIS is expanding and that there has been no
effective action to support the army and the people of
Libya in facing up to terrorism.
Secondly,
we
condemn
the
heinous
crimes — respectively, in February and April — that
targeted our 21 brothers from Egypt and our 28 brothers
from Ethiopia. However, I want to emphasize that
40 Libyans were also killed as a result of terrorist acts
in the eastern part of our country on 20 February. That
is in addition to the beheading of 12 Libyan citizens
and the burning of a Salafist cleric after exhuming his
remains from the grave where he was buried 12 days
earlier. That took place on Friday, 14 August. Before
that and since, scores of innocent Libyans have been
killed by ISIS in Derna, Benghazi and Tripoli.
Yet there are no resources for the Libyan army
to fend off the increasing threats to our country and
our people. I would like to emphasize that we are
grateful to the Council for its adoption of resolution

15-2955639/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

2214 (2015), on 27 March. However, we have seen no
active implementation of the resolution thus far — not
just in terms of removing restrictions on the supply of
weapons to the Libyan army, but also with regard to
building up the capacity of the army and supporting the
ability of the Government to implement paragraphs 7
and 10 of the resolution.
Thirdly, also last December, given the failure of the
international community to act, I said that we feared
ISIS would expand further in Libya and that it could
have a similar presence as it has in Syria and Iraq.
Fourthly, the concerns of our African brothers and
our partners and friends in Europe are legitimate. We
share the concerns of our Arab and African friends
about the expansion of terrorism in Libya and its
negative repercussions on their countries’ domestic
situations. That includes our European partners, who
aim to combat human traffickers who are sending
thousands Africans and Arabs to their deaths in the
Mediterranean Sea. We, too, would like to eradicate
this scourge, which is a gross violation of human
rights. As Libyans, Africans, Arabs and Europeans, it
is incumbent upon us to combat infiltration into Libya
by the many groups of terrorists. Again, as I have said,
that requires a multipronged strategy and plan of action
in which all our partners participate.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Nabil Elaraby, SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Elaraby (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for inviting the League of
Arab States to present its views on the current situation
in the Middle East.
The Security Council is the organ primarily
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security. It is regrettable that the Council has not
upheld its responsibilities in the Arab world. Terrorism
continues to threaten the countries of the region. We
must definitively eradicate terrorism at its roots.
I have heard more than a few speakers today mention
the eradication of terrorism. But we must not forget
that there is another type of terrorism: State terrorism,
as practiced by the State of Israel. Palestine has been
occupied since 1967. I myself was in the Security
Council during the unanimous adoption of resolution
242 (1967), and also for the adoption of resolution 338
(1973), which established the urgency of implementing

40/83

30/09/2015

the earlier resolution. Resolution 338 (1973) was drafted
in Moscow during a visit by the representative of the
United States to that city.
The two resolutions called for the withdrawal of
Israel from the occupied territories. Israel withdrew
from Egypt and Jordan, and partially withdrew from
Syria within the framework of another agreement.
But Israel did not withdraw from Palestine and some
Lebanese and Syrian territories. Israel continues to
stall for time in order to avoid compliance with those
resolutions. Israel has tried to further appropriate
Palestinian territory through actions considered illegal
by the Council and the International Court of Justice.
The questions that we now ask are the following:
Where does the Security Council stand and why does
it not act? On our television screens, we see the attacks
committed by Israel against Muslim and Christian holy
sites and the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Israel’s actions pose a
challenge not only for Arab countries, but also to the
principles, the pillars, of the international community.
The Security Council must immediately take measures
to ensure the effective implementation of those
resolutions and the establishment of a Palestinian State
with Jerusalem as its capital.
With regard to Syria, a murderous conflict is
taking place that has produced countless victims and
has caused untold destruction. That is the gravest
humanitarian crisis of the century, and I wonder, once
again, what has the Security Council done? In its
capacity as a regional organization that cooperates with
the United Nations under Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, the League of Arab States seized
the Organization of this matter in 2012. But our call was
not heeded by the Security Council. We again call on the
Security Council to fully support the implementation
of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) in
order to ensure peace and stability in Syria. We must
fully support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
as well as those of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of Mission in Lybia,
Mr. Bernardino León, aimed at ensuring stability in
Libya under international law.
Those situations threaten the integrity of other
countries and international peace and security in the
Middle East, as well as throughout the rest of the world.
The current predicament is rooted in the fact that States
have not complied with the text of agreements and with

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

international law. Terrorism, in turn, gains from the
absence of solutions to the conflict.
In conclusion, I would ask once again whether
the Security Council has made adequate use of its
prerogatives aimed at protecting and saving people
from the scourge of war. That applies to all countries.
Permit me to say that one of the main reasons for the
current state of affairs is the exercise of the right of
the veto. The Council started its work in 1946 and
maintains the same provisional rules of procedure to
this day. We do not have a permanent standing set of
rules of procedure. The international community needs
to face the challenges of the twenty-first century. We
must strengthen the Security Council so that it can
shoulder its responsibilities with regard to international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Khalid Bin Mohamed
Al-Attiyah, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of
Qatar.
Mr. Al-Attiyah (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We were
distraught today to find out that the bombing campaign
in the countryside of Homs and Hama — including
the village of Restan — resulted in 40 deaths and 276
wounded, most of whom were women and children,
according to preliminary reports. In that connection,
we remain concerned and condemn that unjustified
bombing, and we call upon States involved militarily
to be on the side of the people of Syria, who are pitted
against a regime turned criminal. In its criminal actions,
the regime has gone beyond the atrocities committed by
the terrorist groups in Syria.
The United Nations efforts to maintain peace and
security in the world are now of the utmost importance.
While they have resulted in success in some instances,
it is regrettable that, in some regions, the peace and
security operations of the United Nations have either
arrived too late or have been ineffectual. It is also
unfortunate that every time the suffering of the people
caused by the conflict increases, so does the impotence
of the United Nations. If we look into the problems of
peace and security in the Middle East and in the world,
we must admit that there are many weaknesses and
vulnerabilities within institutional legal systems, and
especially within the Security Council. If we look at
our failures in the Middle East — in Palestine or in
Syria, for example — we find that we are entirely
powerless, given the gap between the magnitude of

S/PV.7527

the violations committed and the weak stance taken
by the international community. Double standards
have engendered a growing frustration and feelings of
doubt regarding the international community’s sense of
justice, which leads us back to reiterate the importance
of reforming the United Nations, starting with the
Security Council.
The Arab-Israeli conflict has gone on for too long.
It has also affected peace and security in the world. It
has had an extremely negative impact on the region
and the entire world. The tragic consequences of the
conflict will continue as long as a comprehensive
and just resolution is not found. We are quite familiar
with the obstacles, which come from the side of Israel.
Clearly, a just solution can be found if we defer to the
resolutions pertaining to the formation of a Palestinian
State within the 1967 borders, with the Holy City of
Jerusalem as its capital and in line with the twoState solution, which has received the blessing of the
international community.
The inability of the Security Council to establish a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East, especially in
the context of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, represents
a threat to the principles of the peaceful resolution of
conflicts. It also gives extremists pretexts to mobilize,
as they take advantage of injustice and conflict. The
Security Council therefore must focus more closely on
the Palestinian question, as it has on other conflicts
in the region, by taking the measures necessary to
relaunch the political process in order to achieve peace
and security and put an end to the occupation.
It is no longer acceptable, no matter what pretext is
invoked, not to help the people of Syria and help them
emerge from their suffering, in a situation that has gone
out of control. All red lines have been crossed, without
any moral or principled inhibitions or consideration
for humanitarian or international law. The impotence
of the international community in the face of the war
crimes and genocide committed by the regime and the
humanitarian crimes committed in Syria show that
the international system has crumbled and highlight
the absence of an international conscience. That
compromises the collective security system.
We can also ask, how can we shoulder our
collective responsibility to the people of Syria, who, in
an inhuman spectacle, are being subjected to all forms
of persecution and massacres? Faced with this painful
situation, the international community must take all

15-2955641/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

dissuasive measures possible in order to put an end to
this tragedy, which has lasted for far too long. The time
has come for the world to say “enough” to the Syrian
regime.
The phenomenon of terrorism poses a threat to
peace and security in many regions of the world. We all
are aware of the root causes of this phenomenon, which
include religious exclusion, social marginalization,
injustice, lack of development, absolutism, the
crumbling of the international security system and
the lack of effective methods for resolving conflicts
peacefully. We must combat all of the causes of this
phenomenon. We need policies that will put an end
to all manifestations of terrorism by drawing a clear
distinction between terrorism and peoples and their
right to resist and put an end to occupation.
Dealing with the dangerous aftermath in Iraq,
including the proliferation of terrorist acts, requires the
participation of all segments of the Iraqi population.
The most effective way to meet these challenges is to
launch a comprehensive national dialogue leading to
reconciliation among all of the different groups in Iraq;
that would also strike a blow against terrorism. That
will be possible only if there is security and stability in
Iraqi society.
In Libya, since the outbreak of the crisis, we have
stressed that it is crucial to start a comprehensive
dialogue that would create a national unity Government
that would restore peace and stability, one that would
have international assistance in facing terrorism. We
commend the role of the United Nations, represented by
the Special Envoy, who has been quite efficient in his
efforts towards reconciliation. Let us hope that those
efforts will be successful and will re-establish stability.
The revolt of various factions against the legitimate
regime in Yemen and their domination of legitimate
State institutions have led to an environment conducive
to terrorism. That has led in turn to a regional and
international response based on United Nations
resolutions and international law. The only way of
putting an end to the conflict in Yemen is to help the
legitimate Government; the initiative of the Gulf States
is the result of the National Dialogue Conference and is
fully in line with resolution 2216 (2015).
I wish the Council every success in this meeting.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Her Excellency Ms. Vesna Pusić, First Deputy

42/83

30/09/2015

Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign and European
Affairs of Croatia.
Ms. Pusić (Croatia): We are currently confronted
with unprecedented challenges in the Middle East and
North Africa that are having immense, rippling effects
on the wider region, the broader neighbourhood, of
which Croatia is definitely a part, and on other parts
of the world.
Unresolved conflicts, poverty, water and food
insecurity, all sorts of discrimination, terrorism,
violence, human rights violations, the transformation
of war into a war exclusively against the civilian
population, and the elevation of sexual violence to
the level of the weapon of choice in these conflicts all
demonstrate that this type of war has become less about
territory or even natural resources and more about the
destruction of peoples. Weak and non-functioning
institutions definitely contribute to that, lawlessness
contributes to that; all of this contributes to the
increasing number of conflicts and to making people
leave their homes in search of safety and peace, most of
them running for their lives. Such challenges require an
exceptional, coordinated and comprehensive response
as well as strong leadership and genuine partnership.
We urgently need to stand together and act with resolve.
This is in the interest of us all, as we see it.
We believe that in our approach we should address
this problem at three levels. The first is the immediate
priority: the stopping of violence. The second is
bringing peace, and I emphasize here the difference
between stopping the violence and creating peace;
they are two different though related processes and
sometimes require different partners. The third is a
sustainable and long-term solution, in other words, a
functioning, safe State.
Only by addressing the root causes and facilitating
political solutions can we create prospects that will
stand the test of time. To achieve this, we need a genuine
political commitment on all sides; otherwise, even the
best- designed approach will fail. In this regard, we
see the importance of a United Nations-led process
to negotiate political settlements and find sustainable
solutions for peace and stability in the region.
Our action should have a strong regional and
country-specific dimension and outreach that brings
on board all international and regional players. It
should be an approach that includes intensified
diplomatic engagement in finding political solutions

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

while at the same time comprehensively employing
other mechanisms to improve conditions on the
ground: sustainable development, humanitarian and
stabilization support, counter-terrorism, peacebuilding
and confidence-building measures, and so on.
The current refugee crisis that has engulfed the
Middle East has spilled over into Europe. It is a test of
humanity and solidarity for us in Europe, especially for
us in the immediate neighbourhood. Close to 90,000
people have crossed Croatia’s border in the past two
weeks.
It is difficult, but if we have a clear objective in
mind — a clear second and third step — as to what can
be done and how to approach or address the problem,
we can deal with it. But if our thinking remains entirely
open-ended, if we do not know what we are doing and
we are just lying low and letting waves of people wash
over us, it is going to be destructive for a much broader
set of countries than the countries of the Middle East.
Recognizing and dealing with the refugee crisis is also,
in our view, a serious wake-up call for all of us who
have seen people come to our doorstep, a wake-up call
to all of us that our first reaction should be a humane
one — we need to treat these people as people — and
the second step needs to involve talking to all partners.
The third step needs to involve using this coming winter
to find a way to stop the fighting in Syria and Iraq, but
especially in Syria.
With regard to Syria, I would like to emphasis
again the fact that we see, from our experience in that
respect, the termination of the fighting as a connected
but separate process from the actual bringing about
of peace, which takes years or decades. Stopping the
fighting is not peace yet, but it is a prerequisite for
peace. It is a prerequisite for starting to build and
embark on the long-term process called peacebuilding,
which ends in real peace.
We believe that, in order to stop the fighting, we
might need a different or broader group of partners
than the one needed to build peace. In Syria, in order to
stop the fighting, we need everybody who is prepared
to participate in the effort to stop the fighting to be
on board. In order to build peace, we probably need a
different group of actors, but that will come later. In my
view, Staffan de Mistura has been doing an excellent
job in showing the way and the need to replace fighting
with talking. Sometimes that actually works. At the end

S/PV.7527

of all of the fighting there is talking, so it is probably
better to start sooner rather than later.
We also believe that time is of the essence in that
context. Winter is coming. Now is the time when we
should find a common solution for stopping the fighting
in Syria. If we do not do that, spring will bring new
surprises and new suffering for the people of the region,
as well as the danger of an expansion of the crisis into a
much broader regional neighbourhood than the one we
are looking at now.
On Libya, we believe that we need to continue
to support the United Nations-led inclusive political
process headed by Bernardino León aimed at reaching
an agreement on establishing a Government of national
unity. A bad Government is a bad thing. The only thing
worse than a bad Government is no Government. Libya
is probably a case in point. In that sense, we need to
support all United Nations efforts to establish a unified
Government in that country.
With respect to Iraq, we believe that we should
remain committed to helping the Iraqi Government
to further sustain the transition process, in particular
with regard to the inclusiveness of its policies, credible
national reconciliation and reform. We believe that the
Iraqis — the Iraqi Government and Iraqi forces — need
and deserve our support. The Iraqi forces and the
Peshmerga are fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and need and deserve humanitarian assistance
and support. Earlier this year, I visited a number of
refugee camps in Iraq. They definitely need us and our
support.
Finally, on the Middle East peace process, I
think there is nobody in the Chamber and around this
table — regardless of the different opinions that States,
countries and people might have on the issue — who
does not think that we should devote all our efforts
to reviving the peace process in the Middle East. The
process has, obviously, not been successful; in fact, it
has been a very difficult. Although it has looked like
a failure many times, there is no alternative to it. We
have to persevere in trying to revive the peace process
in the Middle East. In addition, as a member State of
the European Union, which informs our perspective,
we also believe that the European Union should play
a more active role and take more responsibility for the
process.
In conclusion, the current challenges in the Middle
East and North Africa are multidimensional in nature,

15-2955643/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

and therefore require multidimensional answers. As
we watched people from Syria and other countries
pass as refugees through Croatia, one thing that was
clear was that they were middle-class people. They
are people with degrees — high school, university
degrees — exactly the people who are needed to rebuild
a country after a war. If they leave the neighbourhood,
if they leave and go somewhere in Western Europe or
North America or God knows where, it is very unlikely
that they will return. If they do not return, there will be
nobody to rebuild Syria and other countries once the
fighting and the war are over, and everybody will be
left behind. We ourselves might even be left behind, if
we do not act now.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Jean Asselborn, Minister
for Foreign and European Affairs of Luxembourg.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would first like to thank Russia for organizing today’s
debate on a subject that is of concern to us all.
With the so-called Islamic State in Syria and Iraq,
and also in Libya, Al-Qaida on the Arabian Peninsula
in Yemen, the Al-Nusra Front in the Golan Heights,
Al-Shabaab in Somalia, the list of threats in the region
is very long. Those terrorist groups threaten not only
the Middle East and North Africa, they threaten the
entire planet. In their destructive madness, they attack
children, women and men. They attack the most
vulnerable, minorities, sanctuaries, cultural heritage,
archaeological treasures and the freedom of expression.
They strive to break down the symbols of humanity and
diversity.
In order to effectively combat the terrorist threat,
it is important to understand the origins of its rise
to power. The terrorist threat is not the root cause of
the crises in the Middle East and North Africa. It is
itself the result of underlying causes, and it is therefore
necessary to address those root causes in order to
eliminate it. Otherwise, even if Daesh or other terrorist
entities were to disappear today, other organizations,
perhaps more monstrous still, would only take over.
The banner under which the terrorists align themselves
may change, but the root causes of the emergence of
those organizations remain. What are the root causes?
First, the rise of terrorist groups cannot be separated
from their regional political context. Therefore, in Syria,
Daesh has benefitted in large part from the effects of the
brutal policies of the Al-Assad regime, which for more

44/83

30/09/2015

than four years has suppressed and slaughtered its own
people with indiscriminate shelling and the dropping
of barrel bombs. We must fight the terrorists in Syria
without playing into the hands of the Al-Assad regime
or forgetting the crimes that the regime commits daily.
We need to bring increased humanitarian assistance to
areas liberated from the grip of Daesh and to support
the Syrian National Coalition. We must also support the
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, aimed at achieving a political
transition.
In Iraq, it is the feeling of marginalization,
dispossession and humiliation on the part of the Sunni
population that has played into the hands of extremists.
We must support the reforms in the pipeline of the
Government of Prime Minister Al Abadi, whose country
has overcome divisions, while seeking to work within
the framework of a truly inclusive political process.
In Libya as well as in Yemen, the United Nations
mediation efforts should be further supported so as to
achieve a ceasefire and the formation of a national unity
Government that, with the support of the international
community, would be able to isolate extremist groups,
secure the territory and embark on the path of national
reconciliation.
Secondly, among the root causes that promote
radicalization and terrorism, there is the feeling
of exclusion. The lack of prospects and economic
opportunities for young people, including the
difficulties of access to employment, serves to create
a breeding ground for radicalization. It is therefore
essential to invest in the development and well-being
of young people. We must give them an opportunity
to develop their potential by promoting their full
participation in the life of society. It is in that spirit
that our policy of cooperation for development deserves
an important place in the education and professional
training of young people. Luxembourg, with the
support of UNICEF, has committed to the post-2015
Sustainable Development Agenda, which we have just
adopted and which takes into account the specific needs
and potential of children and youth in general.
Thirdly, I must mention another root cause of
instability in the Middle East. I refer to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, a veritable human tragedy, while
the peace process remains deadlocked. Today more than
ever, it is imperative to convince our Israeli friends that
the security of Israel depends on the creation by its side

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

of a sovereign, democratic State of Palestine. We must
encourage our Palestinian friends to persevere on the
path of reconciliation and negotiation. That path is the
best protection against terrorism. Let us all pledge to
support the path that leads to the desired result, namely,
the two-State solution.
Many of us participated in the hoisting of the
Palestinian flag at the United Nations today. That flag
must lead us all to fight the status quo and indifference.
I will conclude with this fact: we cannot change the
past, but we have the duty to learn its lessons and to
act accordingly in the future. I assure the Council that
Luxembourg, including in its current role as President
of the European Council, will spare no effort to counter
the radicalization of terrorists and violent extremists by
addressing the root causes.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Kasoulides,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cyprus.
Mr. Kasoulides (Cyprus): We welcome the timely
initiative of the Russian Federation to convene this open
debate. I would like briefly to provide our perspective
on the issues before us.
The United Nations is, and should remain, at the
apex of international order and justice. It should adapt to
the broad spectrum of security challenges, and Security
Council resolutions need again to become credible and
actionable. No crisis can be resolved by a single Power
or stakeholder. The complexity of the crises we are
facing necessitates effective and mutually reinforcing
multilateralism. I underline that the European Union
must play its role in the settlement of the conflicts in
our neighbourhood through its wide array of capacities
and policies. While we formulate policies to counter
terrorist threats, we need to bear in mind that an ounce
of prevention is worth a pound of cure. Socioeconomic
and political exclusion, youth unemployment and
limited access to education play well into the hands of
those who seek to propagate extremism.
Each country that faces such challenges is a unique
case. With regard to Libya, the formation of a national
unity Government is well overdue. It is imperative that,
once it is in place, the United Nations, the European
Union and other key stakeholders provide support in the
domain of security-sector reform, institution-building
and financial support. With regard to Syria, it is evident
that our approach has thus far not alleviated the plight
of the Syrian people, nor has it facilitated a political

S/PV.7527

solution. The Geneva communiqué (S/2102/522, annex)
remains key, and so is the need for a realistic political
transition process.
Finally, a remark on Daesh. It is a threat that
affects us all. There is much more to be done on the
issue of tracking and interrupting financial flows to
the terrorists. Aspects of that issue have been discussed
elsewhere during the current session of the General
Assembly, and it is evident that we need more robust
Security Council action in that respect.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Miroslav Lajčák, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign and European
Affairs of the Slovak Republic.
Mr. Lajčák (Slovakia): At the outset, I would like
to thank His Excellency Mr. Sergey Lavrov of the
Russian Federation for convening this debate.
The unprecedented rise of terrorism is perhaps the
most serious, shocking, painful and shameful reality
facing us at the beginning of the twenty-first century.
In the region of the Middle East and North Africa, but
not only there, terrorism is sometimes the last, and
sometimes the first, resort of individuals or groups that
no longer feel the need to respect authority and abide by
the rules. People resort to terrorism either because they
choose to or because they have to.
We shall focus here on those who are forced to
be a part of an extremist, radical and violent group.
Their previous experience is the key to understanding
them. Quite often, they belonged to a marginalized
community or ethnic or religious minority. The
problems they face — unemployment, poverty, the lack
of life prospects for them and their children and, most
important, no hope for a better future — have been
blatantly exploited by groups like Daesh, which is a
false, disillusioned and dangerous alternative form of
governance rooted in fear and violence. Yet the military
suppression of Daesh is only a fragment of the solution.
The main part of a solution must be a commitment to
better governance, better than Daesh’s and also better
than the one they had before.
In order to reach a stage of prevention, it is necessary
to end the stage of continuing conflict. The international
community cannot focus on preventive measures in an
environment full of terror and fear where, as we speak,
children hold weapons in their hands, and hospitals and
schools are subject to deliberate attacks.

15-2955645/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

Successful political transitions in the Middle East
require strong and consensual international support.
Any foreign involvement in favour of individual
parties can break the fragile trust in the political
track. A sincere, candid and regular exchange of views
produces an increase in understanding and, ideally, in
trust. That, in turn, might lead to a more flexible and
increased exchange of information and intelligence,
and police and judicial cooperation, which are all vital
components of counter-terrorism efforts.
In addressing the issue of foreign terrorist fighters,
it is crucial for each State to participate in order
to prevent gaps in implementation. Weak links are
windows of opportunity for foreign fighters. At the
same time, we need to keep in mind the balance between
security and respect for human rights. Security will not
be sustainable unless it is reached with respect for the
rule of law.
All the relevant resolutions must be fully
implemented in a timely manner, whether they be
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations or not. The consensus of Security Council
members is far too important not to focus all our efforts
on trying to achieve it. Monitoring by United Nations
entities and other relevant international organizations
with competence and expertise in the matter should
help to ensure better implementation by States of
their commitments. For that reason, I must say that I
appreciate the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General
and the relevant United Nations bodies.
The role of the Security Council in the fight
against terrorism remains crucial. It is a cornerstone
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
The General Assembly also has considerable potential
and an important role to play. We look forward to
the Secretary-General’s global action plan against
violent extremism. We hope it will reflect many of the
inspiring proposals raised at the regional conferences
on countering violent extremism.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Iyad Ameen Madani,
Secretary-General of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.
Mr. Madani: It is indeed a privilege to have this
opportunity to speak to this body. I wish to thank the
Russian Federation for scheduling this important and
timely open debate during its presidency of the Security
Council, in conjunction with the high-level segment of

46/83

30/09/2015

the General Assembly, on the settlement of conflicts
in the Middle East and North Africa and countering
terrorist threat in the region.
At the outset, let me align myself, as SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), with the statement delivered by His Excellency
Sheikh Sabah Khalid Al Hamad Al Sabah, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
State of Kuwait, in Kuwait’s capacity as the Chair of the
OIC Ministerial Council.
As a committed and strategic partner of the United
Nations system and of the international community, the
OIC exerts every possible effort to bring remedies to the
intertwined and daunting challenges the Middle East
and North Africa region faces. We sincerely believe
that, while we assume responsibility as the international
community to provide solutions and remedies, we
can only be on a better footing if we can honestly
and properly diagnose the historical backgrounds,
roots causes and dynamics that have brought about
all the disasters and failures that we have to deal with
today. We must analyse whether the international and
regional peace and security mechanisms are capable of
overcoming today’s hurdles.
The remnants of colonialism, ill-conceived Cold
War strategies, letting the Palestinian people suffer
the consequences of an unjust and illegal occupation,
and the invasion of Iraq, which devastated the social
fabric of the country with dangerous regional fallouts,
all created a climate whereby the region is unable to
invest in human capital. Millions of Iraqis sought haven
and jobs outside of Iraq long before we heard of Daesh.
The region’s resources have been spent on the purchase
of arms, to the great satisfaction of those trotting the
globe on behalf of the arms industries.
The paralysis in the region, the absence of a
paradigm among its countries for peaceful coexistence
and the intellectual malaise that took over a Muslim
world intent on regurgitating, instead of reinvigorating,
its traditions, cultural expressions and intellectual
discourse, coupled with the absence of international
collective political will to tackle the conflicts in the
Middle East, and what seems to be, if the members
allow me to say, chronic divisions within the Council,
have allowed such menaces in the region to continue
and reach the proportions we are here to contemplate
today. Therefore, where should we look for a way out?

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Those who see Islam as the source of division and
violence and search for a core a structure within Islam
that lead Muslims, just because they are Muslims,
to division and violence, simply ignore history and
the story of the great Muslim civilization. They also
overlook a century full of wars and ethnic conflicts and
alienation, which we all carry as a heavy inheritance
of humankind where Muslims have been mostly the
victims. Also, those who make the assumption that this
region is self-destructive by nature gloss over the great
games or interests that play on the stage of the region,
a region that has rarely been left alone to develop and
mature and create its own institutions.
Instead of taking custody of the region, we must
address the multifaceted dimensions of its conflicts,
listen to its people and remember the hardship, the
recent history that led to what we have now in Iraq,
Syria and Libya. Within that context, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation has initiated, is initiating and
will continue to initiate specific projects that focus on
such understanding in order to address the political
and socioeconomic contexts that bring forth conditions
conducive to conflict and the need to counter all types
of radical extremist discourse in order to delegitimize
the violent and manipulative acts, whether they be
based on ideology or claims of cultural superiority.
They address also the underlying causes of sectarian
violence, the attempts to politicize the sectarian
differences and to put undue emphasis on sects as the
essence of identity — and also to always remember
and consider, in the history of all movements, whether
liberation movements or others, the potential of external
actors penetrating terrorist and extremist groups for the
purpose of serving their own political agendas.
Today is the day that finally the flag of Palestine
flies high at the United Nations premises. This jubilant
development is a reflection of the overwhelming majority
of the international community in support of the just
cause and inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
without which radicalization, frustration, humiliation
and the sense of historic betrayal will remain deep in
the conscious of the region and its people.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Didier Reynders, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for European Affairs of
the Kingdom of Belgium.
Mr. Reynders (Belgium) (spoke in French): The
instability in the Middle East and North Africa over the

S/PV.7527

past four years is at the centre of Belgium’s concerns.
I thank the Russian Federation for having taken the
initiative of convening this debate, which complements
our discussions yesterday when we met in the meeting
on the coalition against the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and violent extremism at the initiative of
the United States.
As again demonstrated in the general debate of the
General Assembly, we are united in our determination
to eradicate terrorism. The Security Council has
adopted resolutions listing many terrorist organizations,
including ISIL and Al-Qaida, and calling on all the
States Members of the United Nations to shoulder
their responsibilities in the face of the threat. We must
continue with our actions to eradicate this scourge by
taking measures in each of our countries, in particular
to dry up the financing in order to contain the flow
of foreign combatants who join the ranks of terrorist
organizations. Achieving those goals requires stepped
up cooperation among States in all aspects of the
counter-terrorism struggle.
In Syria and Iraq, the coalition against ISIL, which
is supported by some 70 countries, is fighting with
resolve against ISIL. Its work should be completed
coherently and in a coordinated fashion through the
individual action of all Members of the United Nations
by clearly and exclusively targeting recognized terrorist
groups.
We will not be able to defeat the terrorist threat if
the legitimate concerns of the populations are not taken
into account and if human rights, the responsibility for
which rests primarily with States, are not respected.
The use of inhumane weapons, such as barrel bombs,
and responding with violent outbursts to demands for
democracy, as in Syria, fuel the recruitment of terrorist
organizations that present themselves as alternatives
to dictatorship. We must also obviously support
neighbouring countries, which have demonstrated an
unrivalled generosity by welcoming the populations
who fled terrorism, war and repression.
In Syria, we must urgently work towards an
inclusive political transition. Belgium supports the
efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Staffan de Mistura. I also call on all countries
that have influence over the actors in Syria to encourage
them to urgently come to the table so that the language
of weapons finally ceases. We know that there must
be negotiations with the regime, as well as with the

15-2955647/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

moderate opposition forces, but the transition has to
occur in parallel with military action against Daesh.
In Iraq, the Government of Prime Minister Al
Abadi has demonstrated its determination to move
towards a more inclusive policy. We must continue to
support it so that its efforts are reinforced and sped up.
The situation in Libya remains a factor of instability
for North Africa and the Sahelian region. Terrorist
movements, some of which claim to be the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, are profiting from the political
vacuum. Neighbouring Tunisia, whose evolution is
remarkable, has become weaker. The Libyan parties
concerned must urgently engage in an inclusive
political process to form a transition Government, and
I welcome the tireless efforts of Special Representative
Bernadino León in that regard.
In Yemen, where the process of transition has been
compromised by negative actors, the humanitarian
situation is deteriorating perilously. There must be a
political process without delay to end the suffering of
the population.
Finally, we must relaunch a credible peace process
aimed at establishing a Palestinian State side by side
with the State of Israel with respect for the concerns
of peace, sovereignty and security of their respective
populations. The recent growth of tension in Jerusalem
underlines that urgency.
Once again, Mr. President, I thank you for
organizing this debate and hope that we will progress
both in waging an effective militarily fight against
Daesh, and in finding a political solution in the various
countries I just mentioned.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Mauro Vieira, Minister for
External Relations of the Federative Republic of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I congratulate you,
Mr. President,- for convening this open debate and for
bringing us together to discuss the serious challenges
that the world faces today in promoting peace and
stability in the Middle East and North Africa. We
also appreciate that the concept note prepared by the
Russian Federation (S/2015/678, annex) encourages
a more in-depth reflection on the primary causes of
conflicts and terrorism.
The threats to international peace and security in
the Middle East and North Africa have been a recurring

48/83

30/09/2015

topic in the Council. The increase in the number and
complexity of threats in those two strategic regions
attests to our collective inability to solve long-lasting
conflicts and to prevent the outbreak of new ones. As
Brazil has consistently upheld in this Council, we must
address those problems by conceiving an overarching
strategy based on a combination of diplomacy and
peacebuilding efforts.
Last year, we witnessed the third tragic war in five
years in Gaza. The peace process between Israelis and
Palestinians has remained stalled. Violence reached
unimaginable levels of brutality in Syria, and the
prospects for resolving the conflict remain elusive.
The so-called Islamic State took control of large parts
of Iraq and Syria and has been perpetrating the most
barbaric crimes against innocent civilians. Both Libya
and Yemen are falling into a spiral of political disputes
and violence, resulting in destruction and serious
humanitarian crises.
Let me state in no uncertain terms Brazil’s utmost
repudiation for all forms of terrorism and extremism.
There are simply no justifiable grounds for terrorist acts.
The Brazilian Government was appalled by the acts of
provocation that resulted in the senseless destruction of
cultural and historic heritage sites in Syria, Iraq, Mali
and elsewhere. It should be noted that the common trait
to all those situations is the international community’s
failure in dealing with the underlying causes of
conflicts. As long as we disregard poverty and the
fragility of national institutions as drivers of armed
conflict, there will be no lasting solution in sight.
Time and again, we have seen the harmful effects
of bending the rules and invoking exceptional rights in
order to justify military interventions. Those strategies
have enfeebled the multilateral system and aggravated
the situation on the ground. Iraq and Libya are two
clear examples of the failure of any approach based
on vicious cycles of threats, sanctions and violence.
Military interventions led only to weak national
institutions, increased sectarianism, power vacuums
and arms proliferation, paving the way for the rise of
radical groups such as the Islamic State. Those groups
thrive in the absence of the State and they benefit from
the flow of weapons to non-State actors.
It is high time that the Security Council assess the
inventory of preventable tragedies and learn from past
mistakes. We should all commit to demonstrate our
resolve to focus on political dialogue and preventive

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7527

actions. The use of sanctions and military force should
always be the last resort and, when it occurs, it must be
in line with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. What we really need is better diplomacy to
face the numerous challenges that still lie ahead.

be halting the flow of arms into the country. We look
forward to a renewed political process, led by the United
Nations, to deal with the situation in Syria. Brazil
wishes for a territorially united, sovereign, plural and
democratic Syria to emerge from the ashes of war.

The humanitarian tragedy that emerged from the
conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa remains
a matter of great concern. We commend the work done
by the United Nations agencies and its partners to help
millions of people in need, as well as the outstanding
generosity of many countries in the region, including
Lebanon, Jordan, Egypt and Turkey, which have been
receiving the bulk of Syrian refugees.

In Libya and Yemen, the international community
should be united in condemning violence, avoiding the
use of unilateral force and working with the parties
to promote dialogue, bridge differences and reach a
peaceful and durable solution.

Brazil has been striving to contribute to these
humanitarian efforts. We have issued more than 7,700
entry visas for Syrian residents affected by the crisis
and provided food and medicine to help alleviate the
dire situation faced by refugees and displaced people in
the region. As President Dilma Rousseff pledged before
the General Assembly at its seventieth session (see
A/70/PV.13), Brazil will continue to host those who had
to flee their home country and need a place to restart
their lives. As the home of the largest Syrian diaspora
in the world and a country committed to international
peace and security, Brazil is ready to shoulder its
responsibilities on the diplomatic and humanitarian
fronts.
Even in light of those tragic facts, there is still
reason for hope, hope generated by a renewed belief
in the virtues of diplomacy. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action regarding the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
Nuclear Programme, and Security Council resolution
2235 (2015) on Syria’s chemical weapons demonstrate
that when political will is present, reaching an agreement
is possible even on complex and highly sensitive issues.
Brazil commends all those involved in those efforts
and their persistence in dialogue and negotiation. That
sets a positive trend that should help us to effectively
address the ongoing conflicts in the region. We should
look up to those examples of successful diplomatic
engagements and redouble our collective efforts to halt
and settle the conflicts in the Middle East.
Peace talks between Israel and Palestine must be
urgently resumed under parameters that could lead to a
two-State solution.
There can be no more delay in achieving an inclusive
political solution in Syria. A first step to encourage
dialogue and avoid the aggravation of conflict should

Diplomacy, cooperation and multilateralism
should guide us in the quest for a more stable and
peaceful Middle East and North Africa. The Council
has a primary responsibility in encouraging political
dialogue and addressing the root causes of conflicts.
It is our duty to restore the Council’s capacity to fulfil
its duty to uphold international peace and security. Its
effectiveness and continued authority require that it be
viewed as legitimate and representative.
After 70 years of work, a reformed Security Council,
with new permanent and non-permanent members,
would be better positioned to adequately address the
challenges of a multipolar world and lead a new phase of
active diplomatic engagement to resolve those disputes.
The opportunity is before us. We need look no further
than the situations that have been discussed in today’s
debate to realize how urgent the task is.
Brazil has been an enthusiast of multilateralism
and everything the United Nations stands for since
1945. We hope that over the next 70 years and beyond,
the international community can live up to the promise,
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, to rid
future generations of the scourge of war and all forms
of meaningless suffering.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Erlan Idrissov, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Idrissov (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
Thank you very much, Mr. President, for giving me
the floor, and please pass on my country’s gratitude to
Mr. Lavrov for his initiative in convening this meeting
for an open debate on some of today’s most urgent and
pressing issues.
(spoke in English)
As we continue to witness unprecedented crises of
grave magnitude in the Middle East and North Africa,

15-2955649/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

we believe that now is the time to jointly address those
issues. For decades the situation in the region has been
a major factor in the destabilization of global security.
We are absolutely sure that the current situation
in the Middle East will start to seriously improve
only if the Palestinian issue is resolved. Kazakhstan
recognizes the Palestinian people’s legitimate right to
self-determination and strongly supports the creation
of an independent State of Palestine, coexisting
peacefully with Israel within its 1967 borders. We also
support Palestine’s full-fledged membership in the
United Nations, and we welcome today’s ceremony
in which the Palestinian flag was raised at United
Nations Headquarters. We see a two-State solution as
the only viable option for lasting peace, and we call on
Israeli and Palestinian leaders to demonstrate political
responsibility and goodwill in order to reach a historic
peace agreement that meets the legitimate aspirations
of their peoples.
As we celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations, let us remind ourselves of the events
that humankind had to endure in the last century,
including two world wars and many revolutions. The
tragedy that we all had to go through is the permanent
impulse pushing us to work constantly to achieve peace
and security. The Arab Spring once again proved that
revolutions only hinder human development, propel
societies backwards and damage inter-State relations.
We must all reject the unconstitutional and illegal
use of military force, including external foreign military
interventions, which lead only to the destruction of
statehood.
The humanitarian disaster in Syria is no longer just
a regional issue. The crisis has spread far beyond the
Middle East. A good illustration of that is that more
than 200 Kazakh citizens are fighting in the area of
Syria and Iraq. We support the efforts by the United
Nations, the League of Arab States, the United States
of America, Russia and other stakeholders. Kazakhstan
firmly believes that the crisis should be resolved only
through genuine political dialogue among all Syrian
parties, with the unbiased support of external actors.
In May Kazakhstan hosted a meeting of Syrian
opposition leaders, at their request. The negotiations
were based on the following key principles: respect for
the Geneva process, the condemnation of all forms of
terrorism and a collective call to end foreign paramilitary
involvement. In two days’ time, the same groups will

50/83

30/09/2015

meet again in Kazakhstan for a second round. We do
not interfere; we simply provide a platform in the hope
that Syrians themselves will find a road to peace and
reconciliation.
In 1992, in an effort to ensure peace and security
in the entire Asian region, Kazakhstan initiated the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building
Measures in Asia (CICA), a unique pan-continental
security forum for implementing confidence-building
measures and forging and enhancing political dialogue
and interaction aimed at achieving peace and stability
in Asia. Today, CICA stretches from Cairo to Seoul
and unites 26 countries from every subregion of the
continent.
We are confident that spiritual and religious
leaders play a significant role in fostering inter-ethnic
and interreligious harmony and mutual respect, which
is why Kazakhstan convenes and hosts the triennial
Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions,
which provides a platform for dialogue among religious
and political leaders for the sake of peace. In July,
Kazakhstan hosted a regional conference on countering
violent extremism to which we invited representatives
from the countries of Central Asia, China, Iran,
Pakistan, India and the republics of the Caucasus.
We believe that all these things are a symbol of our
sincere contribution to a united fight against the evils
of terrorism.
While recognizing terrorism as a global threat,
we need to establish a counter-terrorism coalition
led by the United Nations and to develop a common
mechanism to defeat this evil and bring its perpetrators
and their supporters to justice. The current United
Nations mechanisms aimed at countering terrorism,
including the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
should be made legally binding through the adoption
of relevant Security Council resolutions. Two days
ago, in his remarks at the general debate of the General
Assembly (see A/70/PV.13), my President called for
the establishment of a global anti-terrorist network
under the auspices of the United Nations. We will
lobby strongly for and support that initiative and will
ask every Member State to support it. It is necessary
to create an agreed-on list of terrorist organizations, at
which point the Security Council alone should have a
mandate to outlaw them.
In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment to the
collective efforts to fight international terrorism and to

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

ensure peace in the Middle East, based on freedom and
justice for all.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Nikos Kotzias, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Hellenic Republic.
Mr. Kotzias (Greece): I would like to start by
thanking the Russian Federation for organizing this
important meeting. The issues we are addressing in this
debate are closely intertwined and have precipitated a
migration and refugee crisis.They have driven hundreds
of thousands of people from the region, creating new
pressures on the societies and economies of countries
neighbouring on and far beyond the region itself.
Greece, which is situated at the crossroads of the
refugee crisis, is also particularly concerned about
the fate of the minority communities in Iraq and the
region, including Christian communities, which, after
two millenniums in the region, are facing an existential
threat, owing to the atrocities perpetrated by the Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS).
It is clear that the threat posed by ISIS continues to
undermine the stability and political dynamics of Iraq
and Syria, leaving the security situation in the region
very volatile. But for some time it has been equally
clear that, through the foreign fighters phenomenon
and the migrant and refugee crisis, waves of instability
are being felt much further afield, on a global scale.
The crucial issue for the international community is
therefore to implement a consistent, determined and
multifaceted strategy for countering ISIS.
The horrendous tactics that ISIS is using are
serving to unite regional States, including many with
divergent interests. That is truly a key element in
our common endeavour to defeat ISIS: a determined
stance on the part of all actors. However, ISIS cannot
be defeated by military means alone. We also have to
address the financing of jihadist organizations and their
recruitment tactics, including the use of the Internet
and social media. Last but not least, it is crucial for
the international community to work collectively and
in unity in order to arrive at the long-overdue solution
to the Syrian crisis through the immediate initiation of
an inclusive political process.
The war needs to stop. There needs to be a grand
alliance for peace, an alliance for the reconstruction of
Syria. We must give back to the youth of Syria, and
of the Arab world in general, their right to dream and

S/PV.7527

to lead a different life. Otherwise, without that dream
or prospects for a different life, they will not fight for
peace and the reconstruction of Syria.
The President: (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Karl Erjavec, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Slovenia.
Mr. Erjavec (Slovenia) (spoke in French): The
stability and prosperity of the Middle East and North
Africa continues to rank among the most urgent
priorities for the international community. The region
represents one of the cradles of our civilization, and it
is both culturally and religiously rich. In that context,
we condemn in no uncertain terms the destruction of
cultural heritage perpetrated in Syria and Iraq.
The situations in Syria, Iraq, Libya and Yemen are
complex and extremely disturbing. Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations are still at an impasse. The political,
economic and social transition in the Maghreb also
faces numerous obstacles.
Terrorism and violent extremism — in whatever
form or manifestation — cannot and must not be
tolerated. The atrocities committed against civilians
by Daesh, Al-Qaieda, the Al-Nusra Front and similar
extremist groups are beyond human understanding.
Given the extent and nature of the crimes committed
in Iraq and Syria, they can be qualified in no other
way than as crimes against humanity, war crimes and
genocide — with women and children being particularly
vulnerable. Extremist groups constitute a complex
terrorist threat that should not be solely dealt with by
military means. Rather, we need to turn to diplomacy,
mediation and conflict prevention. Through education
and open dialogue, we need to improve our familiarity
and knowledge of the other.
Young people represent one of the most vulnerable
groups facing radicalization and extremism. When we
talk about prevention, we mean that we are looking for
positive alternatives for youth. That entails education
and creating employment opportunities and an
environment of hope.
We must also focus on the concept of responsibility.
The international community must find a way to
address the impunity currently enjoyed by those who
commit such horrible crimes. The perpetrators of such
atrocities must be brought to justice for their actions.
The International Criminal Court plays a crucial role in

15-2955651/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

the fight against impunity. We call on all States in the
region to accede to the Rome Statute of the Court. We
continue to advocate for the Security Council’s referral
of the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court.
The violence and atrocities committed by extremist
groups have triggered massive displacements.
Thousands of Syrians, Iraqis and Afghans are fleeing
their countries every day, resulting in a catastrophic
humanitarian situation. Millions of people are displaced
within the region or are seeking refuge in neighbouring
countries and well beyond the region, including Europe.
The international community must respond effectively
to the immediate needs of those at risk by adopting an
approach based on needs, all the while respecting basic
humanitarian principles.
We must do everything in our power to restore
peace in the Middle East. The resumption of IsraeliPalestinian talks is of crucial importance for the entire
region. Sustainable solutions to the crises in Syria
and Iraq can be brought about only through dialogue
among Syrians and Iraqis. The role of the international
community is to assist Syrians and Iraqis in the pursuit
of such dialogue.
Let me conclude by assuring the Security Council
that Slovenia fully supports the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura.
The President: (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Abdullah Ghobash,
Minister of State of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Ghobash (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): On behalf of the delegation of the United
Arab Emirates, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
for this month. We wish you every success in
your functions. We would also like to thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Nigeria,
for her excellent guidance of our work last month. We
also thank you, Sir, for convening this special open
debate on the current state of affairs in the Middle East
and North Africa — especially because, at present, the
security challenges pose a real, serious threat to peace
and security in the world.
Extremism and terrorist activities have increased
over the past five years, as have the barbaric crimes
committed by extremist and terrorist organizations — led

52/83

30/09/2015

by Daesh and Al-Qaida — which have taken advantage
of the political vacuum and instability in countries in the
region, such as Yemen, Libya, Syria and Iraq, in order
to impose their domination, expand their activities and
attract and mobilize marginalized elements of societies,
with a view to implement their plan to implement a
programme of sabotage within and beyond the region.
In that regard, the United Arab Emirates believes that
restoring peace and security in the region could be
accomplished by the following steps.
First, there is a need to resolve the major problems
that have persisted for far too long in the region.
To that end, the United Nations should assume its
responsibility to achieve a final, lasting, comprehensive
and just settlement of the Palestinian question. The
continued occupation and flagrant violations of human
rights on the part of the occupying Power are among
the major threats to peace and security in the region.
That affords terrorist groups a substantial opportunity
to take advantage of serious humanitarian situations
to influence frustrated young people and recruit them
into their destructive programme. We emphasize the
importance of the Security Council intervening to put an
end to the aggression of extremist Jewish groups aimed
at desacratig the Al-Aqsa Mosque. We need to do this in
order to avert a dangerous conflagration in the region.
The Emirates also stress the need to step up the pace in
the settlement of this conflict, which has lasted for far
too long, so as to establish an independent Palestinian
State within the 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as its
capital.
We also call upon the Security Council to heed
the calls and initiatives of the Arab Group, which has,
since last year, been inviting the Council to adopt an
effective resolution for the relaunching of the peace
process. We also stress the importance of the Security
Council’s shouldering its responsibilities in the area
of international peace and security. We therefore call
on the Council to take action to settle the Syrian crisis
through a political transition process and the creation
of a national Government in Syria, while providing
humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people, refugees,
displaced persons and the countries that host them. We
hope that the creation of four working groups, at the
initiative of the Secretary-General, will represent a
positive step towards a political solution and putting an
end to the suffering of the Syrian people.
Secondly, we need to support the legitimate
Government in conflict-affected countries so that they

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

can face the challenges posed by terrorist groups. In
Yemen, the support provided by the coalition of regional
and international countries helped the legitimate
Government to deal with the Houthi coup d’état, which
led to military and humanitarian successes that made it
possible to retake Aden and reinstate the Government
of Yemen. We deem it vital to comply with resolution
2216 (2015), and we are working in cooperation with
the United Nations to meet the humanitarian needs of
our brotherly countries.
We call also for support for the elected Libyan
Government. We must lift the embargo, which is tying
the Government’s hands with respect to Daesh and
other terrorist groups. We also commend the work
of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative in
Libya, and we welcome the political agreement that
has been finalized. We call for the establishment of a
Government of national accord.
Thirdly, we must to respect the principles
of the Charter on respect for sovereignty and
non-interference, and refrain from any ctions that
could undermine the security and stability of countries.
Foreign interventions, even under the pretext of settling
conflicts, only create more violence and instability. The
United Arab Emirates believes that the agreement on
the Iranian nuclear programme is a good opportunity
to begin a new chapter in regional cooperation. We
call upon Iran fully to comply with its commitments
under the Joint Plan of Action and the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as
United Nations resolutions, in particular resolution
2231 (2015).
Fourthly, we must devise more effective joint action
in order to face the challenges in the region. We also
need to include countries and regional organizations
in the decision-making processes in the region that
concerns them.
Fifthly, we must coordinate global efforts and
shoulder our common responsibilities in the face of
these challenges and threats. We must do this through
cooperation in order to put an end to the root causes of
extremism and terrorism, which means that we must
also have lasting solutions, through education or media
programmes, the empowerment of women and taking
advantage of the full potential of young people. We
must channel these energies in a peaceful way. We also
must provide social assistance to marginalized sectors
of society.

S/PV.7527

We believe that we need to have a national model.
My country has a national plan for tolerance and
moderation to combat extremism and that condemns
the barbaric message of extremists. To that end, we
have created the international Hedayah centre to fight
extremism. Along with the United States, we have
created a call centre to counter extremist propaganda
and incitation to violence. We have passed a law against
anti-discrimination in all its forms, and we are ready to
cooperate with the United Nations and the international
community to strengthen our efforts in the service of
peace and security in our country, in our region and
the world.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Mr. Péter Szijjártó, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Trade of Hungary.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary) (spoke in Russian): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this open debate of the Security Council in order to
discuss this very important topic. Countering terrorism
in the Middle East can be successful only if we pool
our global efforts. Unifying our global efforts requires
global cooperation.
(spoke in English)
A decade ago, when we had a chance to watch
reports from the Middle East on television, we were
shocked at the scenes we saw. But at that time we were
fairly sure that these kinds of developments would
never happen in Europe, on our continent. What we are
experiencing today shows how wrong we were. Now
the growing threat of terrorism has become part of
everyday life in Europe.
The Islamic State in Iraq and Sham (ISIS) has built
a global network, including in Europe, and has around
30,000 foreign fighters, who pose a significant threat
to us. ISIS has caused more damage to our common
cultural heritage than any armed conflict or natural
disaster since the conclusion of the Second World War.
ISIS destabilizes the region around Europe and is one
of the factors that has led to an unstable situation in our
neighbourhood.
The other factor is the series of bad international
political decisions that resulted in the creation of longterm war-torn zones in North Africa and the Middle
East region.
Because of ISIS gaining additional territory and
because of the aforementioned bad international

15-2955653/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

political decisions, the European neighbourhood is more
unstable than it has been in years. These developments
have led to a situation in which we must say that the
European Union is facing the greatest challenge since
its creation. Currently, the European Union is facing
the challenge of mass migration, a mass migration with
an unlimited source of supply of people. Let us just take
into consideration the fact that there are 8 million people
living on humanitarian aid in Iraq. There are 12 million
people living on humanitarian aid in Syria, of whom
almost 7 million are already internally displaced. In
addition, the sub-Saharan region, according to some
reports, is home to more than 12.5 million internally
displaced persons. That is not even to mention Yemen,
Libya or the situation in Pakistan or even in Afghanistan.
So if we take all of these elements into consideration,
then maybe we can agree that it is absolutely not an
exaggeration to say that there are around 30 million
to 35 million people around Europe who might make
a quick decision to leave their homes and hit the road,
heading towards Europe. That is why I think that it is
in our common interest to avoid this challenge, because
if there are 30 million to 35 million people heading
towards Europe, that can destabilize our continent: first
the periphery, and then the central part.
In order to prevent that, we have to stabilize the
situation in North Africa and the Middle East region
very quickly, as soon as possible. If we agree on that,
then it gives us two tasks.
The first task is to increase our efforts to combat
ISIS. Although we have formed the broadest coalition
ever, we have achieved only limited success. That is
why we have to make sure that ISIS does not gain more
territory, and we have to take back te territory that ISIS
has occupied. We have to make sure that the International
Criminal Court investigates crimes committed by ISIS,
because we must not leave such crimes without serious
consequences for the perpetrators. We Hungarians
recently took a decision to deploy 112 troops in Erbil,
in the Kurdish region, in order to carry out forceprotection duties. Those troops will soon take part in
training Peshmerga troops as well.
The second task would be to stop the war and make
peace in Syria. It appears that there is broad agreement
that the only way to achieve peace in Syria is through
negotiations. In order for negotiations to be successful,
we need maximal political inclusiveness.

54/83

30/09/2015

We have to be aware that we will not be able
to overcome these difficulties without pragmatic
cooperation between Russia and the trans-Atlantic
community. Recent developments in multilateral
diplomacy, as Council members will recall, have
proved that even the most serious and complicated
challenges can be overcome if there is global will and
global cooperation. In our view, global will and global
cooperation cannot leave out Russia. Without a quick
reconsideration of the relationship between Russia and
the trans-Atlantic community, we are not going to be
able to stabilize the situation in North Africa and in
the Middle East region. Furthermore, if we are not
able to stabilize the situation in North Africa and the
Middle East, then we will not effect a the decrease in
the migratory pressure on Europe. It should be stated
that Europe is not going to be able to bear the heavy
burden of a mass migration on its own.
In conclusion, we should not commit such mistakes
in the future because doing so could destabilize our
continent, Europe, because our neighbourhood — our
surroundings — have already been destabilized.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Didier Burkhalter,
Head of the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs of
Switzerland.
Mr. Burkhalter (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Mr. President, and the Russian presidency
for having initiated this debate.
Increasing instability and human suffering in
the Middle East, massive refugee flows, the rise
of transnational terrorism all call for a swift and
determined response that includes not only additional
humanitarian assistance but also, primarily, a political
solution to the violent conflicts that have plunged
the region into chaos. The impasses have lasted long
enough — much too long, in fact — and Syria needs
our help.
A national dialogue should be initiated to begin to
end the bloody war between the Damascus Government
and the opposition. Switzerland supports the efforts of
the United Nations Special Envoy to encourage thematic
discussions in the Syrian working groups established to
address key aspects of the 2012 Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). From the beginning we have
supported the United Nations efforts to find a political
solution to the Syrian crisis. We will continue along
that path until peace is achieved, by providing experts,

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

logistical support and financial resources as needed.
We urge Syria to take advantage of thr opportunity to
participate in the working groups. We also demand the
rapid formation of an international contact group that
would be responsible for supporting the search for a
political solution.
All regional and international actors share the same
responsibility for stabilizing Syria. They must come to
the table and discuss the issues. Switzerland welcomes
the strengthening of diplomatic efforts to find common
ground. Now is the time to leave behind the maximalist
positions and finally seek compromise. The only path
that will lead to peace is that of an inclusive dialogue
that includes the Syrian Government and which aims
to define the parameters of a managed transition. That
process will difficult, given the enormous sacrifices
that will have to be made. The parties to the conflict
will have to make difficult choices to find compromise.
But the only way that a lasting solution can be achieved
is if all parties work sincerely for peace. The millions
of women, children and men who have suffered the
atrocities of this war deserve such efforts and sincerity.
An inclusive dialogue and power-sharing are not
only vital for Syria, but also for stabilizing Iraq and​
resolving the conflicts in Yemen and Libya. My country,
Switzerland, with its multiparty Government, is willing
to offer its expertise. We are prepared to facilitate
discussions in Geneva, should that be appropriate, and
to support the efforts of the United Nations.
With regard to the fight against the terrorist
threat in the Middle East and North Africa, terrorist
groups such as the so-called Islamic State cannot be
part of a political solution. However, resolving those
conflicts will weaken terrorist groups. And again, a
key role in that regard falls to the United Nations. We
are concerned about the apparent lack of coordination
among various military actions in Syria, and we ask the
Security Council to assume its responsibility in leading
the efforts to oppose terrorism and re-establish peace
and security in Syria.
We also welcome the announcement by the
Secretary-General on the presentation this year on a
plan of action to prevent violent extremism. Military
force and coercive measures to enforce the law are not
enough to eliminate terrorism. We must also ensure that
young people are able to resist the demagoguery of the
terrorists, and for that we must to combine peace and
security measures, development measures and human

S/PV.7527

rights measures. In other words, we must mobilize all
the strengths of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Daniel Mitov, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Bulgaria.
Mr. Mitov (Bulgaria) Today’s debate is timely, as
the Middle East and North Africa are going through a
deep political and security crisis that has ushered in the
expansion of violent extremism. In Iraq, the response
to terrorists has been a process of reconciliation
initiated by Prime Minister Al Abadi. Those efforts
are a prerequisite for a united, stable and peaceful
Iraq. In Syria, the issue of countering terrorism has
unfortunately been manipulated by a regime that has
used the extremist threat that it itself created and
triggered to justify the violence exercised against its
own people. The strengthening of the reconciliation
policy in Iraq and the need for promoting an inclusive
political transition in Syria reminds us also of Libya,
Yemen and other places where we hope for Governments
and States that are indeed inclusive.
As long as there is no peace in the Middle East,
violent extremism will take advantage of the situation.
The terrorist scourge of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) knows no borders. From Syria and
Iraq, it is moving to Libya. It carries out attacks in
Mali, Yemen, Tunisia and elsewhere. As a partner
in the global coalition to counter ISIL, Bulgaria is
working to degrade, and ultimately defeat, the threat
it poses to the world. But violent extremism continues
to expand, and we should start taking further measures
that will produce the necessary effects, including in the
countries of the Middle East and North Africa.
Faced with such a grave situation, we believe that
the United Nations could undertake further actions in
stepping up international cooperation in countering
terrorism. Bulgaria looks forward to the presentation
of the Secretary-General’s plan of action on preventing
violent extremism. Following the Council’s adoption of
resolution 2178 (2014), on countering foreign terrorist
fighters, Bulgaria has enacted legislation to amend the
penal code and operational improvements with regard
to travel documents. Measures also need to be taken to
draft a strategy for countering terrorism, radicalization
and extremism for the period 2015-2020.
My country is at the crossroads between Europe
and the Middle East and bears the consequences of
the unprecedented migration pressure generated by

15-2955655/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

conflicts in the region and the expansion of Daesh.
Besides addressing the consequences through measures,
including those outlined in our national strategy on
migration, asylum and integration, Bulgaria shares
the view that its root causes should be immediately
addressed. It is necessary to seek a lasting settlement of
the conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa and
to tackle human rights violations, dire socioeconomic
situations and the lack of good governance.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Kristian Jensen, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Denmark.
Mr. Jensen (Denmark): The main discussions
in New York about Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist organizations have
served to remind us once again that the threat from
terrorism and violent extremism is accurate and real.
Violent extremism and terrorism are not only a threat
to innocent civilians of the countries of the Middle
East and North Africa, they are a global challenge.
To counter the terrorist threat effectively, we must be
guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. Peace and respect for human rights
go hand in hand. The international rule of law is not
about selectively invoking tranquility as a shield for
oppressive regimes while at the same time ignoring the
legitimate rights of States in other regions of the world.
A functioning global order requires us to protect the
innocent victims of terrorism where States fail to do so.
It requires a comprehensive effort that involves military,
economic and political being deployed strategically and
through the broadest possible coalition. It was therefore
good to hear this morning the Russian Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Lavrov, say that Russia would
participate in the fight against ISIL — and we can see
now that they have always been militarily active. But
it was also troubling to hear that it was difficult to see
who Russia has been militarily active against. Rumours
say that it was not ISIL that was hit by the military
aggression from Russia this morning.
What we also need to do is to focus on how we
can prevent persons from turning to terrorism in the
first place. Countering extremism by investing in
prevention measures, education and jobs for youths is
key, as is paying attention to the need to extend citizen
participation and democracy to all. Our own experience
has shown us that we must focus on applying an early
preventive effort while at the same time being capable
of managing more eminent threats.
56/83

30/09/2015

In Georgia and Tunisia, we are launching new
initiatives with the Governments to counter radicalism.
Those include a focus on youths, dialogue and
preventive measures. To reduce the appeal of ISIL to
potential foreign fighters, we are supporting initiatives
to investigate and document war crimes and human
rights abuses in Iraq and Syria committed by ISIL and
other extremists.
Violent extremism impacts the security of us
all — in Copenhagen, Baghdad, Paris and New York.
But it also hinders development and economic growth
globally. It is therefore important for us that the global
framework for countering this threat be firmly anchored
at the United Nations and that all Member States
and others in the United Nations family are actively
engaged in the efforts to build resilience and to counter
violent extremism wherever we meet it. A successful
approach to counter-terrorism must therefore revolve
around partnerships.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Abdelkader Messahel,
Minister for Maghreb Affairs, the African Union and
the League of Arab States of the People’s Democratic
Republic of Algeria.
Mr. Messahel (Algeria) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to congratulate the Russian Federation
on its presidency of the Security Council this month
and for its initiative in organizing this debate on the
sensitive issue of resolving conflicts in the Middle East
and North Africa and the related issue of combating the
terrorist threat in the region. The relationship between
those two phenomena is a reality that challenges us
every day. In occupied Palestine, Syria, Iraq, Yemen,
Libya, Afghanistan, Somalia and the Sahel, the outbreak
and persistence of crises and conflicts have today a
direct impact on the worsening threat of terrorism and
the proliferation of terrorist groups. Those crises and
conflicts bring to mind three fundamental aspects.
First, the weakening of States affected by that
scourge benefits first and foremost those groups,
because it indirectly creates opportunities for them to
consolidate and develop their criminal activities.
Secondly, it offers them opportunities for
interaction and cooperation with major transnational
criminal groups, which obviously protect the terrorists
and enable them to conduct activities that now include
human trafficking, illicit trafficking in natural
resources, illegal migration, trafficking in ancient

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

cultural artefacts, kidnapping and drug and arms
trafficking. All those activities are now recognized as
facts, including by the United Nations.
Thirdly, the absence of negotiated political
solutions promotes the emergence of chaos and lawless
areas, which terrorist groups are quick to occupy and
exploit to their advantage.
The impasse in the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process is a good illustration. The continuation of the
policy of occupation, colonization and annexation of
occupied Palestinian territory, in flagrant violation
of international law and the relevant resolutions of
the Council, and the repeated attacks by Israel on the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, fuel frustration within the Muslim
community. That frustration is compounded by the lack
of meaningful consequences from the international
community to those violations and by the impunity that
the occupation authorities feel secure of. They have
also used terrorist propaganda to their advantage.
The crisis in Syria has been and remains dependent
on finding a sincere negotiated political solution among
the Syrians themselves in respect for the sovereignty,
the territorial integrity and the unity of the Syrian
people. The emergence and continuation of the conflict
has opened space for the rise and development of
numerous terrorist groups. They now occupy vast
swathes of territory, control natural resources, raise
taxes and impose their barbaric behaviour on innocent
people and their ancient cultural heritage. The same
thing is happening in neighbouring Iraq, where part
of its territory as well as its sovereignty, security and
institutional stability are threatened by the terrorist
hordes of Daesh and their associates.
In Libya, the terrorist threat continues to expand
and to take advantage of the lack of effective control of
the all the territory by a central Government authority,
which weighs on the stability and security of the entire
region. The demand to counter this threat requires a
rapidly negotiated solution based on respect for the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
unity of the brotherly Libyan people. The solution also
requires the urgent establishment of a Government of
national unity to enable the Libyan people to effectively
cope with terrorist groups, which are progressively and
dangerously establishing themselves in the country.
The scarcity of resources available to countries
in these regions and their porous and vast borders, as
well as poverty and lack of development, are factors

S/PV.7527

that provide terrorism with considerable room to
manoeuvre, develop and strengthen, despite the war
that the countries affected and threatened by this
scourge are legitimately waging.
Like the rest of the international community, my
country is very concerned by the aggravation of the
terrorist threat and the serious risks it poses to regional
and international peace and security. We believe that
efforts to counter this threat must be directed in three
complementary directions.
First, bilateral, regional and international
cooperation in the fight against this scourge must
be continuously pursued and deepened. The United
Nations and the Security Council have, in this respect,
a responsibility and a critical role, particularly in the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
Secondly, dialogue and peaceful means,
instead of the indiscriminate, disproportionate and
counterproductive use of force, must be promoted to
find political solutions to these crises and conflicts.
Such solutions are sure to encourage the suppression of
chaos and lawless areas and to mobilize the dedication
of greater and more important resources in the fight
against terrorism.
Thirdly and lastly, the efforts of the concerned
countries and the international community as a whole
must be coordinated in order to develop and strengthen
the institutional, human, technical and technological
capacities of these countries, which badly need
such capacities in their fight against terrorism. The
reinforcement and presence of strong and capable
States is today one of the condition for success in the
fight against terrorism.
These are some observations we wished to share
with the Council in context of this important and timely
debate, whose the conclusions concern us individually
and collectively.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Rodolfo Nin Novoa,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Eastern Republic
of Uruguay.
Mr. Nin Novoa (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate and for your efforts during Russia’s presidency
to achieve progress on the major issues on the agenda of
the Security Council.

15-2955657/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

For me, it is an honour to be here today to
exchange views on a topic of particular importance for
international peace and security, that is, the terrorist
threat in the Middle East and North Africa. It is one of
the greatest violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, as well as of the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and peaceful coexistence among
nations and among individuals. Its transnational nature,
its innovative modes of action and its growing impact
at the international level demand immediate responses
from the international community, and in particular
from the Security Council, the body to which the Charter
grants primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Uruguay condemns terrorism and all its forms
of action and stresses the need for measures by the
international community that are consistent with the
Charter of the United Nations and that make it possible
to counter the operations of terrorist groups.
We believe that the responses designed by the
international community should not focus exclusively on
the implementation of coercive measures in accordance
with international law, but should also offer solutions
based on a comprehensive approach that addresses the
structural factors that are at the root and origin of this
phenomenon. Poverty, the lack of job opportunities,
social exclusion, xenophobia and discrimination and
the challenges with regard to access to education create
an environment conducive to the formation of new
terrorist groups and the recruitment of followers. We
are convinced that addressing those challenges will
also prevent the emergence of new hotbeds of tension
related to the structural factors I just mentioned.
Uruguay notes with great concern the escalation
and brutality of the actions of the group called the
Islamic State, including the deliberate destruction of
the cultural heritage of humankind. We denounce in the
most emphatic way the cruelty and disregard for human
dignity that this group has demonstrated. That is why,
given the actions of the Islamic State, it is not possible
to sustain the principle of the peaceful settlement of
disputes and to demand dialogue and negotiation with
an entity that has adopted a clear strategy of terror. In
this context, Uruguay emphasizes the need for urgent
action by the international community, using means
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, to
put a stop to the actions of this terrorist group. The
international community cannot remain indifferent

58/83

30/09/2015

in the face of these crimes and the suffering of their
victims.
The attacks on the civilian populations, in
particular on women and children, perpetrated by
Boko Haram on the African continent demonstrate the
terrible escalation in frequency, brutality, cruelty and
virulence of the actions of this group against their own
compatriots. It systemically subjects them to terror
and violates their basic rights. Uruguay condemns its
actions and reiterates that there cannot be any religious,
ethnic or any kind of other justification to legitimize
such actions. Similarly, Uruguay hopes that these
barbaric actions do not go unpunished and that those
responsible will be tried and convicted in accordance
with the existing norms.
Uruguay supports the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and is committed to
actions aimed at strengthening its implementation, as
it is aware of the importance of collective action. In
this framework, Uruguay would like to announce that
it is currently considering the definition of a national
strategy against terrorism that makes it possible to
cooperate effectively with international efforts in the
consideration of this global phenomenon.
No State or individual is exempt from becoming
a victim of a terrorist attack. We must act together
immediately to repair the damage caused to those
affected and their families and to prevent future attacks
in order to protect potential victims.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari
Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Indonesia.
Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate.
Instability and prolonged conflicts in the Middle
East and North Africa continue to cause a high number
of causalities and material costs. The international
community must work harder in concert to tackle this
issue. In our view, a political solution through diplomacy
is the only way to resolve the conflicts. We firmly
believe lasting peace can be achieved only through a
peaceful process. We must therefore create the space
and opportunity for an inclusive political dialogue and
reconciliation to take place. It is important that such
inclusive political and reconciliation process has no
pre-set or preconceived outcomes.

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

For our part, Indonesia remains committed to
supporting the peaceful resolution of conflict in
the Middle East and North Africa, while respecting
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of all States. A myriad of issues have
arisen as a result of continued conflicts in the Middle
East and North Africa. Issues such as the influx of
irregular migrants, the rise of the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria (ISIS) and the emergence of foreign terrorist
fighters are proof of how this situation can significantly
impact other regions and threaten international peace
and security.
Indonesia believes that the key to addressing the
rise of ISIS and the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters is by addressing the root causes. That is why
the launching of an all-inclusive political process is
imperative. We also need a comprehensive approach.
While recognizing the role of the hard-power approach,
Indonesia believes that the soft-power approach is
important for preventive measures in countering
terrorism. Indonesia believes in the importance of
multi-stakeholder engagement in efforts to counter
the terrorist ideology. The role of women — I
emphasize — should be empowered, for they are a key
pillar in providing children with guidance, values,
tolerance and education. The role of moderates and civil
society should also be promoted to provide counternarratives to terrorist propaganda.
For its part, Indonesia is committed to addressing
the cycle of radicalization. We have, among other
things, done this through interfaith dialogue and by
ensuring the teaching of Islam in the education system
while stressing that its teachings bring about blessings
and prosperity.
In response to the emergence of ISIS and foreign
terrorist fighters, we must also strengthen international
cooperation, in particular on intelligence, as well
as among the relevant law enforcement agencies and
legal instruments. We must also bolster the exchange
of information and experience on legislation on foreign
terrorist fighters, enhance the promotion of tolerance
and moderation and improve border security.
At the international level, the role of the United
Nations should be strengthened, including by enhancing
coordination among the various United Nations bodies
related to counter-terrorism, as well as synergizing
with counter-terrorism initiatives other than in the
United Nations framework.

S/PV.7527

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity to
ask the Security Council to devote more political energy,
vigour and time to resolving conflicts peacefully and to
counter terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, in
line with the mandate and responsibilities enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Børge Brende, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Norway.
Mr. Brende (Norway): War and civil strife in the
Middle East and Africa are giving extremist groups
room to grow into a threat out of all proportion to
their relative strength. That much is clear, even if
the full picture of the exponential increase in violent
extremism and terrorism is much more complex. The
fall of large expanses of territory to a terrorist group
and the unspeakable atrocities of those brutal criminals
have to be countered with a wide range of instruments,
including military force.
That is why Norway is contributing to all five
lines of effort set out by the global coalition against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). A
Norwegian military contingent is now fully deployed
in Iraq. We are helping to stem the flow of financial
resources and foreign terrorist fighters. We are working
to counter ISIL’s propaganda. And we are supporting
efforts to stabilize areas at risk in Iraq. We are also
taking an active part in the international efforts to
fight radicalization and the perverted ideology of the
extremists.
Being unemployed is never an excuse to employ the
methods of terrorism. But if we want to cut off support
for extremists, we have to create jobs and opportunities
for the younger generations. In accordance with
humanitarian principles, we are also providing
considerable assistance in Iraq, Syria and the affected
neighbouring countries. The international community
must stand united in the fight against ISIL. All actors
share a responsibility not to create new complications
on the ground, or make any moves that could be
counterproductive.
The perception of ISIL as an imminent threat to
everyone in the region — and beyond — is widely
shared. We should grasp this opportunity to seek
solutions to the underlying conflicts. It was clear from
the start that, without an inclusive political process
in Iraq, ISIL could not effectively be dealt with. It
is equally clear that an effective response requires

15-2955659/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

credible progress towards conflict resolution in Syria.
Comprises are needed to reach a political solution.
Five days ago, the leaders of the world set themselves
ambitious goals for the next 15 years. Unfortunately, it
will be very hard for Syria, Libya, Yemen and other
conflict-torn countries to reach the global Goals. The
relation between security and prosperity is obvious.
Four years ago, Syria was a middle-income country
on its way to reaching almost all of the Millennium
Development Goals. Today it is a humanitarian
catastrophe. What four years of war have destroyed,
may take 40 years or more to rebuild.
Hardly any country in conflict has reached the
Millennium Development Goals. Ending the conflict
in Syria — and conflicts elsewhere — would be major
steps towards fulfilling the ambitions targets set last
Friday. And vice versa: fighting poverty is among the
most effective conflict-prevention tools. If we create
jobs and opportunities and let young people educate
themselves and have a say in how their countries
are governed, we also remove fundamental roots of
instability, extremism and conflict. But the people of
Syria cannot wait for 15 years. A political solution is
urgently needed.
We welcome the fact that members of the Council
are now engaged in conversations on what should be
done. But that is only the beginning of the beginning.
This conflict can be brought to an end only if all leaders
gathered here remain committed to finding solutions
even after they have left New York, and act quickly
upon it. We owe it to the people of Syria and to our own
security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Carlos Raúl Morales,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Guatemala.
Mr. Morales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation appreciates the initiative of holding this
debate and commends the delegation of the Russian
Federation for the excellent work that it has been doing
throughout the month of September while holding
the Security Council presidency. I also appreciate the
briefing of the Secretary-General, which sets forth the
urgency of resolving conflicts, especially those waged
in the Middle East and North Africa.
It is disconcerting to see how a region that was
no ennobled by a series of social movements that
recently sought democratic changes is now dominated
60/83

30/09/2015

by instability and conflict. The consequences of the
violence in the region have been disastrous for the
civilian population. Sadly, we have witnessed how
the continuing acts of violence, fundamentalism,
intolerance, exclusion and the renting of the social
fabric have become the daily life of the peoples of the
region. We believe that we must all redouble our efforts
to find viable political solutions to change those trends
in the context in which human rights are respected and
where we can bring about a better future.
Guatemala has had an opportunity to see at firsthand how often the Security Council has failed in
how to address the roots of conflict. Many times that
was due to the political sensitivities of its members.
However, we have also been able to observe situations
where it was possible to find enough political will
among its members to make the necessary structural
changes and thereby counteract many of the scourges
that have given rise to conflicts.
Clearly, we have reached a point where we must
muster the political will to address in a comprehensive
manner the thorny issues that help foster the terrorist
threat, such as socioeconomic exclusion, the availability
of weapons and violations of basic human rights. It is
these kinds of problems that, taken together, have been
exploited in order to advance the interests of those
groups that promote violent extremism and threaten
peace and security.
In Guatemala’s view, it is essential that the
international community, particularly the members of
the Security Council, overcome its differences and use
the mechanisms at its disposal to bring together the
parties to conflicts in order to find new ways to reduce
violence, alleviate the people’s suffering and build
confidence for a resumption of political negotiations.
We are aware that the Council can have a strong
influence on the course of events on the ground, but
ultimately peace can be preserved or restored only by
the actual parties to the conflict. In matters of war and
peace, the international community can play a critical
role, but it is only the internal actors who can be the
masters of their own destiny.
The effectiveness of our efforts in combating
terrorism is linked to our ability to successfully tackle
the conditions that fuel the problem. In that regard, we
believe we now have a number of multidimensional
and operational tools enabling us to address the issue
and cooperate effectively, while taking into account
the needs and peculiarities of each region. However,
15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

we should remember that it is not possible to fight
terrorism with military force alone. It is vital that the
actions of the United Nations and its Member States be
seen to be legitimate, as is ensuring the accountability
of those who execute them.
Finally, circumstances change and trends are often
not linear, and both can be changed, by individuals or
institutions. By ensuring a judicious mix of policies,
the Council can prevent a conflict or interrupt a trend.
Indeed, that is the reason for having a Security Council
that is called on to act and to seek a lasting peace built
on solid foundations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Marina Kaljurand,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Estonia.
Ms. Kaljurand (Estonia): Like many nations,
Estonia is gravely concerned about the recent wave of
aggressive terrorism and violent extremism. Following
President Obama’s initiative, we gathered in this
Chamber in September (see S/PV.7272) to discuss
various threats posed by terrorists, especially the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and to stress the
global and comprehensive role of the United Nations in
countering terrorism and radical extremism. The main
outcome of that meeting was the Council’s adoption of
resolution 2178 (2014), aimed at blocking funding for
terrorist groups and the recruitment and travel of foreign
terrorist fighters. Today we can take stock of how that
important resolution is being implemented. In Estonia,
we have now almost completed the incorporation of the
resolution’s terms and requirements into our national
legislation.
Our shared aim is the establishment of peace
and security in the Middle East and North Africa by
effectively countering the terrorist threat in the region
caused by ISIL and other groups. Yesterday, in a
reflection of the international community’s dedication
to addressing the terrorist threat, we held a summit
of the international coalition for countering ISIL. We
welcome that approach, since ISIL is unquestionably
the biggest and most complicated terrorist threat to
peace and security in the Middle East, North Africa and
beyond. We must stop this aggressive, brutal movement,
which is killing innocent people and resulting in huge
waves of refugees.
While we stress the importance of international
cooperation in combating ISIL, we should use our
resources and capabilities effectively and avoid the

S/PV.7527

danger of acting on parallel tracks. Estonia supports
the existing coalition and its working groups, and
cooperation should continue within that framework.
Terrorism needs a global, unified and consistent
response. Only intensive, close and well-coordinated
cooperation between nations and international
organizations can bring concrete results.
It is also clear that long-term stability and putting an
end to every kind of terrorism and violent extremism in
the Middle East and North Africa can be achieved only
by addressing the ongoing tensions between various
non-extremist political, ethnic and religious groups.
Political solutions to the ongoing conflicts in Syria,
Libya and Yemen will be key to our ability to wage a
more effective fight against ISIL and other extremists.
For that to happen, we must support the ongoing efforts
of the United Nations.
There is one more aspect to add to this. It is true
that today these phenomena all frequently appear in
the broader Middle East, where the religion of Islam
is unfortunately used to conceal terrorist goals. But we
must address the issue more widely. As a global player,
the United Nations should continue with its general
approach of tackling terrorism and violent extremism
everywhere they emerge and of addressing terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, regardless of its
religious, political, historical or ethnic background and
motivation.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that Estonia
welcomes the work of the Secretary-General in the field
of counter-terrorism and countering violent extremism,
especially his efforts to prepare an action plan for
preventing violent extremism, as well as those of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
among others, for organizing a full set of international
meetings on this important subject throughout the year.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Timo Soini, Minister
deputizing for the Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Finland.
Mr. Soini (Finland): We live in an increasingly
interdependent world. Security challenges emerging in
one country affect us all. Ultimately, it is the Security
Council’s responsibility to maintain international peace
and security. Of course, we all share the responsibility
to respond to security challenges, old or new. Inaction
is not an option.

15-2955661/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

The situation today in many parts of the Middle
East and North Africa is intolerable. I would like
to commend and express my strong support to the
mediation efforts of the United Nations in the crises
in the region. The work of its Special Envoys and
Representatives in resolving conflict there is greatly
appreciated.
Our primary focus should be on the root causes of
conflicts. Millions of young people are unemployed
and lack future prospects, which can lead to their
exclusion from economic, social and political life.
Unfortunately, terrorist organizations use discontent
and marginalization to their advantage. Democracy,
human rights and inclusive economic development are
fundamental elements in creating stable societies. The
key word is inclusiveness. It is essential to use society’s
full potential, especially when addressing difficult
social problems.
Here I would like to highlight the importance
of women’s full participation in decision-making. I
firmly believe that we need the equal participation of
men and women alike if we are to achieve sustainable
peace. Religious and traditional leaders are also often
important and influential representatives of local
communities when it comes to questions related to peace
and mediation. Finland sponsored the establishment of
the Network for Religious and Traditional Peacemakers.
The network brings together religious and traditional
leaders, men and women alike, in their efforts for peace
in conflict areas.
We also need decisive action against terrorist
groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
At the same time, we must make sure that all measures
to counter terrorism comply with international law,
human rights law, refugee law and international
humanitarian law. The rule of law and the protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms are essential
components of the fight against terrorism.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Henryka MościckaDendys, Undersecretary of State at the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Poland.
Ms. Mościcka-Dendys (Poland): At the outset, let
me thank Russia for convening today’s timely debate on
issues of great importance to international peace and
security.
History teaches us that people will not consent
to live under an authoritarian regime indefinitely,
62/83

30/09/2015

tolerating lawlessness, accepting brutality and giving
up all ambition for a better life. The experience of
Poland and other Central and Eastern European
countries, once under foreign — Soviet — rule, are the
best proof that illegitimate regimes cannot last forever.
The Arab revolutions did not create a terrorist
threat. However, they created a political vacuum that
provides conditions permissive to violent extremism
and terrorism to thrive and gain ground. The longer
the crises in the Middle East and North Africa persist,
the more polarized and violent their societies become.
Daesh and Al-Qaida feed on exactly those processes.
In the light of that situation, we must ask ourselves
how to de-escalate conflicts, taking into account
the number of external actors involved and their
contradictory interests. Repeating the mantra of the
need to find a political solution will not help. Nor
will a security response alone be sufficient to address
the challenges posed by foreign fighters, terrorism
and extremism. We should work on a comprehensive
response that addresses some of the root causes, such as
economic and social inequalities, and that guarantees the
enjoyment of fundamental human rights and freedoms.
Without a broad, inclusive solution comprised of both
political and development elements, the attainment of
lasting peace in the region will not be possible.
In elaborating a peaceful solution to the conflicts
in both the Middle East and North Africa, we should
not forget about diversity, citizenship and equality,
common values such as tolerance, peace and stability,
respect and acceptance of others, solidarity and identity.
We need to enhance capacities to prevent and combat
violent extremism through the promotion of a culture
of democracy, dialogue and human rights. The role of
women, who constitute a large segment of society and
who are mostly in charge of basic education, should
also be emphasized in that regard.
We are of the view that there should be greater
emphasis on the prevention of terrorism by examining
and addressing the conditions conducive to its spread.
The most important issue will be to curb recruitment
by terrorist groups. In order to meet that objective
we should primarily concentrate on ensuring a stable
future for youth.
It is important to recognize that, from an ideological
point of view, promoting a process of deradicalization
is first and foremost the right and obligation of Arab
and Muslim countries. His Majesty King Abdullah

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7527

II spoke about that in the European Parliament last
February. Education, the promotion of a culture of
peace and respect for others, and appreciation for the
role of Christians in the Middle East as an integral part
of the world’s civilization are the main elements for
consolidating the efforts His Majesty proposed. Some
valuable projects have already been initiated in that
regard. Let me mention just a few.

delivered by Poland on behalf of a cross-regional core
group during the twenty-eighth session of the Human
Rights Council of the United Nations. UNESCO builds
international support for the protection of heritage in
areas where it is threatened by extremism. However,
a new strategy on how to reinforce the organization’s
action for the protection of culture in the event of armed
conflict is indispensable.

A good example of a new way of thinking was
the convening of the Global Forum on Youth, Peace
and Security in August in Jordan. The Amman Youth
Declaration adopted at that meeting is the first of its
kind to address youth and peacebuilding issues. It
calls for the full engagement of youth and youth-led
organizations in issues of peace and security. The
driving principle is to create a space for meaningful
intergenerational dialogue with common understanding
and respect, in order to prevent violence and extremism.

To conclude, let me underscore that only through
our joint and unwavering commitment will we be able
to achieve a vision of a world free from the scourges of
terrorism and violent extremism. Poland stands ready
to continue its engagement in international efforts to
achieve that important goal.

Another example worth mentioning is Hedayah,
the international center established in December 2012
in Abu Dhabi, with a strong focus on countering violent
extremism through dialogue, training and research.
Hedayah addresses timely subjects such as combating
foreign fighters and countering violent extremism
through education.
Poland supports international efforts to fight
terrorism and radicalization. We value close
cooperation with the United Nations, the European
Union and our strategic partners in that regard. We
have a long-standing tradition of advocating for change,
in particular as a result of our own recent successful
political and economic transformation. Poland is ready
to share its own experience.
Last but not least, I must refer to another issue linked
to growing extremism, which is the destruction of world
cultural heritage. I take the opportunity of speaking
in this Chamber to once again strongly condemn the
barbaric acts of destruction of world heritage that have
been taking place in the Middle East and in Africa.
Damage to the cultural heritage of anyone means
damage to the cultural heritage of all humankind. Such
acts are war crimes and their perpetrators must be held
accountable for their shameful deeds.
I would like also to convey Poland’s strong support
for UNESCO’s action to safeguard cultural heritage
in both Syria and Iraq, particularly bearing in mind
the unprecedented support of 137 States for the joint
statement on the destruction of cultural heritage,

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Margot Wallström,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Sweden.
Ms. Wallström (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself
with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union, but I would like to make a few additional
remarks in my national capacity.
Let me first thank the Russian presidency for
organising this ministerial meeting on countering the
terrorist threat in the Middle East and North Africa.
I would like to focus on two issues of particular
concern to us. First, we must intensify our efforts to
find political settlements to end the civil war in Syria
and the violence in Iraq. In the case of Syria, it is
unacceptable that the conflict is now in its fifth year.
The Security Council has to take its responsibility in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. This
bloodbath must end. Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
deserves our support in his efforts to find a political
solution and urgently implement the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex).
The Security Council should endorse the
establishment of an international contact group in
support of Mr. De Mistura’s four working groups. I
encourage key actors, including the United States,
Russia, Saudi Arabia and Iran, to participate. The
European Union should also be actively involved. The
ultimate goal is a genuine political transition that meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, including
the women of Syria, and that enables them to determine
their own future independently and democratically.
In the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and terrorism, the Syrian regime

15-2955663/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

must contribute by ending its attacks on civilians
and committing to a genuine political transition. Let
us not forget that the Syrian regime is responsible for
the overwhelming part of the atrocities committed in
Syria — atrocities that may constitute war crimes and
crimes against humanity, and that cannot be tolerated
by the international community.
In Iraq, military and stabilization efforts should
be underpinned by a political process of national
reconciliation and inclusive politics. Prime Minister
Al Abadi has taken bold steps to include the Sunni
community and all other groups in the governance of
Iraq. Sweden will continue to play an active role in the
coalition against ISIL in Iraq. We are participating in
the group on stabilization, which is key to a democratic,
stable and unified Iraq. Yesterday my Prime Minister
pledged $4 million to the United Nations Development
Programme stabilization fund for Iraq. We are a major
donor of humanitarian aid, and we are participating in
the coalition’s military training efforts in northern Iraq.
Secondly, we need to counter the widespread and
systematic violence being committed against women
and children. By using girls and women as sex slaves,
and rape as a method of warfare, the Syrian regime and
terrorist groups such as ISIL have committed flagrant
human rights abuses and violations of international
humanitarian law.
This matter is not new to me, and, I think, not to
anyone here either. When I briefed the Security Council
previously in my capacity as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, I highlighted the fact that my visits to the field
taught me that sexual violence was often considered
either as something inevitable or unspeakable, or as a
lesser crime.
Now the use of sexual violence has been taken to
horrific new levels, where it is not only condoned but
openly commanded as a method of warfare. This issue
should be kept on the agenda of the Security Council,
as it is a matter of international peace and security.
Sweden welcomes the announcement made by the
Secretary-General yesterday on the presentation of a
comprehensive plan on countering violent extremism
and terrorism. I urge fellow States Members of the United
Nations to support Special Representative Bangura’s
efforts. Sweden is committed to strengthening our
support for victims and survivors of sexual violence.
There must be accountability for sexual violence and
an end to impunity.
64/83

30/09/2015

If we look at the broader Middle East, there are also
other conflicts, in Libya and in Yemen, that require,
of course, urgent political solutions. Today we are
addressing the immediate threat from ISIL. If we also
look beyond, we have to address the broader security
challenges of the region. It is necessary to revive the
Middle East peace process, support good governance,
strengthen post-conflict restoration and peacebuilding,
as well as tackle climate change and find solutions to
water-management issues.
In conclusion, let me say that the values of
democracy, human rights and equality remain our best
defence against terrorism. They can be achieved only
through political settlements based on reconciliation
and inclusiveness.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Sebastian Kurz, Federal
Minister for Europe, Integration and Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Austria.
Mr. Kurz (Austria): First of all, let me thank the
Russian presidency for having convened this important
debate. Not since the Second World War have we seen
such large numbers of people desperately fleeing
conflict areas to save their lives. Nearly 60 million
people worldwide are on the move. In 2014 alone,
13.9 million people became newly displaced, four times
as many as in the previous year. We are witnessing a
mass exodus, especially from the wider Middle East
towards Europe, mostly via Turkey, Greece and the
Western Balkan States.
This mass exodus has worrisome aspects for
countries of origin, transit and destination. For
countries of origin, it increases the brain drain, and for
countries of transit and destination, it poses a significant
challenge for societies and their social systems.
We all know what the main trigger for this mass
exodus has been: the barbaric war in Syria and the
horrors committed by Daesh in Iraq and Syria. To
respond to this challenge, I believe that we have to
address the sources of the problem, and we must act in
a united manner.
First, we have to confront the root causes in the
countries of origin. In the case of Syria, that means that
we have to intensify our fight against Daesh and other
terrorist groups. Austria actively participates in the
global coalition to counter the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL). We cannot offer military assistance,
but we have recently increased our help, sending more
15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

humanitarian aid, protective equipment and mine
detectors. But we have to engage in this fight also
among our societies. We have to do more to stop the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters and to cut off financial
support to their organizations.
Secondly, we need greater unity at the international
level. Our first priority should be to put a rapid end to
the bloodshed. Here we need clear leadership from the
Security Council. We will be able to make a difference
only in the United States and Russia pull in the same
direction. We need a mandate not only for action
against Daesh but also for the protection of civilians,
including the establishment of safe and buffer zones.
Austria stands ready to contribute to such a United
Nations-mandated operation in the region.
The positive outcome of the E3+3 negotiations with
Iran in Vienna offers a glimmer of hope. What has
been possible on the Iran issue in finding a negotiated
diplomatic solution should also be possible for Syria.
Progress is difficult but not impossible. We have to
actively take matters into our own hands and stand
united to end the war in Syria and fight terrorism. We
owe this to the victims of terrorism, to the many who
have to flee their homes, and also to our own population
so as to ensure their security needs.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to his Excellency Mr. Valentin Rybakov, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Belarus.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): At
the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, for having
invited a large number of States Members of the United
Nations to discuss such a grave and pressing subject
here in the Council.
In the Middle East region, terrorism today exists
in the form of a quasi-State. Basically, terrorism has
become yet another type of weapon of mass destruction:
the destruction of people, the world cultural heritage
and the future of entire regions. Terrorists have killed
tens of thousands of Muslims, Christians and Yazidis
and representatives of other ethnic and denominational
groups.
As paradoxical as it may seem, the threat of
the use of conventional types of weapons of mass
destruction is the greatest specifically in the Middle
East region. The lack of progress on such issues as the
ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty, the creation in the Middle East of a zone free

S/PV.7527

of nuclear weapons and other types of weapons of mass
destruction, and the failure this year in terms of the
work of the Review Conference of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons - these are all
striking evidence of backward movement in terms of
working out a comprehensive dialogue on the issue of
ensuring international security not only in the Middle
East region and North Africa, but also worldwide.
Let us be frank. Today the real reasons for the
emergence of the crisis in the region are being replaced,
and this objectively impedes the quest for a long-term
solution. Some problems are being artificially brought
to the fore, and others are being skillfully hushed
up. As a result, what is being formed as a multilevel
parallel reality, and the primary victim of this parallel
reality is the truth. The artificial, coercive imposition
of certain views on other peoples and the discreditation
of legitimately elected Governments, as well as support
for terrorist groups, are the reasons that have led to
the worsening of the already difficult situation in the
region.
We are certain that for certain concepts, it is
unacceptable and criminal to use nuanced tones; in
this case, black is black. Terrorism mercilessly destroys
the integrity of the international security system.
Support for certain terrorist organizations in the fight
against others may lead only to negative consequences.
Similarly, the fragmenting of counterterrorism efforts
in terms of coalitions that are pursuing their own
political aims and the involvement of non-State entities
will inevitably lead to a worsening of the terrorist
threat and the threat of extremism. In that regard, we
see that the only viable option is to take action based
on Security Council decisions. For its part, Belarus has
consistently worked to strengthen international peace
and security, particularly in our region.
We recognize the primary coordinating role of
the United Nations in combating terrorism, and we
attach particular importance to the development
and strengthening of international cooperation in
that area. Belarus’ participation in key universal
international treaties in the fight against terrorism
within the United Nations framework and its full
implementation of the obligations under the provisions
therein and the provisions of the relevant Security
Council resolutions have created a solid foundation
for further comprehensive counter-terrorism efforts.
Our country is an active party to regional counterterrorism agreements, programmes and other efforts

15-2955665/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

carried out in the framework of the Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS), the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
In the light of the ongoing and growing intensity
of terrorist activities, we would like to draw attention
to resolution 1540 (2004), which deals with countering
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and preventing their falling into the hands of
terrorist organizations. In our view, that resolution has
a direct bearing on the theme of today’s open debate.
One cannot forget about such forms of terrorism
as cyberterrorism, given the global information and
communications interdependence, which could well
lead to terrorists gaining access to weapons of mass
destruction. That would then be a disaster of truly
global proportions.
In January 2013, Belarus, together with the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, the
CIS Executive Committee and the OSCE secretariat,
held a workshop for CIS member States to exchange
experience on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). We plan to continue holding such events on that
subject in Minsk.
In conclusion, we believe that we need to note the
following. Belarus calls on everyone not to forget that we
are States Members of the United Nations — I emphasize
the words, “United Nations”. With regard to the issue of
maintaining international peace and security, there are
no idle observers in the fight to counter terrorism, nor
can there be any. The contribution of each State to that
crucial effort is of exceptional importance.
Finally, given the most recent events, we welcome
the involvement of new States in actively countering
terrorism, particularly in those cases when such
involvement takes place at the request of legitimately
elected Governments.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Her Excellency Ms. Aurelia Frick, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Principality of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Frick (Liechtenstein): For decades, conflicts in
the Middle East and North Africa have deeply affected
the lives and livelihoods of the peoples of that region.
In recent years, new waves of violence have contributed
to a humanitarian crisis and population displacements
not seen since the Second World War, especially in
Syria, Iraq, Libya, Yemen and Gaza. The terrorist

66/83

30/09/2015

threats in and emanating from that area have reached
unprecedented levels, with vast territories ruled by
brutal extremists. The international community has
discussed Middle East issues for a long time, but often
to no avail. As a result, the effects of instability are
more evident and more broadly felt than ever.
The reasons for that dramatic state of affairs are
highly complex. Sustainable solutions will also require
efforts outside the realm of the Security Council.
Nevertheless, the situation in the Middle East and
North Africa falls squarely within the competence of
the Council. The way it responds in that area serves
as a measure of the Council’s performance in general.
I would like to make a few brief observations in that
regard.
Many of the conflicts in the region, most
prominently the war in Syria, can be seen as failures of
preventive diplomacy. That is not meant as a criticism of
United Nations envoys and their teams. They are doing
their best in desperate circumstances. Rather, the main
problem is that preventive diplomacy has often been
marshalled too late and lacks political and financial
backing. That situation is all the more regrettable, as
we know that diplomacy can be effective in the most
complex of crises, as was demonstrated recently with
the agreement on Iran’s nuclear programme. Proper
implementation will of course be essential, and that
may encounter difficulties or delays. Nevertheless,
that historic deal should pave the way for greater
collaboration on other strategic issues affecting the
region.
The conflicts in the Middle East and North
Africa are set against complex historic backdrops and
geopolitical alliances. Council members frequently
find their own interests at stake, which is not exactly a
catalyst for effective decision-making. Yet the Council
is a collective organ mandated to maintain peace
and security on behalf of the entire United Nations
membership. The Council is not meant to be a forum for
pursuing national political goals. That is particularly
true for situations where civilian populations are
subject to massive crimes.
I would therefore like to remind Council members,
as well as all other States Members of the United
Nations, that they are invited to support the proposed
code of conduct regarding Security Council action
against genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes, prepared by the Accountability, Coherence,

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Transparency group. The proposed code calls for a
voluntary political pledge to support Council action in
such situations. It is, in other words, a pledge not to
leave civilians under attack to their fate. I hope that it
will also strengthen the resolve of Council members to
overcome divisions and enhance the sense of ownership
among non-permanent members.
The conflicts in the region are also marked by
extreme levels of impunity. Perpetrators of the most
serious crimes fear the crimes of revenge perpetrated
by their enemies more than they do trials in a court
of law. We have to make the fight against impunity
a building block in our efforts and signal to victims
that they are not forgotten. Ratifications of the Rome
Statute are important in that regard. A Security Council
referral of the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court, complemented by other accountability
efforts, is an obvious option. The counterarguments
raised in that regard — “let us not interfere with the
political process” — have frankly been overtaken by
the realities on the ground.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Her Excellency Ms. Tzipi Hotovely, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of Israel.
Ms. Hotovely (Israel): I would like to thank the
Russian Government for initiating this important debate
on a topic that is deeply troubling to all peace-loving
countries and peoples.
The scourge of terror is not new to Israel. Since
before our establishment and throughout our existence,
we have been contending with an ongoing terror
campaign. The Middle East and Africa have witnessed
a broad expansion of terror throughout the region.
Terror groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIS), Houthi militants, Hamas and Hizbullah
have a territorial dimension, which poses a particular
challenge. Moreover, the terror inspired by groups
such as Al-Qaida and ISIS has struck as far afield as
Australia, Belgium, France and elsewhere. If some
thought at first that the so-called Arab Spring would
give rise to a newly democratic Middle East, the vast
spread of terror regimes throughout the region has been
an alarming wake-up call.
Israel is surrounded by terror groups. They are to
be found on all of its frontiers: Hizbullah and Jabhat
Al-Nusra in the north, ISIS in the south and Hamas
in Gaza. Last year we were starkly reminded of the
magnitude of the threat we face when Hamas launched

S/PV.7527

thousands of missiles against Israeli civilian targets
and tunnelled under the border to strike at innocent
Israeli civilians.
Israel dealt with that huge security threat while
abiding by international law, and in many cases going
well beyond its requirements. Perhaps that explains
why many democracies have expressed an interest
in learning from our experience. One of the greatest
challenges is the fact that terror groups often exploit
and misuse the principles of international law in order
to advance their aims. For example, in the 2014 Gaza
war, Hamas turned the principles of international
humanitarian law on their head in its attack on Israel,
making massive use of human shields and deliberately
launching attacks on innocent civilians from United
Nations facilities and from playgrounds, hospitals,
mosques and schools.
Like a crime syndicate, Middle Eastern terrorism
would be nothing without its godfather, Iran. Empowered
in the wake of its agreement with the P5+1, Iran has
made no secret of its intention to use the sanctions
relief to expand its support for terror, especially for
terror proxies in the region and in the world. To defeat
that terror threat, the moderate States in the Middle
East must act together in confronting extremism and
in addressing its root causes: the absence of democracy
and the rule of law, the absence of women’s rights and
the lack of education about tolerance.
Palestinian society, where Hamas and other terror
groups maintain strong support, exemplifies the effects
of education towards violence and extremism. Any
society in which public squares are named for mass
murderers and children are encouraged to become
martyrs — shahids — will be fertile ground for
extremism and terrorism.
Terror has two main goals: to kill and to dispirit.
Of the many things needed to defeat terrorism, the one
thing in particular that stands out is clarity — clarity
of purpose and clarity of moral conviction. United, the
democratic world is capable of defeating the tidal wave
of terror sweeping the Middle East and threatening the
international community at large. To do so effectively,
international norms and laws need to be adapted to the
changing nature of the twenty-first century battlefield,
especially to the unique challenges that arise in
conflicts against rivals and those that deliberately
blur the distinction between military personnel and
non-combatants. In that regard, Israel is eager to

15-2955667/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

continue playing an active role in the work of United
Nations bodies in their international counter-terrorism
strategy.
The fight of democracy against terror will always
involve a balancing act between civil liberties and
national security. Israel has for decades been contending
with that dilemma and has succeeded in protecting
its civilians from terrorism while obeying the rule of
law. All countries facing the threat of terror today are
dealing with similar challenges.
As Israel has learned in its own prolonged
campaign against our ability to defeat terror, terror
belies our reverence for the sanctity of human life
and our fierce conviction to do battle with any and all
who strive to defile it, even when they cynically try to
use our principles against us. It is this conviction that
will ultimately ensure that the democratic world will
prevail.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Albert Koenders, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Mr. Koenders (Netherlands): The Kingdom of the
Netherlands aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.
Terrorism and violent extremism are timely issues
for the Security Council, so I thank you, Mr. President,
for this possibility to debate today. I will address three
issues: terrorism, the Global Counterterrorism Forum
and the rule of law.
The Netherlands firmly condemns all attacks by any
terrorist organization. Such attacks are disastrous for
peace, justice and development. Propelled into people’s
lives by the power of social media and the Internet,
terrorism has no moral or geographic boundaries.
Terrorist organizations are challenging our beliefs and
values, including — and maybe especially — those of
the peopled of the Maghreb and Mashreq regions. We
therefore welcome resolution 2199 (2015), initiated by
the Russian Federation. It obliges Member States to
take steps to prevent terrorist groups from receiving
donations and from benefiting from the trade in
oil, antiquities and hostages. We all know this still
continues. We still must implement the resolution to the
letter with precision.
We need to act collectively against those who
enslave women and children, behead innocent
civilians and destroy our cultural heritage. On Sunday,

68/83

30/09/2015

the Netherlands became a co-Chair of the Global
Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) following that of
the United States. The GCTF aims to reduce the
vulnerability of people around the world to terrorism
by preventing, combating and prosecuting terrorist
acts. Furthermore, it aims to counter incitement and
recruitment to terrorism. We are proud and humble
to have assumed the responsibility of co-Chair. We
will work closely with the other 29 members of that
pioneering body, in particular with the Kingdom of
Morocco.
In the past year, the GCTF paved the way for
resolution 2178 (2014). The resolution was a crucial
step against foreign terrorist fighters. Neverthess,
the number of foreign terrorist fighters continues to
increase. They come from a great variety of backgrounds
and countries, including my own. There have been 210
foreign terrorist fighters from the Netherlands to join
the ranks of terrorist organizations abroad.
The GCTF stands for less talk and more action
in close cooperation with other multilateral forums.
Through the GCTF, funds are channelled to support
those who need it for capacity-building. The Netherlands
recently allocated an additional €43 million for that
purpose.
Unlike the terrorists we fight, we act in clear
recognition of the moral and legal boundaries set by
the rule of law and human rights. We take due account
of the dilemmas posed by the demands for security and
privacy. Finding the proper balance is not easy, but the
Netherlands is convinced that the two are not mutually
exclusive.
First and foremost, terrorists aim to disrupt our
daily lives by instilling a sense of constant fear. In
the face of those actions, we need to stay true to our
own values. It means standing firm behind the guiding
principles that unite us here. We know how effective
the United Nations can be if the political will is there.
Sadly, the Council has so far failed us on Syria. The
Council has not acted even though the Syrian regime
has been carrying out a gruesome campaign of terror
against its own people, even though it has fostered the
creation of Daesh, or the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, and attracts terrorist recruits from across the
region. These actions constitute flagrant human rights
violations and abuses against the people of Syria. Let us
not forget the obligation we all have to protect civilians

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

and to follow the letter and the spirit of the Charter of
the United Nations.
If we look at what unites us, we do not simply fight
terrorism. We must fight for positive things, for things
that hold a more universal value. I am reminded of one
of the fundamental rights in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights: the freedom from fear. Formulated
almost 75 years ago by Mr. Franklin D. Roosevelt, a
President of Dutch descent, as one of the four freedoms
in his State of the Union speech of 6 January 1941,
this freedom is still too often absent today. Let this be
what we collectively strive for. Let us together reduce
the vulnerability of our people around the world to
terrorism.
That is also one of the reasons that the Kingdom
of the Netherlands has the ambition to be elected to the
Council next June for the period 2017-2018. We look
forward to cooperating with the Security Council in the
fight against international terrorism. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands has the ambition to continue being a
partner for peace, justice and development.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Peter Varghese, Secretary
for Foreign Affairs and Trade of Australia.
Mr. Varghese (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity for Australia to participate in this
meeting.
The nations of North Africa and the Middle East,
home to many of the world’s oldest human civilizations,
are at a critical point in their history as the region
struggles to contain conflict and violent extremism.
Some conflicts, such as between the Israelis and the
Palestinians, have defied decades of efforts to resolve
them. Australia has consistently supported a long-term,
enduring, sustainable peace in the Middle East. We
support a two-State solution, which recognizes that
Israel is a vibrant democracy in the region and that both
the Israeli and the Palestinian peoples have an inherent
right to exist within secure borders.
Other conflicts — in Libya and Yemen, for
example — may have flared in comparatively recent
times, yet their root causes have been many years in
the making. The underlying causes of these conflicts
are diabolically complex. The need for an effective
international response is most urgent in Iraq and Syria,
where Daesh is inflicting unspeakable brutality on
innocent people. The human costs of these conflicts

S/PV.7527

have escalated to horrific proportions. The destabilizing
effects have radiated across the region and beyond,
encouraging violence in scores of countries worldwide.
Australia is not immune from these conflicts.
Around 120 Australian citizens have travelled to Syria
or Iraq, many to fight for Daesh. With our partners,
Australia has responded to the crisis. We are a leading
contributor to the global counter-Daesh coalition. This
month, Australia extended air operations to target
Daesh in Syria, building on our operations in Iraq and
consistent with Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations.
Australia strongly refutes any criticism of the legal
basis for our operations in Syria. Our action is designed
to cut off Daesh’s capacity to sustain its operations
in Iraq, including the use of Syrian territory to train,
prepare attacks, resupply and move fighters across the
border. Article 51 of the Charter clearly recognizes
the inherent right of States to act in self-defence.
The Government of Syria has failed to constrain
Daesh’s continued attacks in Iraq from safe havens in
Syria. Australia, together with coalition partners, is
acting in response to the request for assistance by the
Government of Iraq, and is undertaking necessary and
proportionate military operations against the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant in Syria in the collective
self-defence of Iraq.
The Russian Federation has advised us of its
intention to undertake air strikes in Syria against
terrorist targets. If this is Russia’s real intent, its strikes
must focus on Daesh, which, by any measure, is the
most significant terrorist threat in Syria and Iraq.
Military action is a necessary but in no way sufficient
response to Daesh. Sustainable political settlements are
required to end the conflict. We support the efforts of
Iraq’s Prime Minister Al Abadi to seek reconciliation
and deliver inclusive governance for all Iraqis. We
continue to advocate for a political solution that can
bring an end to the brutal conflict in Syria, where
horrific atrocities by the parties — particularly the
Al-Assad regime, Daesh and Al-Qaida affiliate Jabhat
al-Nusra — have taken a devastating humanitarian
toll. We support the efforts of United Nations envoy de
Mistura towards a negotiated political transition. We
believe all transition options should be considered.
Australia is also working to meet the humanitarian
needs generated by the conflicts, permanently resettling
an additional 12,000 refugees drawn from Iraq and

15-2955669/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

Syria’s most vulnerable. We are working with the United
Nations to deliver food, water, health care, education,
emergency supplies and protection to more than
240,000 Iraqis and Syrians. This will bring Australia’s
contribution to help address the humanitarian crises in
Syria and Iraq to around $230 million since 2011.
We commend Iraq and Syria’s neighbours, notably
Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey, for the burden they have
shouldered.
Much more needs to be done. We encourage
Member States to give generously to the Iraq and Syria
humanitarian appeals. We must all support the Iraqi
and Syrian people in their desperate hour of need.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Gunnar Bragi Sveinsson,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iceland.
Mr. Sveinsson (Iceland): Our leaders have just
agreed on the Sustainable Development Goals to be
fulfilled by 2030. This forward-looking vision of hope
makes it clear that sustainable development, peace and
security are tightly related.
However, the Arab Spring, which raised so many
hopes just a few years ago, has given way to a situation
that, for many, amounts to a living hell. A large part
of the population of Syria has either been displaced in
their own land or has left its country altogether, driven
out by vicious attacks from Government forces or by
rebel groups. Libya is fragmented and achieving unity
between the disparate factions is proving very hard.
Iraq is divided. War rages in Yemen. The Palestine/
Israel situation and the unresolved Western Sahara/
Morocco dispute continue to fester. Security, human
rights and the rule of law are heavily compromised in a
string of countries in the region.
Across the region extreme terrorist forces, such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, succeed
in exploiting the situation, bringing further chaos and
misery. In addition, they pose a major threat to other
countries within and beyond the region, not least
through the spread of foreign terrorist fighters. The
fatal attraction of violence and extremist doctrines to
some young people in our societies presents a further
challenge.
Meanwhile neighbouring countries struggle to
address the massive humanitarian challenges. Turkey,
Lebanon and Jordan deserve praise for giving support
and safe havens to many millions. There has been a

70/83

30/09/2015

marked increase in the number of people from the region
trying to find refuge in Europe. But these numbers
are small compared to the millions of refugees in the
countries of origin and their neighbouring countries.
Iceland is determined to do its part in helping to
address the humanitarian aspects of this man-made
catastrophe. We believe it is most urgent to steer
assistance to the region. By improving the life of the
millions of displaced in the region, we will reduce the
desperation that drives them into the hands of traffickers.
The Icelandic Government has allocated $16 million to
supporting the vital work of frontline United Nations
institutions. We will also take an increased numbers of
refugees to Iceland.
Allow me to commend the Secretary-General for
holding the side event on migration today.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security. I
would like to join others in urging the members of the
Security Council to renew their efforts to find ways
to act together and put differences aside. I take note
of the Secretary-General’s observation in his recent
report on the future of United Nations peace operations
(S/2015/682). It states that his envoys find themselves in
situations where they search for ways to initiate political
processes even as Member States and regional actors
reinforce military and financial support to opposing
sides. The only way highly complex conflicts of the
type we see in this region will be resolved is through
united and concerted action by the Security Council.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Ammar,
Permanent Observer of the Cooperation Council for the
Arab States of the Gulf to the United Nations.
Mr. Al-Ammar (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for holding
this important meeting on the dangerous developments
in the Middle East and North Africa, from the Arab/
Israeli conflict to the bloody conflicts in Syria, Yemen,
Libya and Iraq, as well as the substantial material
damage and humanitarian consequences in the region.
This represents a great challenge for the international
community.
The Arab/Israeli conflict has always been a
major threat to the region and the entire world and
has consequences for the crises in the region. The
violations by the Israeli occupying forces of Muslim and

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Christian holy sites causing a change in the legal status
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque are a violation of international
customary laws. For that reason, we call on the Security
Council to assume its responsibility and take all
necessary steps to protect the Palestinian people and
their holy sites and to reach a long-lasting settlement that
would end the occupation of the Palestinian territory
and lead to the creation of a Palestinian State, on the
basis of the 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as its capital
and on the basis of a two-State solution. Otherwise this
will remain a source of instability and the worst excuse
to justify extremism and terrorism in the region.
The crisis in Syria, with all its implications and
current and future consequences, could lead to a real
disaster in the region and in the world. The Syrian
crisis, with all the crimes committed by the regime,
as well as the great material damage inflicted on
the people — involving millions of displaced and
thousands killed — has led to the displacement of
2.8 million Syrians. We have afforded them a legal
status, granting them freedom of movement. We have
allowed the children to attend schools and even to
register at our universities. Since 2011, the States of
the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) have provided
assistance totalling more than $4.3 billion. All those
efforts have been made so that we can stand beside our
fraternal people of Syria.
We underscore the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Syria. We are also committed to the
political solution of the Syrian crisis in line with the
Geneva communiqué of 30 June (S/2012/522, annex), so
that the Syrian people can live in dignity. The Security
Council should also fulfil its responsibility towards
the Syrian people so that we can end this humanitarian
crisis.
In Yemen, the best way to ensure stability and stop
the country from sliding into terrorism is to support the
legitimate authority, based on the GCC initiative and its
mechanisms. We need the implementation of resolution
2216 (2015).
The conflicts in our area provide fertile ground for
terrorism. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/
Daes is now the major threat for us all. Therefore, we
should reach a political solution to the crises that are
affecting our region. That is the best way to give hope
to people.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to His Holiness Archbishop Paul Richard

S/PV.7527

Gallagher, Secretary for Relations with States of the
Holy See.
Archbishop Gallagher: My delegation wishes
to thank Russia’s presidency of the Security Council
for convening this timely open debate on the theme
“Settlement of conflicts in the Middle East and North
Africa and countering the terrorist threat in the region”.
In his address to the General Assembly last Friday,
Pope Francis said
“I must ... renew my repeated appeals concerning
the painful situation in the entire Middle East,
North Africa and other African countries where
Christians, along with other cultural and ethnic
groups, and including those adherents of the
majority religion who have no desire to be caught
up in the hatred and madness, have been forced to
witness the destruction of their places of worship,
their cultural and religious heritage and their homes
and property, and are faced with the alternatives
of either of fleeing or of paying with their lives or
with enslavement for their devotion to goodness
and peace.” (A/70/PV.3, p. 5)
The migration crisis in the Mediterranean and in
many parts of Europe has been provoked in a significant
manner by violence and persecution perpetrated by
terrorist groups in the Middle East and North Africa.
The body of the three-old Aylan Kurdi, washed
ashore in Turkey, represents the thousands who have
perished in the perilous journey to flee from violence
and persecution. Aylan’s limp and lifeless body cries
to the international community, in particular to the
Council, to do all it can to stop the madness, so that
other innocent lives like his may be spared from the
same tragic fate. Whatever we do from this moment
on will be too little and too late for Aylan and for the
thousands whose lives were ended due to our collective
indifference and geopolitical and national rivalries.
But from now on, every action to spare even just one
Aylan from death and from all forms of atrocity is not
only timely but urgent. The Holy See is calling on the
international community not to remain silent and inert
before all the tragedies happening even as we speak and
before the watch of the Council.
Enumerating the multiple and complex emergencies
that the Middle East and North Africa continue to
face on an unprecedented scale once more before
the Council is unnecessary. But the Holy See feels
compelled to echo the pleadings of the 12 million

15-2955671/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

30/09/2015

Syrians in need of humanitarian assistance, of whom
7million are internally displaced and 5 million have
become refugees in other countries. My delegation
also considers it a grave duty to denounce the utterly
senseless destruction of some of the world’s priceless
cultural patrimony in Syria. The situation is extremely
grave and is worsening day by day. The settlement of
the conflict in Syria must therefore be at the top of the
priorities of the Council and of all the authorities in
Syria and in the Middle East.

In conclusion, I would like to return to the address
of Pope Francis to the General Assembly last Friday,
when he said,

My delegation avails of this opportunity to reiterate
the Holy See’s profound gratitude to those countries in
the region that, in spite of their own difficult situations
and limited resources, have welcomed and taken care
of the millions of refugees. On its part, the Catholic
Church remains active at the forefront in providing
humanitarian aid to all those in need with all the means
at its disposal.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency to Mr. Sergiy Kyslitsya, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.

Flooding the region with more and more destructive
weapons will not end the violence and the suffering.
What the region needs are negotiated political solutions
to the conflicts that continue to engulf it. The region
needs those solutions now, if it is going to win the war
against terror; if its populations are not going to be
constrained to flee; if freedom and stable democracy
are going to have any chance to flourish in the region;
if the leaders of the region are going to learn to settle
disputes peacefully; and if outside forces and Powers
are going to refrain from imposing their wills in the
region.
Any lasting solution to the conflicts in the Middle
East, and indeed to all conflicts in the world, must
consider the centrality of the inviolable dignity and
rights of the human person, regardless of race, religion,
political belief or differences. Many individual citizens
and groups in the region have suffered and continue
to suffer death and all forms of violence because of
their religion, ethnicity or political beliefs. Terrorists
must never be allowed to destroy centuries of peaceful
coexistence between Muslims and Christians in the
region. The lie of terrorist groups that claim to kill and
oppress in the name of religion must be denounced in
the strongest possible terms. How can we stand by as
our fellow human beings are being persecuted, exiled,
killed, burned or beheaded solely because they hold a
different religious creed or they happen to belong to a
minority group?

72/83

“War is the negation of all rights and a dramatic
assault on the environment. If we want true integral
human development for all, we must work tirelessly
to avoid war between nations and between peoples.”
(ibid.)
Now is the time for life-saving action.

Mr. Kyslitsya (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to underscore that this open debate represents a
common contribution to the efforts of the international
community in addressing terrorism and violent
extremism, not only in the region of the Middle East
and North Africa but also in a global context. Ukraine
fully supports the Security Council’s position that all
forms of terrorism constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security, and that
any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable
regardless of their motivations.
Ukraine supports the central role of the United
Nations in the global effort to suppress international
terrorism and promote international cooperation in
that field. We reiterate our strong support for the set
of measures in resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014)
aimed at resolving the acute problems associated with
foreign terrorist fighters. We share the concern that
foreign terrorist fighters can increase a conflict’s
intensity and duration. Dealing with the threat they pose
requires that the factors underlying the phenomenon
be comprehensively addressed. Taking into account
the presence of foreign militants and terrorists in the
Donbas region of Ukraine, some provisions of those
resolutions are also applicable to the situation in
Ukraine.
We remain deeply concerned about the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other associated
terrorist entities and about the negative impact of their
violent extremist ideology and destabilizing actions
in the Middle East and North Africa, including their
devastating humanitarian impact on the civilian
population, which has led to the displacement of
millions. We strongly condemn the crimes and acts

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7527

of mass violence that ISIL has committed against
civilians, particularly in Syria and Iraq, including their
most vulnerable minorities. Ukraine shares the view
that the activity and violent ideology of terrorist groups
such as ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra constitute a threat
to the entire international community. We support all
possible steps on the part of the international coalition,
including appropriate military operations against ISIL
forces, aimed at banishing the terrorist threat from the
region. We also believe that the fight against ISIL and
other terrorist groups must be accompanied by a positive
political transformation in Syria and democratization
of its State institutions.

countering ISIL and violent extremism. We consider it
an important step towards achieving unity in addressing
the global threats posed by terrorist organizations and
their activity.

At the same time, combating the activities of
individual terrorists and terrorist groups is insufficient if
the problem of sponsor States is not properly addressed.
That is true in the cases of both the Middle East and the
Donbas region of Ukraine. Considering certain current
developments in Syria, particularly Russia’s military
build-up and use of force there, we share the opinion
that so far its policies seem to be about advancing its
own narrowly defined interests, which do not coincide
with interests of the Syrian people. In that regard, we
are deeply concerned about the reports from Syria
today that the air strikes carried out by the Russian air
force have resulted in the death of dozens of civilians.

What seemed at its start to be a spring in the
Middle East has turned into an autumn of despair and
suffering for its people. As we discuss the conflicts in
the Middle East today, people in the region are dying,
and their exodus has created a humanitarian catastrophe
thousands of miles from its source. We must look at
the reasons behind this desperate situation. First, the
people’s legitimate aspirations have not been fulfilled.
Secondly, external interventions, both overt and covert,
have exacerbated the conflicts. Poor governance, of
course, is a common thread in many of these situations.
This year, world leaders gathered here in New York
to talk about the transformation of the development
agenda over the next 15 years. The agenda is all about
keeping people at its centre; the question is, have we
actually put people at the centre? If we had, young
Aylan Al-Kurdi would not have suffered his tragic fate
in search of a better life.

We also find it very disturbing that attempts are
being made to tilt the discussion on the Syrian crisis in
the direction of how best to accommodate the interests
of the Russian Federation in Syria, rather than how
to address the root causes of the current crisis in the
Middle East, while ignoring the plight and genuine
interests of the Syrian people. If we allow this approach
we risk exacerbating the situation in Syria, which
will continue to drive Syrians out of their homes and
thus worsen the migration crisis. In the light of this,
we welcome the assurances made by the leaders of the
anti-ISIL coalition to the effect that further interaction
with the Russian Federation in the fight against ISIL
will not come at the expense of the integrity of their
position vis-à-vis the Russian Federation on issues of
principle in other parts of the world where Russia has
been directly implicated in conflict situations.
Anti-terrorism activities should play a central
role in United Nations efforts to address transnational
threats to security, which have grown dramatically
and are not confined within national boundaries. In
that regard, we welcomed yesterday’s holding, at the
initiative of the United States, of a summit of leaders on

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Aizaz Ahmad Chaudhry,
Foreign Secretary of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.
Mr. Chaudhry (Pakistan): I would like to begin
by thanking Foreign Minister Lavrov on his initiative
in convening a meeting of the Security Council on
this very important issue, which is a real threat to
international peace and security.

If we dig deeper into the underlying reasons for
this crisis, the Palestinian issue remains one of the
primary causes of instability in the region. Without a
just, sustainable and enduring resolution of the ArabIsraeli conflict, peace in the Middle East will remain a
pipe dream, and experience tells us that without peace
in the Middle East, peace and security for all of us will
remain under threat. An independent and viable State of
Palestine, based on the pre-1967 borders, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital, remains the only solution.
We must ask ourselves why Daesh has become
the hydra-headed monster that it is today in Syria
and Iraq. Were there lost opportunities? Could the
Security Council, in particular, and the international
community, in general, have done more to prevent the
situation from deteriorating and, more importantly, can
we do something now? In our opinion, the answer to all
those questions is an emphatic yes. Disputing what is

15-2955673/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

past is no use. We must now unite behind the mediation
efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. Today the
regional Powers, the supporters of all the parties to the
conflict and the paramount members of the Council
and the international community must all decide that
enough is enough. This war must end and we must all
contribute to that goal.
In Yemen, the country’s legitimate Government
must be restored, but that should be done through
negotiations. A peace process must be launched based
on the Council’s resolutions and the work tackled at a
national dialogue conference in order to chart a path to
a peaceful settlement.
Violent extremism and terrorism, whatever
their causative factors, thrive in an environment of
desperation and frustration. What could be more
frustrating than a conflict that is on the Security
Council’s agenda yet remains unresolved for decades?
The relationship between prolonged unresolved conflict
and instability is obvious. Only helplessness can emerge
from protracted conflicts in which the people have
been prevented from exercising their legitimate right
to self-determination. The international community as
a whole, and the Security Council in particular, should
play a just and effective role in conflict resolution in
an expeditious manner. If the United Nations cannot
ensure a people’s legitimate right to self-determination,
who can?
Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations is
reprehensible. Nothing justifies its despicable acts of
barbarism and cruelty, but if we want to counter it, we
must be ready to root it out completely. Fighting only
the symptoms of terrorism will not do. We will have
to address its causes, political, social and economic.
It must be a comprehensive fight, involving much
more than military might. Pessimistic arguments
must be countered and hearts and minds won. Above
all, a positive environment must be created in which
individuals can have an optimistic outlook on their
lives.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Montenegro.
Mr. Šćepanović (Montenegro): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your presidency of
the Council this month and on organizing this important
open debate.
In addressing the topic of today’s meeting, I would
like to begin on a more general note with a point that I
74/83

30/09/2015

believe can never be emphasized enough. In discharging
its important duty to maintain international peace and
security, the Security Council might consider making
better use of the options at its disposal in order to
prevent conflicts from emerging. Making progress in
shifting from a culture of reaction to one of prevention
continues to be essential. Potential crises should be
addressed before they fully break out, and proactive
steps should be taken promptly in order to mitigate any
escalation of violence. Once a crisis unfolds, measures
based on Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations should be given priority.
In that context, let me single out mediation because
it represents such a cost-effective tool for the prevention
and peaceful resolution of conflict. But it has largely
been underutilized. As a sign of my country’s firm
dedication to advancing the cause of mediation,
particularly in the historically very turbulent and
conflict-prone of the Mediterranean, which largely
covers the area that is the subject of our discussion
today, Montenegro plans to host the next annual seminar
in 2016 within the framework of the initiative on the
promotion of mediation in the Mediterranean. I remain
convinced that the best and only truly sustainable way
to resolve differences and rectify tensions and conflict
situations is through peaceful means, in the spirit of
dialogue, and by committing to diplomatic and political
efforts and tools.
Any political solution has be accompanied by a
sufficient humanitarian response in order to alleviate
large-scale suffering and the consequences of serious
human rights violations for the affected populations.
The absence of those critical elements in the wake of
continuing violence has a devastating toll not only
on civilians, but on the international community in
general, to which the Syrian and current refugee crises
attest.
An environment of unabated conflict with total
impunity, such as that in Syria, has an additional,
significantly negative aspect. It provides fertile
ground for the expansion of terrorism. Therefore, the
international community should recognize its vested
interest in rallying around and fostering decisive action
with a view to bringing an end to the long-standing
crisis — sooner rather than later — because the cost of
inaction is enormous. The Syrian crisis is also a reason
why Montenegro believes that cases of mass atrocities
ought to be tackled with greater decisiveness by the
Security Council.

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

When one speaks of long-standing crises, the first
to come to mind is the Israeli-Palestinian situation.
The persistent stalemate and status quo do not favour
anyone. With the ongoing crisis in Syria and Iraq and
the emergency created by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIS), the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
has fallen by the wayside, and this has to change. Key
international actors, especially the Quartet, should play
a reinvigorated role and bring the sides back to the
negotiation table. The parameters of a comprehensive
peace package based on a two-State solution are
already in place. All stakeholders have to recognize the
potential of a final status agreement, as it can go a long
way towards building trust and easing tensions between
Arabs and Israel, as well as reducing radicalization in
the region. The situation in the many fragile countries
throughout the Middle East and North Africa — as if it
were not already complex enough — has been further
complicated by the presence and spread of terrorists,
mainly ISIL, which now makes it necessary to seek
parallel, political and counter-terrorism solutions.
In Libya and Yemen, achieving stability and
countering the terrorist threat requires the creation
of inclusive reconciliation in Government, as well as
consolidating and strengthening the security sector
with international support. For countries emerging from
conflict, where peace is fragile, institution-building
and institutional reform are crucial. Although creating
national bodies that promote human rights and the rule
of law and socioeconomic development is a long-term
project, it is a prerequisite for sustaining peace. Those
countries require targeted and effective international
assistance under the auspices of the United Nations so
that they will be in a position to protect their people and
deliver basic services.
We now find ourselves in desperate need to
take joint, comprehensive action against the very
sophisticated threats of ISIL, which is challenging the
wider landscape and endangering the very existence of
certain States. In dealing with ISIL and international
terrorism, it is vital to counter incitement to terrorism
and stop the spread of extremist ideology. One
recommendation in that regard is for religious leaders
to play a more prominent and vocal role in denouncing
the goals that terrorists are aggressively pursuing by
abusing the values of Islam. It is worth recalling that,
in relation to the fight against terrorism, the same can
be said for the migrant crisis, which requires a broad
approach that goes to the root-causes of the problem,
rather than addressing the symptoms.

S/PV.7527

The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters poses
another challenge that requires a resolute response. My
country has made legislative changes and stands ready
to further cooperate with a view to make its contribution
to the full implementation of resolution 2178 (2014).
In closing, I would like to welcome the signing
of the agreement on the Iranian nuclear programme,
which is an important step towards enhancing regional
and global peace and security. We express our hope that
the conference on establishing a Middle East zone free
of weapons of mass destruction will take place soon, as
it also has the potential to contribute significantly to the
renewal of trust and the lasting stability of the region.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I thank Russia at the outset for having convened this
important meeting on the maintenance of international
peace and security, the settlement of conflicts in the
Middle East and North Africa and countering the
terrorist threat in the region.
At a time when peace is being challenged and
terrorists are becoming increasingly strong in
numerous regions around the planet, I reaffirm that
the region of the Middle East and North Africa is no
different from the rest of the world. They are part and
parcel of the global fabric. If justice were to prevail
and domination were to be eliminated; if neighbourly
relations among nations were the rule, peace and
security would follow — hence the importance of
today’s proposals. The settlement of current conflicts
needs to draw on a rigorous analysis of the root causes,
which would facilitate the search for a resolution. The
conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa actually,
particularly the Israeli occupation, arise from a small
number of factors, including exclusion, domination and
the failure to respect international law. Those are the
very same causes that have given rise to terrorism and
its territorial expansion.
The ongoing Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territory, continued aggression against the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and settler violence are among the direct causes
of many conflicts in the region. The hardships imposed
by occupation and a sense of despair are among the
reasons that attract people to terrorism. Accordingly,
the international community must act immediately to
put an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestine and
other Arab territories and work to establish a Palestine

15-2955675/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

State with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with international law and the Arab Peace Initiative
that my country proposed over 13 years ago.
The atrocities committed against the heroic Syrian
people, including the criminal use of barrel bombs
and poisonous gas by the Syrian Government, can
be counted among the reasons for the expansion of
terrorism and violent extremism that are undermining
international peace and security. Achieving peace and
security in Syria requires a broad coalition to deal with
the profound causes that allow the Syrian regime to
remain in power and refuse to comply with the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), which called for the
creation of a transitional government with expanded
powers. The Al-Assad regime cannot participate in any
war against terrorism because it is the very embodiment
of terrorism. Any resolution of the Syrian must be
based on the conviction that those who have the blood
of their own people on their hands cannot be part of any
settlement of the crisis.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has fought terrorism
everywhere and has taken part in the international
coalitions against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). The countries that now claim to be coming to
fight ISIL’s terrorism cannot do so while supporting the
regime in Syria and its foreign allies such as Hizbullah,
Saraya Al-Quds as well as other terrorist faith-based
groups. In that regard, my delegation expresses its deep
concern over the military operations of the Russian
Federation in Homs and Hama. There are no Daesh
troops at the present time in those cities. Those attacks
have claimed a number of civilian victims. We demand
an immediate end to those attacks, which must not be
repeated.
The attempts at domination and interference in the
affairs of States and attempts to worsen confessional
rifts by creating divisions, such as Iran has done in a
number of States in the region, are processes that history
had proven to be doomed to fail, They lead to the denial
of rights and the deprivation and denial of political
rights and provide further ground for terrorism. Also,
my country has supported the measures adopted by the
Iraqi Government to restore balance in the political life
of that country and to include all components of the
Iraqi people in order to fight terrorism.
In brotherly Yemen we have seen how international
legality has been under siege. We have seen the Iranian
dictate undermining all the gains of the Yemeni people.

76/83

30/09/2015

It is for that reason that we responded to the appeal
from the Yemeni Government through its President
Hadi Mansour. We believe that the resolution of the
conflict in Yemen entails an open dialogue between the
various components of Yemen in accordance with the
peace initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council and its
mechanism and with Security Council resolution 2216
(2015).
It is reprehensible that Iran continues to politicize
the regrettable incident that took place during the Hajj
pilgrimage. It is equally reprehensible that Iran does
not show respect for the sanctity of the pilgrimage and
the lives of the victims. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
has always sought to insure the security of pilgrims. We
have thwarted numerous Iranian attempts to carry out
sabotage over the years. We express our condolences to
the bereaved families of the pilgrims. We will conduct
the necessary investigations and will punish anyone
who turns out to have failed in his or her duty, but we
will not allow anyone to attempt to exploit that human
tragedy.
Lastly, Sir, the resolution of the conflicts in the
Middle East certainly requires a rigorous analysis of
their reasons and root causes. We also reaffirm the need
to end the Israeli occupation of the Arab territories
and to halt the abuses being committed by the Syrian
authorities, International legality, good neighbourliness
and non-interference in the affairs of other States need
to be respected. Otherwise, fighting terrorism and
overcoming terrorism will be no longer within our
reach.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): Thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today’s debate. We thank today’s briefers for
their comprehensive briefings on this important topic.
We very much appreciate your circulating a very useful
concept note (S/2015/678) in that context.
The situation in the Middle East region continues to
remain fragile and unpredictable, with unprecedented
changes in several countries in the region. The ongoing
conflict in Syria, the buildup of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and new flash points, such
as in Yemen, are examples of that. Besides having
implications for peace and stability, those conflicts also
impose serious economic costs for the region and the
whole world, which will have a major impact on the
prospects for implementing the development objectives

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7527

of Agenda 2030, which our leaders unanimously adopted
just last week (see General Assembly resolution 70/1).

United Nations mediation efforts will assist the people
of Yemen in finding a consensus-based solution.

The concept note correctly emphasizes the need
for politically negotiated solutions to conflicts. It
clearly delineates three important measures that all
of us in the international community should take in
order to counter terrorism, overcome interreligious and
sectarian discord, and extend humanitarian assistance.
All conflicts result in the uprooting of the lives and
aspirations of ordinary people, and we therefore expect
the Council to invest more in political efforts to resolve
them.

It is our view that the prerogative of national
authorities to resolve internal crises should be
respected as a cardinal principle. We are convinced that
the interventionist trend, using humanitarian concerns
as a pretext, runs the danger of exacerbating conflict
between and within countries.

We are deeply concerned at the ongoing violence in
Syria and the loss of human lives. India has consistently
called for a comprehensive and peaceful resolution of
the crisis by bringing all parties to the conflict to the
negotiating table. It has to be a Syrian-led process,
taking into account the legitimate aspirations of the
people of Syria. There can be no military solution. We
welcome all initiatives in that direction, including the
efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria,
Staffan de Mistura, for restarting the political talks.
Our position on the Middle-East Peace Process is
also very clear. India supports a negotiated solution
resulting in a sovereign, independent, viable and united
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living within secure and recognized borders, side by
side and at peace with Israel, as endorsed in the Quartet
Road Map and relevant Security Council resolutions.
India has always played a proactive role in garnering
support for the Palestinian cause in multilateral forums.
We supported the recent vote in the General Assembly
on raising the flags of Palestine today (General
Assembly resolution 69/320).
We are deeply alarmed at the ongoing violence
and intensified militia warfare in Libya. We call for
continued political negotiations. The situation in Iraq is
also a matter of concern for the entire comity of nations.
We are particularly concerned at the spillover effects of
the instability in Iraq resulting from increased terrorist
activities in the region. We strongly support the Iraqi
people and Government in their efforts to overcome
the crisis, uphold national sovereignty and preserve
territorial integrity.
India remains deeply concerned about the
worsening political and security situation in Yemen.
We have been urging all concerned parties in Yemen to
amicably resolve their differences, and we hope that the

India is committed to combating terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations. India believes in a
comprehensive approach to countering the threat posed
by ISIL and other terrorist groups and individuals.
The Council should be more transparent and
uncompromising when considering and adopting its
decisions on countering terrorism. India stands ready
to extend full cooperation to the Council in countering
terrorism.
The concept note asks what needs to be done to
see that the Council’s resolutions are implemented. The
ineffectiveness of the Council is rooted in the nature and
working procedures of this body. We must implement
the mandate of our leaders, given ten years ago, for
early reforms of the Council to make it more effective
and representative. That would impact not only the
conventional crises the Council is called upon to resolve,
but even more so the new and emerging challenges to
international peace and security, especially those posed
by terrorism. We therefore hope that this debate will
endorse action by the United Nations during its ongoing
seventieth anniversary session to conclude negotiations
on reforming the Council, so that the Council can play
an important role in ensuring a strongly supportive
international environment for our collective efforts
to eradicate poverty within a generation while
implementing Agenda 2030.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in English): I
would like to start by presenting the apologies of our
Permanent Representative, who is currently receiving
His Royal Highness Prince Moulay Rachid, who will
address the General Assembly in a few minutes.
(spoke in Arabic)
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
for presiding over this meeting and for convening
members to consider this very important subject. All of
us are trying to maintain peace and security and settle

15-2955677/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

conflicts in a peaceful manner and counter all forms of
extremism.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his enlightening briefing. We appreciate the great
efforts he has made to raise awareness about the need to
maintain peace and security and to counter extremism.
We are meeting at a time when the international
community is celebrating the seventieth anniversary of
the Charter of the United Nations, which emphasizes
the need to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and the importance of finding
peaceful resolutions to conflicts. The current conflicts
spreading across the world and the absence of peaceful
solutions via dialogue and consensus pursuant to the
Charter have contributed to igniting conflicts among
brothers who had previously lived in harmony and
peace and served the interests of their nation and their
prosperity.
We cannot talk about maintaining peace and
security without discussing the question of Palestine.
In that regard, we are concerned at the escalation that
Israel has opted for in dealing with Al-Quds, especially
since 13 September 2015. Israel is committing grave
violations against the Al-Aqsa Mosque and carrying out
incursions against, and abuse of, worshippers in blatant
violation of the sensitivities of millions of Muslims
and in defiance of many international conventions
and agreements. Israel is also trying to undermine the
status quo of Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
The Kingdom of Morocco is playing a role in
these issues through His Majesty Mohammed VI at
the head of the Al-Quds Committee, which supports
the Jerusalemites and upholds the Palestinian cause.
We will continue to support our Palestinian brothers
in creating their independent State with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital. We urge that Israel withdraw
from all the Palestinian occupied territories to the 1967
borders.
Following Israel’s acts of aggression, the Committee
was convened without delay under the auspices of
His Majesty, who has also met with Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas to consider the grave situation. Through the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation Ministerial
Contact Group on defending the cause of Palestine
and Al-Quds Al-Sharif, which defends the Palestinian
cause, we met on 26 September on the margins of the
seventieth session of the General Assembly. At that
meeting, we adopted a declaration that condemns the

78/83

30/09/2015

Israeli violations, which constitute an unprecedented
provocation of the sensitivities of hundreds of millions
of Muslim worshippers in the world and which could
lead to additional interreligious and sectarian conflict.
Such violations undermine all efforts to reach a twoState solution and only serve to increase extremism.
The Kingdom of Morocco will continue to be
true in its support for the Palestinian people and
their inalienable rights, the foremost of which are the
creation of an independent State with East Jerusalem as
its capital on the basis of the June 1967 borders, in the
context of a two-State solution by which it would live
side by side in peace and harmony with Israel.
All prospects before us are at an impasse. Crises
are unfolding before our eyes, especially in Syria, but
also in Yemen and Libya. This situation fuels terrorism,
which continues to spread in the Middle East. Since
June 2014, Daesh has occupied many regions in Iraq,
Syria and Libya. Boko Haram is prevailing in West
Africa, as is Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. These
organizations are fragmenting States and are now
controlling parts of them. They have enslaved women,
carried out rape, kidnapped children and the elderly,
and committed massacres that are tantamount to war
crimes of and a blatant violation of international law,
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
They have also destroyed places of worship — mosques
and churches, principally — and have oppressed many
minorities, even going so far as to destroy their heritage.
These terrorist groups are also stalking conflict areas in
order to be drawn into the fighting and thereby attract
more youth to these hot spots.
According to United Nations reports, there are
more than 25,000 foreign terrorist fighters from at least
100 States, especially in Syria and Iraq. These fighters
are being attracted by many means: their poverty is
being exploited, and the Internet, particularly social
networks, is being used to tempt them. In that context,
if youth finds itself before closed doors, if political
and economic setbacks are all they know, if there is
no governance, if there is despair and deprivation,
increasing numbers of them will be tempted to ride the
waves of clandestine migration. They will be exploited
by the mafias specializing in human trafficking. This
tragedy unfolding before us, including the drowning
of people, demands that we quickly find a solution.
We must find a way to provide people with decent
livelihoods so that they do not turn into massive armies
of terrorists.

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

My delegation condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. Terrorism cannot be attributed
to any religion, ethnic group, nation, culture or
civilization. It is a criminal act. Since the attacks
of 11 September 2001, Morocco has participated
in international efforts to fight terrorism. We have
cooperated with various United Nations agencies in
devising strategies to fight terrorism. In particular, we
have tried to promote the implementation of resolution
2178 (2014), on foreign terrorist fighters, and resolution
2199 (2015), on the financing of terrorism. We have also
been actively involved in the Global Counterterrorism
Forum, which last September adopted the Hague–
Marrakech Memorandum on Good Practices for a More
Effective Response to the Foreign Terrorist Fighters
Phenomenon. Together with the Netherlands, we
co-chair a working group on foreign terrorist fighters.
Furthermore, the Moroccan city of Al-Jadida hosted a
conference with the United Nations on foreign terrorist
fighters. We have also adopted a security strategy and
modernized and updated our legal framework as a part
of our national human development initiative.
Morocco has always been involved in peace-loving
efforts. We have been part of many United Nations
peacekeeping operations all over the world, especially
in Africa. We have supported all constructive
approaches to lifting countries out of crisis. His
Majesty King Mohammed VI has sponsored peaceful
solutions in many regions, especially in the Mano River
Basin. Morocco has also hosted many dialogue sessions
among Libyan parties. We hope that an agreement will
be adopted and signed soon. When that occurs, we will
have helped the people of Libya to give form to their
deepest desire since they achieved their independence.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Minami (Japan): Allow me to express my
gratitude to the President for convening this meeting,
and to Secretary-General for his briefing.
We continue to witness a series of conflicts in the
Middle East and North Africa with repercussions that
extend far beyond the region. The rise of terrorism,
and the mass exodus of refugees, is a clear sign of the
gravity of the situation. The effective responses against
it may not be easy to ascertain. However, one thing is
certain: e must not only confront the challenges at hand,
but also address the underlying factors that fuel them.

S/PV.7527

Japan has been swift and steadfast in its response
to the current refugee crisis. Yesterday, Prime Minister
Shinzo Abe announced that Japan would provide
approximately $810 million dollars in assistance this
year to refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) from Syria and Iraq — a three-fold increase over
2014. In addition, approximately $2.5 million dollars
in assistance will be extended to European countries,
such as the Republic of Serbia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, which are receiving refugees.
News of refugees and terrorism is coming from
communities where economic prospects are truncated,
civilians are indiscriminately attacked and families
uprooted. In response, Japan seeks to empower
individuals and build economically sustainable
communities. That is in line with the concept of human
security that we have been advocating for decades.
Therefore, the $2.5 billion dollars in assistance that
Japan is extending to the Middle East and North
Africa region targets not only Governments but also
the most vulnerable in society, such as women and
children. Women and children, however, can also work
against the spread of extremist ideologies and serve as
effective drivers of peace. Malala Yusafzai’s story best
epitomizes that. A Nobel Laureate, Malala feared no
bullet in defense of her right to education. She is now an
inspiration for millions. We all remember at the opening
day of the sustainable development Summit, when she
emphasized that education was hope and peace. Let us
heed her courageous call.
In Syria, where access to education has been
severely hampered, Japan has helped reach more than
2.6 million children with textbooks and educational
programmes under the “Back to Learning” programme,
in partnership with UNICEF and others. In Palestine
and neighboring countries, Japan has long been one of
the principal contributors to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, which provides education to 480,000 Palestinian
refugee children.
Mothers, wives and daughters, with influential
voices within the family, can serve as bulwarks against
the spread of extremist ideologies. However, atrocious
acts committed by groups such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and Boko Haram attest to how
women are frequently abused in conflicts. Japan will
continue to support the Office of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zainab Hawa Bangura, as its
largest contributor. Moreover, we have increased our

15-2955679/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

30/09/2015

contribution to UN-Women by 10-fold over the past
two years, and supported the economic empowerment
of refugees and IDPs through vocational training and
other programmes.

dialogue. Other factors, including socioeconomic ones,
interference by outside parties and the pursuance of
the regime change doctrine by some has also played a
significant role in perpetuating conflicts and instability.

Japan firmly believes that empowering individuals
and strengthening communities, in line with the
concept of human security, will facilitate political
solutions, which are ultimately needed in the region.
Japan therefore supports the good offices of the
United Nations in the Middle East and North Africa
region, including in Syria, Yemen and Libya. We also
look to the Security Council to play an increasingly
constructive role in achieving political solutions. Japan
will continue to tackle the imminent challenges at hand
and cement the foundations for sustainable peace and
prosperity in the region.

As terrorism and violent extremism spreads, the
international community must reflect on an appropriate
response, because it is clear that our actions thus far
have fallen short of what is required. Terrorism and
violent extremism continue to kill and maim innocent
people, damage property and infrastructure, foster fear
in local communities, undermine social and economic
confidence and, in many cases, entrench the forces of
poverty.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): The Security
Council is meeting today in the context of growing
international concern about the rise of terrorism and
violent extremism, with their distorted ideology
and accompanying brutality. South Africa therefore
commends the Russian Federation for holding this
thematic open debate on the matter.
My delegation agrees with the assessment that
the situation in the Middle East and North Africa
is characterized by a vicious cycle of violence and
instability, fuelled in part by a sharp deterioration in the
socioeconomic conditions of the region and its peoples.
The lack of progress on political dialogue and the
absence of a sustainable long-term solution has created
space for terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and Syria, Al-Qaida and others associated with
them to exploit divisions for the furtherance of their
distorted beliefs. No belief system that requires violent
enforcement can be regarded as an acceptable standard
for civilization, and South Africa condemns such
actions in the strongest possible terms. It is therefore
critical that the discussions on violent extremism and
terrorism in parts of Africa and the Middle East look
into the root causes of the problem, and not just the
symptoms.
The most prevalent cause of the current trend
in terrorism and the breeding ground for violent
extremism is primarily the result of unabated war and
conflict in a region where for a very long time there has
been a preference for military action instead of political

80/83

The Council has a Charter-mandated role to
maintain international peace and security. It must
therefore be at the forefront of the efforts to curb the
scourge of terrorism and violent extremism. South
Africa has long been critical of the one-size-fits-all
approach to addressing conflicts. The current situation
in the Middle East and North Africa requires greater
engagement on the part of the Council, with all the
relevant role-players, including regional organizations.
The proximity of regional and subregional organizations
will allow the Council to broaden its approach to
include important elements that can contribute to the
prevention of conflict, such as cultural orientation,
local preferences and local expertise in developing
strategies.
The Security Council’s failure and inconsistency
in addressing the continued unrest and instability in
the region has resulted in multiple and widespread
unintended consequences, such as the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, organized crime,
kidnapping for ransom, cross-border terror attacks
and the bloody persecution of religious minorities at
unprecedented levels. It is also fuelling the refugee
crisis in Europe, the worst since the end of the Second
World War.
While all these factors in themselves constitute
crises, collectively they create a serious threat to
international peace and security. Therefore, South
Africa once again calls on the Security Council to
redouble its efforts to promote the conditions for
inclusive dialogue aimed at achieving sustainable
political solutions to the conflicts in the region.
Nowhere has the Council been as ineffective
as in the manner in which it has addressed peace in
the Middle East. The South African Government

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

believes that the only way to bring about lasting
peace in the Middle East is to have a comprehensive
and unconditional negotiated settlement to end the
Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories and an
immediate end to Israel’s continued blockade of Gaza.
That will contribute to peace and security throughout
the Middle East. We agree with the Secretary-General’s
assessment that we must “guard against the dangerous
drift in the Middle East peace process” and that “it is
essential for Israelis and Palestinians to re-engage and
for the international community to pressure the parties
to do so.” (see A/70/PV.13) Similarly, Security Council
action in Syria, Libya and Yemen should be geared
towards promoting inclusive political solutions.
Thematic debates of this nature are necessary in
order to ensure that, as Member States, we agree on
a united strategy to counter terrorism and violent
extremism, thereby maintaining international peace
and security. My delegation stands ready to continue
constructive engagement to uphold the centrality of the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations in that regard.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): I would
like to thank the Russian presidency for convening this
timely and important debate.
The recent developments in the Middle East and
North Africa region are worrisome, even terrifying.
Violent extremism spreads, feeding on long-standing
frustration and grievances. More often than not,
repeated calls for a political solution sound hollow, as
they are not met by unified action on the part of the
international community. In the face of the triple crises
arising from violent extremism, deadlocked political
transitions and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, all
stakeholders, including the United Nations, should take
more responsibility to overcome those complex and
intertwined problems. Against that backdrop, I wish to
make three points.
First, we need to clarify our common strategy and
priorities. Few would challenge the idea that the threat
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) should
be high on our agenda. The unprecedented exodus of
Syrian refugees clearly shows that the humanitarian
crisis has already gone beyond the critical point. It is
time to move beyond our differences and conclude the
debate on the best strategy to counter the ISIL threat.

S/PV.7527

Secondly, political transitions in Yemen and Libya
should be inclusive and sustainable. We support the
United Nations-backed political process. Assuring
conflicting parties that they will have their appropriate
places down the road could help expedite the process.
We welcome the Iranian nuclear deal, agreed in July,
and hope that Iran will play a constructive role in the
region. Peaceful coexistence, backed by political will
and inclusivity, should be the key for early stabilization.
Thirdly, the Israeli-Palestinian issue should not be
put on the back burner. The two-State solution is the
only viable option. We have consistently been against
any unilateral action that could undermine that solution.
We also take note that the international community
has been providing more support to the Palestinian
people with a view to encouraging them to take more
responsibility.
On a final note, in tackling the threat of violent
extremism, it is important to understand the exact
nature of the challenges before us. Essentially, violent
extremism is an ideology. It is a distorted and dangerous
way of seeing the world. Ideas cannot be defeated on the
battlefield, nor can Governments stop the flow of ideas.
To ultimately defeat violent extremism, we must be able
to prove that our ideas and values — such as peace,
freedom and democracy — are better than those of our
opponents. We must convince our younger generation
that it is our free and diverse societies — not the hatred,
division or violence preached by extremists — that
will afford the right path to human dignity, hope and
happiness.
As a way to reach a fundamental and long-term
solution, I would like to emphasize the importance
of global citizenship education to teach our future
generation the value of tolerance, mutual respect and
understanding. Our best weapon in fighting terrorism
should be our commitment to human rights, freedom
and the rule of law, as was also declared in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) adopted a few days ago, in
particular in Goal 16 of the Sustainable Development
Goals. The Republic of Korea firmly believes that it is
only through the primacy of these core principles and
values that we can ultimately prevail and triumph over
violent extremism.
Finally, in addressing the dire situation of women
and adolescent girls in particular, the President of the
Republic of Korea, Ms. Park Geun-Hye, announced (see

15-2955681/83

S/PV.7527

Maintenance of international peace and security

A/70/PV.7) an initiative called “Better Life for Girls”
at the United Nations Summit for the adoption of the
post-2015 development agenda held a few days ago. The
Republic of Korea will contribute $200 million in the
next five years to assist adolescent girls in developing
countries in the areas of health and education.
The Republic of Korea will continue to engage
constructively in the political, economic and
humanitarian situation in this region.
The President (spoke in Russian): The representative
of Iran has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am sorry to
take the floor at this late hour.
My delegation has asked for the floor just to respond
to the allegations made by the representative of the
Israeli regime during this meeting. In that connection, I
would like to state the following.
What the representative of that regime said in
today’s meeting was totally irrelevant to the subject
of today’s open debate. Indeed, foreign occupation
constitutes the gravest form of terrorism. We do not
believe that there is any doubt that that regime is
responsible for aggression; occupation; the killing of
civilians, including women and children; the crime of
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
other criminal acts. It is also responsible for turning
millions of Palestinian inhabitants into refugees far
from their homeland. Its network of State terrorism has
a long list of deadly operations all over the world, and it
continues to threaten more wars.
Also, to respond to my colleague from Saudi
Arabia, as my Minister mentioned this morning, the
aggression against Yemen has created a new, bleeding
sore in the region and is inflicting death and destruction
upon civilians, while emboldening extremist groups
and providing a new space for them. Those who
unleashed their armies against the innocent people of
Yemen must have realized by now that no way forward
exists other than by a political process based on a broad
inter-Yemeni dialogue.
Once again, I reiterate that the world has not yet
forgotten Saudi Arabia’s complicity in the creation
of Al-Qaida and the Taliban, as well as in Saddam
Hussein’s crimes against our people and the people
of Iraq. Those were the major contributing factors in

82/83

30/09/2015

the dangerous emergence of Takfiri elements and the
spread of terrorism in the region.
I would also like to mention the question of the
tragedy that happened during the haj. As my President
already mentioned in the General Assembly this week
(see A/70/PV.13), we are not trying to politicize the issue.
We are talking about the lives of hundreds of people
who, unfortunately, fell victim to the incompetence
and mismanagement of those in charge. Due to their
unaccountability, even now as we are talking, the
missing cannot be identified and the expeditious return
of the deceased to their mourning families has been
delayed. Public opinion demands that Saudi Arabian
officials promptly fulfil their international obligations.
More important, conditions must be established for
an independent and professional investigation into the
causes of this disaster and methods identified to prevent
its repetition in the future.
The President (spoke in Russian): The representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked for the floor to
make an additional statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I did not intend to take the floor again at this
late hour, but the representative of the Saudi regime
always insists on receiving a response to his claims at
every occasion and at every meeting. Indeed, on every
occasion that representative continues to introduce the
subject of my country. This morning and this afternoon,
we have heard that the main threat posed to the world
and the Middle East is my country, as well as the Daesh
and other terrorist groups, such as Jabhat Al-Nusra.
The representative of the Saudi regime said that we
have deviated from the right path and that the positive
effort initiated by the Russian Federation in holding
this meeting deviates from the need to counter the real
threat, which is Daesh. The Saudi regime plays a role
in arming and financing terrorist groups. That has been
clear to all — from Daesh to Jabhat al-Nusra and Jaish
Al-Islam. We know the role it plays with regard to those
terrorist groups. Without the role of foreign forces,
including the Saudi regime, terrorism would not have
spread. We would have eliminated it long ago.
I will not add anything. I just wanted to refute those
false allegations.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more speakers inscribed on the list of speakers. I would

15-29556

30/09/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

like to thank all participants for their contributions to
this meeting presided over by the Russian Federation.
As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Security
Council for the month of September 2015, before
adjourning the meeting I would like to express the
sincere appreciation of the delegation of the Russian
Federation to the members of the Council, especially
the Permanent Representatives, their respective staff
and the secretariat of the Security Council, as well
as to the conference services, the interpreters and

S/PV.7527

security staff, who have reliably ensured our security
in this trying month. We could not have done it alone,
of course, without the hard work, support and positive
contributions of every delegation and the representatives
of the Secretariat. As we end our presidency, I know
I speak on behalf of the entire Security Council in
wishing the delegation of Spain good luck in its work
during the month of October.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

15-2955683/83
