United Nations

S/PV.6228

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6228th meeting
Thursday, 3 December 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kafando . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Burkina Faso)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Araud
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 12 November 2009 from the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2009/587)
Letter dated 12 November 2009 from the President of the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2009/589)
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-63003 (E)

*0963003*

S/PV.6228

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Council in the month of December,
I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Permanent Representative of Austria,
for his service as President of the Security Council for
the month of November 2009. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Mayr-Harting for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council’s
business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory
of Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and
31 December 1994
Letter dated 12 November 2009 from the
President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2009/587)
Letter dated 12 November 2009 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2009/589)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kenya,
Rwanda, Serbia and Sweden, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual

2

practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Judge Patrick
Robinson, President of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia; Judge Dennis Byron, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda;
Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to the following documents: S/2009/589, which
contains the text of a letter dated 12 November 2009
from the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia addressed to the
President of the Security Council; S/2009/587, which
contains the text of a letter dated 12 November 2009
from the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the President of the
Security Council; S/2009/394, which contains a note
by the Secretary-General dated 31 July 2009,
transmitting the sixteenth annual report of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; and
S/2009/396, which contains a note by the SecretaryGeneral dated 31 July 2009, transmitting the fourteenth
annual report of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the President of the International Tribunal

09-63003

S/PV.6228

for the Former Yugoslavia, the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
Prosecutors of those two Tribunals.
I now give the floor to Judge Patrick Robinson,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia.
Judge Robinson: It is an honour for me to appear
before the Council in my capacity as President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and to do so under the presidency
of Burkina Faso. I congratulate Burkina Faso on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and thank the President for the attention he has given
to matters pertaining to the Tribunal.
My remarks today will be brief, as the details of
the measures the Tribunal has undertaken to complete
its mandate are set out in my written biannual report
(S/2009/589), which has been duly submitted to the
Council.
Since my most recent presentation, the Tribunal
has continued to focus its energies on completing its
work as expeditiously as possible. Of the 161 accused
indicted by the Tribunal, only a single accused remains
in the pre-trial stage awaiting the commencement his
trial, and that trial will start on 17 December. A total of
24 accused are presently on trial in nine cases, and
another 13 have appeals pending. Five trials are
expected to be completed during the course of 2010
and three in the first half of 2011, while the remaining
case — that of Radovan Karadžić — is currently
estimated to be completed in August or September
2012.
With the redeployment of resources to the
Appeals Chamber, we anticipate that all appeals will be
completed in 2013, except for the Karadžić appeal,
which is estimated at this time to be finished in
February 2014. This revised estimate for the Karadžić
appeal results from the decision of the Trial Chamber
to assign counsel following the refusal of the selfrepresented accused to attend the trial. The Trial
Chamber has given the assigned counsel five months to
prepare, and the trial will resume in March 2010.
The redeployment of resources from trials to
appeals is part of the Tribunal’s overall downsizing
strategy, which has already commenced. While these
are our currently anticipated dates for completion, all
possible measures will be taken to speed up our

09-63003

proceedings and shorten these anticipated times. To
ensure that all possible measures are being taken to
expedite our proceedings, I have reconvened the
Working Group on Speeding up Trials. The
recommendations of that Group will be presented in
my next completion strategy report.
At my last briefing, I reported that contempt
proceedings were sapping the strength of the Tribunal
and diverting us from our main objective — the fair
and expeditious completion of our trials and appeals
for persons charged with serious violations of
international humanitarian law. I am happy to inform
the Council that we have made progress on this front,
rendering two contempt trial judgments and two
contempt appeal judgments. We have also amended the
rules of procedure and evidence to expedite contempt
proceedings.
As can be seen, our efforts to implement the
completion strategy are coning to fruition and the end
of all trials is in sight. But one serious hurdle remains.
I refer to the continued flight from justice of Ratko
Mladić and Goran Hadžić. The failure to bring these
two men to justice will tarnish the Security Council’s
historic contribution to peacebuilding in the former
Yugoslavia. I also wish to stress, as I have done before,
that their immediate arrest would obviate the need for a
residual trial function. It is not too late to arrest and try
these fugitives, and I hope that the Security Council
and Member States will act decisively to achieve that
goal.
The other major issue on which I request the
Council’s assistance today is staff retention. It is a
matter that requires immediate attention. We are
currently losing, on average, about one staff member
per working day to more secure employment, often to
other judicial institutions in The Hague, such as the
International Criminal Court and the Special Tribunal
for Lebanon. In a recent survey of 451 staff members,
57 per cent stated that they were actively seeking
employment elsewhere. If we consider the results from
one specific group of critical staff members — the
legal support staff of the Office of the Prosecutor and
the Chambers — 70 per cent were actively seeking
employment elsewhere, 24 per cent stated that they felt
exhausted by their current work load, and close to
50 per cent stated that they felt they have to work too
fast. The reality of the situation is that there is a very
real threat to the Tribunal’s ability to conduct its work

3

S/PV.6228

as expeditiously and fairly as possible during the
remaining years of its mandate.

and reduce the burden on the institution imposed by
constant staff recruitment.

I acknowledge the efforts made by the General
Assembly to assist the Tribunal through resolution
63/256 of 24 December 2008, which authorizes the
Tribunal to offer critical staff longer contracts, thereby
alleviating some of their job insecurity. But more needs
to be done, and there are two areas in which we could
really use the help of the Security Council.

As the Council is no doubt aware, during my
recent address to the General Assembly (A/64/PV.16), I
proposed the establishment of a claims commission to
compensate the victims of crimes committed during the
wars in the former Yugoslavia. Since I became
President of the Tribunal, I have had occasion to meet a
multitude of victims’ groups, and they have expressed
anguish at the failure of the international community to
provide any kind of compensation for their suffering.
Indeed, they feel that they have been forgotten.
Currently, there is no effective mechanism by which
those victims can seek compensation for their injuries,
despite the fact that their right to such compensation is
firmly rooted in international law. And I refer to
instruments such as the General Assembly’s 1985
Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims
of Crime and Abuse of Power and the Basic Principles
and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and
Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of
International Human Rights Law and Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law.

First, the International Civil Service Commission
has recommended an end of service grant applicable to
those staff separating from the organization upon
completion of their contracts, provided they have
served continuously for 10 years. Many of our staff
have served over 10 years, and the end of service grant
would provide them with a concrete incentive to
remain until the completion of the Tribunal’s work.
Secondly, of great benefit to our staff would be their
inclusion in the regime of continuing contracts.
Continuing appointments will offer some of the
stability that we sorely need, and I urge the Council to
ensure that this new regime, if adopted, is made
applicable to Tribunal staff.
However, the consultations I have had about
these matters have left me somewhat uneasy. But it
would be wrong — completely wrong — for a body
like the United Nations to abandon the staff members
of an institution that it had set up in a time of crisis to
assist in the restoration of justice, peace and
democracy in a troubled region, and which has, by any
reasonable assessment, rendered invaluable and
trailblazing service not only to that region, but to the
international community as a whole. And it would be
especially wrong for the United Nations to distance
itself from the needs of the staff of such an institution,
when it is in the final stages of its work, on formalistic
grounds based on the so-called separateness and
temporary character of that institution. That approach
would result in the kind of injustice and discrimination
that is antithetical not only to the lofty and noble
purposes of the United Nations itself, but also to the
inspiring objectives of that very institution. The staff of
the Tribunal should not be treated as though they were
staff of other nations. They are in fact staff of the
United Nations and should not be separated from the
benefits of United Nations staff by artificial
administrative barriers. And so I appeal to the
international community to exercise foresight by
assisting the tribunal with measures to retain its staff

4

Justice is not only about punishing perpetrators, it
is also about restoring dignity to victims by ensuring
that they have the concrete means to rebuild their lives.
Clause 13 of the General Assembly’s Declaration itself
identifies sources of compensation, including the
offender or national funds. However, in circumstances
where the State is unable to compensate the victim, the
Declaration proposes that other funds be established
for this purpose. This was a matter that former Tribunal
President Jorda brought to the attention of the Security
Council in November 2000, recommending to the
Council and to the Secretary-General that methods of
compensating victims of crimes in the former
Yugoslavia, notably a claims commission, be
considered by the appropriate organs of the United
Nations. I therefore implore the Council to take official
steps to support the establishment of such a claims
commission as a means of complementing the
Tribunal’s work.
I now wish to turn to another matter — that of the
work being done by the Tribunal in preparation for the
establishment of a residual mechanism. On 21 May
2009, the Secretary-General published his report on the
administrative and budgetary aspects of the options for
possible locations for the archives of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the

09-63003

S/PV.6228

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
seat of the residual mechanism(s) for the Tribunals
(S/2009/258). On 8 October 2009, the SecretaryGeneral advised the Tribunal of the Security Council’s
endorsement of those recommendations and requested
that the Tribunal comply with recommendation (m) in
paragraph 259 and report in detail on the Tribunal’s
implementation of the tasks identified therein.
In my written report, I have addressed each of
these tasks separately. But there is one task that I
wanted to bring to the Council’s attention here today.
We have been asked to declassify, to the greatest extent
possible, all the records of the Tribunal. This is a
mammoth undertaking, which we have begun to tackle
in the comprehensive and organized declassification
project. This project will require significant resources
to be properly implemented. To give the Council an
idea of the work involved, the first case being
examined is that of Tadić. All of the material has to be
examined to identify the confidential hearings,
witnesses, filings and exhibits. There are 1,304 pretrial
transcript pages, 9,300 trial pages, 682 appeal pages,
65 confidential filings and 126 protected witnesses. All
of those witnesses will need to be contacted to
determine whether they oppose the lifting of
confidential protection orders. Moreover, hundreds of
exhibits will need to be examined for confidential
information. While this is an onerous undertaking,
when it is considered that the Tribunal has completed
proceedings against 121 accused in 87 cases and still
has 10 cases to complete against 25 accused, it will be
appreciated that this task will greatly ease the judicial
workload of the residual mechanism. The more
material that is made public, the less need there will be
for national jurisdictions to petition the residual
mechanism for access to confidential material and for
judges to issue decisions on those requests.
While primarily focusing on its core business, the
Tribunal has also been diligently working towards the
strengthening of competent national judicial systems in
the former Yugoslavia in accordance with Security
Council resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). I am
proud to report that the Tribunal recently published a
comprehensive report entitled “Supporting the
Transition Process: Lessons Learned and Best Practices
in Knowledge Transfer” evaluating the needs of the
domestic judiciaries in the region. This report was
prepared jointly with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations

09-63003

Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute and
has been very well received in important quarters as
groundbreaking.
Together with those institutions, we are now
preparing an ambitious project to guarantee that the
national justice systems in the region have the capacity
to deal with their growing war crimes caseload as the
Tribunal heads towards its final days. Generous
funding from the European Commission is expected for
this timely undertaking. I also urge the Security
Council to support the national jurisdictions in the
region as their capacity to continue our work is a key
aspect of the Tribunal’s legacy in the former
Yugoslavia.
Inspired by broader United Nations efforts to
coordinate rule of law activities, the Tribunal will
convene a two-day conference at The Hague on 23 and
24 February 2010. The goals of the conference are to
consult with stakeholders and generate interest and
support for the Tribunal’s legacy strategy in the former
Yugoslavia, to foster contacts and partnerships between
the Tribunal and different players, to share and gather
information on what is being done by different actors
in relation to capacity-building in the region, and to
promote the coordination and consolidation of all of
those efforts.
The conference will also provide an opportunity
for countries of the former Yugoslavia and the broader
international community to communicate to the
Tribunal their ideas and expectations of its legacy. That
dialogue will contribute to the work of the Tribunal in
developing its comprehensive legacy strategy. It is
anticipated that more than 200 persons will participate
in the conference, with representatives from the
Tribunal, the Security Council Working Group on the
ad hoc Tribunals, the Rule of Law Unit, national
jurisdictions in the former Yugoslavia, victims’ groups,
organs of the European Union and many others. The
conference is being funded by voluntary pledges, and
invitations have been issued to all members of the
Security Council.
In closing, I would like to reiterate that we at the
Tribunal remain dedicated to completing the work
entrusted to us so that peace, justice and reconciliation
may prevail in the region of the former Yugoslavia. I
do emphasize, however, that a major obstacle to
completing that task is the continuing flight from
justice of Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić, and I urge

5

S/PV.6228

the Council to seek ways to facilitate their immediate
arrest.
The staff retention issue also remains critical to
the Tribunal’s capacity to expedite its operations.
Again, we urge the Council to actively work with other
relevant organs of the United Nations for meaningful
retention measures as a matter of urgency and in the
two specific ways I have mentioned today.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Judge
Patrick Robinson for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Dennis Byron,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.
Judge Byron: I would like to join Judge Patrick
Robinson in expressing congratulations to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for December, the last month of your country’s
membership in the Council. I wish you all the best for
a successful tour of duty.
On 8 November 1994, the Security Council
adopted resolution 955 (1994) and created an
international tribunal to bring justice to the hundreds of
thousands of Rwandan victims of genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. Today, 15 years later, I
am pleased to inform the Council of the remarkable
progress in the conduct of trials and judgement
deliveries. But yet, significant work remains ahead
before we can safely say that we have achieved our
mandate and tried the principal perpetrators of the
horrendous atrocities committed in Rwanda in 1994.
Since my last briefing in June, our Tribunal has
rendered five first-instance judgements in singleaccused cases, including a sentencing judgement
following a guilty plea, and one appeals judgement. We
have mastered the difficult task of commencing 10 new
trials in the course of this year. In two of the cases,
judgements have already been delivered; in three other
cases, including a retrial, the entire evidence has been
heard. In the remaining five cases, the defence phase
will be completed before the end of this year or in the
first half of 2010. The spillovers are mainly linked to
fair trial concerns; defence counsel have needed more
time to prepare their cases initially or more time to
respond to the prosecution case.
The four ongoing multi-accused cases continue to
pose the greatest challenge to the Tribunal, even where
the evidence phase has been completed, as is the case

6

in three of the trials involving 17 accused. The
judgement drafting in those cases is expected to be
completed in the course of next year, but progress is
continuously challenged by parallel assignments of the
judges and their legal staff to support other cases.
While the judges sit full days over months in the
courtroom to hear sometimes several additional trials,
the scheduling of complex deliberations in the
multi-accused cases is difficult and risks delays.
The fourth trial, Karemera et al., continues to be
delayed largely due to the illness of one of the
defendants, requiring the Chamber to sit in half-day
sessions only and to allow additional breaks in the trial
schedule to accommodate medical needs. Despite those
unavoidable impediments, we aim to complete the
evidence phase in this case by the end of 2010.
The Karemera trial will be one of three ongoing
cases in which judgement drafting will continue in the
first half of 2011. The other two, Ngirabatware and
Nzabonimana, are likely to spill into 2011 because the
presiding judges are also members of the bench in the
largest multi-accused case, the “Butare” trial. Priority
must be given to judgement delivery in that case,
which is expected for autumn 2010, even though this
may delay the delivery of judgements in the other cases
by some months.
In September, the plenary of judges adopted an
amendment of the rules of procedure and evidence,
allowing for the hearing of special depositions for the
preservation of evidence against the remaining
fugitives. That amendment aims at preventing the loss
of evidence 15 years after the crimes were committed.
The hearings, which are planned for the last quarter of
next year, will focus on those of the three currently
top-ranked accused who still remain at large.
As Council members can see, we have another
busy year ahead, in which we need to provide
increased output with declining resources. During the
first half of 2010, we will focus on the completion of
the evidence phase in all ongoing trials, with the
exception of Karemera. In addition, we expect
judgement delivery in four single-accused cases.
During the second half of 2010, additional judgements
in six cases involving 17 accused are to be rendered. In
short, and provided we manage to retain the current
level of legal support staff, we expect judgement
delivery in trials against 21 accused in 2010.
Furthermore, two new trials will commence, and we

09-63003

S/PV.6228

aim, to the extent possible, for completion of their
evidence phases during the coming year.
As I mentioned before, most of the 7 permanent
and 11 ad litem judges currently serving at the Tribunal
are involved in several cases in parallel. That situation
will continue for the majority of next year. Judges are
also needed to handle the cases of the two newly
arrested accused, for possible requests for referral of
cases to national jurisdictions under rule 11 bis, and for
the special deposition hearings. I therefore ask the
Council to extend the exception granted in resolution
1855 (2008), allowing for a maximum number of 12 ad
litem judges to serve at the Tribunal at any one time,
until the end of 2010.
I explained in June our concerns about the
inequality in the terms and conditions of service
between permanent and ad litem judges, concerning in
particular the entitlement to pensions. Resolution 1878
(2009) took note of those concerns. I have had bilateral
discussions with representatives of numerous Member
States and the Secretariat on the matter, and they have
expressed their sympathy for our endeavour to achieve
a review of the terms and conditions of service in the
interest of equity and the completion strategy. I am
confident that the matter can be addressed by the
General Assembly in early 2010.
Let me now turn to another fundamentally
important issue, namely, State cooperation. The arrests
in August and October of two of the fugitives, Grégoire
Ndahimana and Idelphonse Nizeyimana, are very
positive developments, and I would like to thank the
respective national authorities in the Democratic
Republic of Congo and Uganda for their important
contribution to the fight against impunity. The transfer
of Idelphonse Nizeyimana to Arusha only one day after
his arrest in Uganda should serve as an example of
efficient and swift cooperation between the Tribunal
and Member States.
I am sure that Council members agree with me
that 11 fugitives remaining at large today, more than
15 years after the genocide, are 11 too many. The list
includes three top suspects, Félicien Kabuga, Protais
Mpiranya and Augustin Bizimana. The time for their
arrest is long overdue. They have benefited from
impunity for far too long.
I would like to recall once again that it was the
Council that determined, when setting up the Tribunal
in 1994, that genocide, war crimes and crimes against

09-63003

humanity constitute a threat to international peace and
security. That proposition was as true then as it is
today. It is in the interest of the entire international
community that the remaining fugitives be arrested and
tried fairly. This Tribunal has not accomplished its
mandate, if top-level fugitives continue to benefit from
impunity, while victims wait for justice. I strongly call
upon all Member States, and in particular those where
there is significant evidence that fugitives are hiding in
their territory, such as Kenya, to fully cooperate with
the Tribunal.
The fugitives need to be arrested and transferred
to Arusha now, before the Tribunal closes down. The
trial functions of a residual mechanism are
indispensable as long as fugitives remain at large. But
we should all aim at leaving behind a heritage of trials
that is as limited as possible, so that the mechanism
can focus on truly residual work, such as the
management of the Tribunal’s archives, continuous
witness protection and the supervision of sentences.
Recent developments at the Tribunal highlight the
essential need for cooperation by Member States in
another area. During the last weeks, two accused were
acquitted, Hormisdas Nsengimana at the trial level and
Protais Zigiranyirazo by the Appeals Chamber. For
them and two others who were previously acquitted
and who all live currently in safe houses in Arusha, the
Registrar of the Tribunal is seeking countries for
relocation. It is of fundamental importance and in the
interests of fair justice that Member States be ready
and prepared to accept the relocation of acquitted
persons to their territory.
The third essential area of cooperation by
Member States and a cornerstone of the completion
strategy is the referral of cases to national jurisdictions
under rule ll bis. The Prosecutor, assisted by the
Registrar, continues his efforts to ensure that more than
the two cases that were transferred to France in 2007
can be handled by national courts now or in the near
future. The focus of the efforts continues to be
technical support for Rwanda in order to ensure that
the State in which the crimes were committed can take
over cases. But other Member States with jurisdiction
are also urged to consider accepting some of the
remaining cases of fugitives from the Tribunal for trial
on the national level. In this regard, we are pleased to
note legislative changes that have been introduced or
are under way in several countries, providing
jurisdiction over genocide, crimes against humanity

7

S/PV.6228

and war crimes committed, for instance, in Rwanda in
1994. Such laudable legislative changes not only
support the Tribunal in its efforts to transfer cases to
national jurisdictions, but underscore the willingness of
those countries to effectively fight impunity for the
most serious international crimes, irrespective of where
or by whom or against whom they were committed.

be no International Criminal Court. Without their
jurisprudence, support and policy-setting examples,
convictions of Rwandan génocidaires in Canada, the
Netherlands and Belgium and the ongoing
investigations against alleged perpetrators of genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity worldwide
would have been less likely, to say the least.

Our efforts are channelled towards the
completion of our remaining trial and appeals work. At
the same time, we have been following up on the
recommendations for the transitional period, contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on the residual
mechanism (S/2009/258). An overview of the measures
taken so far is contained in our completion strategy
report (see S/2009/587), and we will continue, to the
best of our abilities, to provide the Council with
comprehensive information to support its decisionmaking process.

We all know that the days of our Tribunal are
numbered. It is essential that we reflect on the lessons
we can learn from the past 15 years and on how best to
address the fight against impunity for international
crimes in the future. If we succeed together in
establishing a more effective rule of international law,
the suffering of countless victims will not have been
completely in vain.

The discussions in the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth
Committee on the Tribunal’s budget submission for the
2010-2011 biennium are ongoing. Since our
submission, many developments have occurred, for
example the two new arrests, which will lead to certain
adaptations in the initial request. Any change in the
judicial calendar at this stage, when contract extensions
are tightly linked to trial schedules, affects all who are
involved in the trial work, from legal officers and trial
attorneys to court reporters and interpreters. I ask for
the understanding of all Member States for that
increased need for flexibility.
Over the past six months, the Governments of the
members of the Security Council have continued to
provide support for our work through the adoption of
resolution 1878 (2009) in July, the arrest of fugitives,
voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund, and intense
preparatory work for the residual mechanism. I would
like to assure the Council that all of us at the Tribunal
in Arusha greatly appreciate that support. The
Secretariat, in particular the Office of Legal Affairs,
has facilitated our cooperation with the Council and
with the Governments of its members and has assisted
in communicating our mutual needs and concerns. We
extend our appreciation and thanks to all their staff.
It remains a fact that the ad hoc Tribunals have
laid the ground for the rapid and astonishing
development of international criminal justice during
the past decade and a half. Without them, there would

8

At the same time, we know that the last part of
the Tribunal’s lifespan is not an easy one. We must
remain committed and strive to improve our work,
while our experienced and hard-working staff faces the
imminent end of their contracts and the need to secure
their professional careers.
The future of the international fight against
impunity will rest mainly on the shoulders of national
jurisdictions and the International Criminal Court.
However, today, I ask for the Council’s continuous
support so that our Tribunal, which was at the starting
point of that amazing development of international
criminal justice, can complete its mandate
expeditiously and with all due respect for the highest
standards of fair trials.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Judge
Byron for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia.
Mr. Brammertz: This morning, I will address the
Council on the key elements related to the completion
of our mandate, which has moved into a significant
new phase. More specifically, I will speak briefly on
the status of our trials and appeals; the cooperation
between the Office of the Prosecutor and States; our
capacity-building efforts throughout the region; and,
lastly, our plans to downsize my Office in the coming
years.
At present, the Office of the Prosecutor is
working on eight trials involving 17 accused. The last
trial to start at the International Tribunal for the Former

09-63003

S/PV.6228

Yugoslavia, except the trials of the fugitives, is
scheduled to commence on 17 December this year.
On 27 October 2009, the trial in the case against
Radovan Karadžić started, with the prosecution
presenting its opening statement. The prosecution is
prepared and remains ready to proceed with its first
witness. As with other cases, my Office has balanced
various competing requirements associated with such
large cases. It will present a case that is representative
of the crimes committed, yet streamlined and
manageable.
The Karadžić indictment charges crimes arising
from the ethnic cleansing of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the shelling of Sarajevo, the hostage-taking of United
Nations peacekeepers and the attack on the United
Nations safe area of Srebrenica. Because of Karadžić’s
senior position and the magnitude and gravity of the
crimes charged, his trial is important not only to the
victims of the crimes, but also to the international
community as a whole.
At the start of the trial against Karadžić, I met
with representatives of victims associations. I was
encouraged to hear that they continue to support the
efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor. For the victims,
the crimes remain in the present and are not historical
events of the past. As we proceed with the evidence of
what happened, we are reminded of the fact that
Mladić is still to be arrested. As an indicted accused,
Mladić’s place is before the Trial Chamber, with
Karadžić.
The arrests of Ratko Mladić and the other
remaining fugitive, Goran Hadžić, remain one of my
Office’s foremost priorities. Prosecution lawyers are
currently reviewing the Mladić indictment and I expect
to file a proposed amended indictment shortly.
There are currently five cases on appeal. During
the next biennium, appeals cases are expected to
double. Plans have been implemented to transfer posts
and necessary resources to the Appeals Section of my
Office in order to address that increased workload. As
a result, my Office is fully prepared to meet the work
as appeals hearings increase in number and continue
into 2013.
The cooperation of States remains a key
condition to the successful accomplishment of our
mandate and to meeting the completion strategy goals.
In recent weeks, I met with the authorities of Bosnia

09-63003

and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia at the political,
judicial and operational levels to assess their level of
cooperation with my Office. The purpose of the
missions was also to further our relations with national
prosecution services.
Since the last briefing to the Council, Serbia’s
cooperation with my Office has continued to progress.
Prosecution requests to access documents and archives
are being dealt with more expeditiously and effectively.
It is important that the authorities continue to provide
that level of assistance, which will remain crucial
during current and future trial and appeals work.
The most critical aspect of Serbia’s cooperation is
the need to apprehend the fugitives. My Office
recognizes the professionalism and commitment of
operational services tasked with the tracking of
fugitives. I am in regular and direct contact with
officials in charge of these operations. These services
are now working more efficiently and in a coordinated
manner. Moreover, a variety of operational activities,
including search operations, are currently being
conducted. Serbia must maintain these efforts with the
clear objective of apprehending the fugitives.
With regard to Croatia, we continue to work on a
regular basis with the Ministry of Justice and the
Office of the State Prosecutor, which are assisting in
responding to the prosecution’s requests. The central
issue of concern remains the still unresolved request to
locate and obtain key military documents related to
Operation Storm of 1995. I welcome, however, the
personal initiative of the Prime Minister of Croatia to
establish in October an inter-agency task force aimed at
locating these documents, particularly as there had
been virtually no activity in the administrative
investigation since my last briefing to the Security
Council in June (see S/PV.6134). A report of the task
force received this week is helpful in revealing gaps in
the administrative investigation and in identifying
further investigative steps to be taken. These and all
other available investigative steps must be urgently
undertaken in order to complete a comprehensive and
credible investigation into locating the missing
documents.
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to respond to
all prosecution requests. My Office interacts on a
regular basis with the Special Department for War
Crimes of the State Court. I am, however, concerned
about the possible departure of international personnel

9

S/PV.6228

and support staff from the Special Department for War
Crimes. Despite repeated requests from judicial
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the mandates
of international staff ending in December have not
been renewed due to the lack of political will. If this
matter is not urgently addressed, ongoing trial
proceedings and war crimes investigations could be
jeopardized. There will also be serious repercussions
for the Tribunal’s work, since they also act on
investigative material transferred by my Office.
Immediate action is needed.
My Office will soon complete the hand-over of
investigative files to prosecutors in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia. In addition to the rule
11 bis cases transferred on the basis of judicial
decisions, in total my Office has handed over
17 investigative files involving 43 suspects to
authorities throughout the former Yugoslavia.
A fundamental aspect of the Tribunal’s
completion strategy is the strengthening of the judicial
systems in the States of the former Yugoslavia. As a
concrete example, I would like to mention the
successful project for national prosecutors and young
professionals from the former Yugoslavia. This project
was set up jointly by my Office and the European
Commission. In June, three prosecutors from the
region — one from Bosnia and Herzegovina, one from
Croatia and one from Serbia — began working as
liaison prosecutors within my Office.
Domestic prosecutors have to continue the work
that my Office had originally undertaken, for instance,
by working on cases and material that have been
transferred to the region. As I have indicated in the
past, national prosecution services and judiciaries
continue to face significant legal obstacles and
challenges with regard to the prosecution of war
crimes. The prohibition on extraditing nationals to
other States threatens successful investigations and
prosecutions, as do legal barriers to the transfer of war
crimes cases between States. State prosecutors are
encouraged to maintain an open dialogue and to find
ways to cooperate in the most efficient and
professional manner possible.
Downsizing mechanisms have been agreed and
communicated to staff and will be implemented
starting 1 January 2010. Initial staff reductions in the
Office of the Prosecutor will start immediately in the
new year and will increase throughout the year,

10

reflecting the completion of trials. My Office’s budget
proposal for 2010-2011, which was discussed with the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, proposed a series of cuts in staff numbers as
trials are completed. Specifically, we have called for a
nearly 40 per cent reduction in the Office of the
Prosecutor as trials end over the course of the next
year, including abolishing one of the two director posts
within my Office. Over the next two years, there will
be a reduction of 60 per cent of staff positions within
the Office of the Prosecutor. In the meantime,
prosecution trial and appeals teams will continue to
work at maximum capacity to ensure that trials proceed
expeditiously and in accordance with the completion
strategy.
I thank members for their attention. On behalf of
everyone in our Office, I would like to express my
appreciation for the Council’s ongoing support of our
work.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Brammertz for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hassan Bubacar
Jallow, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda.
Mr. Jallow: The past six months have been a
period of sustained and intense work at the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in
furtherance of the completion of trial and other
activities. During this period, the Office of the
Prosecutor has been able to prepare and present the
trials of six new cases and to complete the prosecution
phase of the trials in all but one of these cases. A guilty
plea was also successfully concluded in the Michel
Bagaragaza case and received the endorsement of the
Trial Chamber.
Over the same period, the Office of the
Prosecutor has had to prepare and file two final appeals
and three interlocutory appeals. It has also had to
respond to four final appeals and eight interlocutory
appeals filed by the defence. This is in addition to the
preparation of two motions for additional evidence and
responses to nine such motions in the Appeals
Chamber. Three final appeals were also argued, with
judgement delivered in one of them and pending in the
other two.
As the President has indicated, two new arrests of
indictees were made. Grégoire Ndahimana was arrested

09-63003

S/PV.6228

in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in a joint
operation of the ICTR, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in
August. Idelphonse Nizeyimana, a leading fugitive
earmarked for trial at the ICTR, was arrested in
Uganda in October 2009. I would like to record our
appreciation to the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda, as well as to
MONUC, for their cooperation, which made these
arrests possible.
With such continued tripartite cooperation among
MONUC, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the ICTR, we are optimistic that several fugitives still
sheltering in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
can be apprehended and brought to justice and that
their arrests will contribute significantly to the
restoration of peace and stability in the Great Lakes
region.
However, I regret to report that there has been no
progress in the matter of cooperation by Kenya in
relation to the case of Félicien Kabuga. Repeated
requests to the Government of Kenya for details of
Kabuga’s reported departure from that country have
gone unanswered for the past 12 months. This situation
should not be allowed to continue. This Council has,
by its resolution 1503 (2003), called on Kenya to
cooperate with the ICTR to ensure the arrest and
transfer of Kabuga to the Tribunal for trial. Kenya
should be required to comply with its legal obligations
under the United Nations Charter, and international law
generally, to give full cooperation to the ICTR and to
comply with these requests. In the event that this
situation continues in the weeks ahead, my Office will
seriously consider the option of initiating the process
for the formal referral of Kenya to the Security Council
under article 28 of the statute of the Tribunal for
non-cooperation with the ICTR.
The fifth Colloquium of Prosecutors of
International Criminal Tribunals, which I referred to in
my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6134), was
successfully hosted by the Office of the Prosecutor of
the Tribunal in November in Kigali, Rwanda. It gave
the prosecutors of all the international tribunals who
participated in it an opportunity to share experiences as
well as lessons learned and to consult further on ways
in which the process of fighting impunity through the
enforcement of international criminal law can be
further enhanced. The Colloquium adopted the Kigali

09-63003

Declaration on international criminal justice, which
will be circulated to all Member States. In the
declaration, inter alia, the Prosecutors called upon all
States to take the necessary measures to vest their
national and regional judicial systems with the capacity
and jurisdiction to prosecute or extradite those
suspected of international crimes and to provide full
cooperation to all international criminal tribunals, in
particular with regard to the enforcement of orders and
requests for assistance.
In the months that lie ahead, my Office will focus
its efforts on several fronts. Trial readiness
preparations are already in progress in respect of the
two recent arrestees, namely, Grégoire Ndahimana and
Idelphonse Nizeyimana, whose cases are set for trial in
2010. My Office will also be attending to the
conclusion of eight partly heard cases, some of which
commenced in the past six months. We anticipate that,
by the end of 2010, the trials of all current detainees,
save the two new arrestees, will have been concluded.
We are also optimistic that the intensification of
tracking efforts and greater State cooperation may
yield positive results with regard to the apprehension
and transfer to the ICTR of the remaining 11 fugitives.
Three of those fugitives have been earmarked for trial
at the ICTR or by the residual mechanism, and the
remaining eight for referral to national jurisdictions.
The prospects for referral to a national jurisdiction
following any further arrests will largely determine the
conclusion of the Tribunal’s trial phase under the
completion strategy. At this stage, it would be helpful,
and indeed necessary, for the Security Council to
continue to remind Member States of their legal
obligations of cooperation in respect of fugitives.
In the absence of other States willing to accept
cases from the ICTR for trial, our efforts with regard to
the referral of cases to national jurisdictions continue
to focus on Rwanda. As I reported the last time we met
with the Security Council, Rwanda has undertaken
considerable law reform in the justice sector that, if
combined with appropriate capacity building measures,
should be sufficient to enable my Office to renew its
requests for referral of cases to that country.
Since our last report to the Council, the Tribunal
has provided training to the staff of the new Rwanda
witness protection service. Some donors have agreed to
provide the necessary resources to make the service
and the video link system operational before the end of

11

S/PV.6228

2009. Those measures should take care of the concerns
related to witness protection and provide an alternative
for the taking of evidence from those witnesses who
are reluctant to travel to Rwanda to testify. Once those
capacity-building measures are implemented, I propose
to file new applications, early in 2010, for the referral
of the cases of eight of the 11 fugitives to Rwanda for
trial.
Cooperation between the ICTR and national
prosecuting and national judicial authorities has
intensified significantly since the holding of a joint
forum with such authorities in November 2008 at the
ICTR. The authorities of several such States are now
actively engaged in the investigation and prosecution
of international crimes, in particular those connected
with the Rwandan genocide of 1994. Those authorities
require, and have benefited from, significant
assistance, in particular evidence from the ICTR, in
that process. In the past 12 months, my Office has
received requests for assistance from 13 countries with
regard to 44 targets under investigation by national
authorities. We have serviced those requests by, among
other things, providing information from, and access
to, our evidentiary database and the records of other
organs of the Tribunal.
The sharing of information and evidence with
national authorities will continue to be a major element
of our work, not only now but beyond completion and
even under a residual mechanism. Combating
international crimes requires an effective partnership
between the Tribunals and national authorities. Access
by such authorities to the vast databases of the
Tribunals is indispensable for such a partnership. We
shall continue to attend to requests for cooperation
from States with all due diligence. In that respect, we
welcome and commend Canadian authorities for the
recently concluded successful prosecution in Canada of
the first case of genocide in relation to the events in
Rwanda. We also continue to support authorities in
Belgium and other countries in respect of ongoing
prosecutions.
In our last report to the Council, I indicated that
serious concerns for potential loss of evidence over
time, in particular in the cases of top-level fugitives,
had prompted my Office to propose amendments of the
ICTR Rules of Procedure and Evidence to provide for a
procedure for the preservation of evidence in cases
where fugitives continue to be at large. As the
President has indicated, the Judges of the ICTR,

12

meeting in plenary session on 1 October 2009, adopted
the necessary amendment to the Rules. Accordingly,
my Office proposes to request such proceedings, by the
second quarter of 2010, in the cases of the three toplevel fugitives, namely, Félicien Kabuga, Augustin
Bizimana, former Minister of Defence, and Protais
Mpiranya, former Commander of the Presidential
Guard of Rwanda. The objective of the proceedings
will be to enable the statements of prosecution
witnesses, and even of defence witnesses, to be
recorded before a judge, with a view to their use in a
subsequent trial in the event that the witnesses are no
longer available for good cause. In that way, we hope
that the interests of justice will not be defeated by the
loss of evidence in the wake of prolonged evasion of
justice by fugitives.
While we focus on servicing pending trials, the
preparation of new cases for trial, filing new requests
for referral to Rwanda and instituting proceedings for
the preservation of evidence in respect of the three toplevel fugitives, we are also attending to, and will
intensify preparations for, the closure of the Tribunal,
with particular attention to archival and residual issues.
Within my Office, the archiving of the records of the
Investigations Division and of the trials that have been
concluded is already proceeding in earnest.
All those activities will continue to require
significant resources, as well as the cooperation of
Member States, if the ICTR is to meet the goals of the
completion strategy. In that respect, we look forward to
the sympathetic consideration by Member States of the
ICTR budget proposals for the 2010-2011 biennium.
The cooperation of Member States and the support of
the Security Council, the other organs of the United
Nations and the Organization’s Secretariat have been
indispensable in the Tribunal’s achievements. I would
like to convey our appreciation for all such support. We
look forward to that same cooperation at this crucial
stage in the implementation of our completion strategy.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Jallow for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council, beginning with Ambassador Mayr-Harting,
Permanent Representative of Austria, in his capacity as
Chairman of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria) (spoke in French):
At the outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for

09-63003

S/PV.6228

the kind words you addressed to me and my delegation.
I should like in turn to congratulate you and your
delegation on Burkina Faso’s assumption of the
presidency for the month of December. This month is
always very difficult and busy, and we are therefore
very happy that it will be in your very experienced
hands. Of course, you will have our full support and
cooperation throughout the month.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their
briefings.
In my statement today, I will first address some
issues about the completion strategies of the Tribunals.
Secondly, as you have already said, Mr. President, in
my capacity as Chairman of the Security Council’s
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals, I
would like to give an update on the Group’s activities.
Austria reiterates its strong support for the
strengthening of international criminal justice,
including through the International Criminal Court
(ICC), ad hoc or mixed tribunals and truth
commissions. We highly commend the work of the
ICTY and ICTR, which carry out a crucial task in
fighting impunity and bringing to justice those
responsible for the most serious crimes. Austria fully
supports the efforts of the Tribunals to complete their
work at the earliest possible date. However, the most
recent reports of the Tribunals (see S/2009/587 and
S/2009/589) indicate that their work is not likely to be
finished until 2013, or even 2014.
While the reported delays remain of concern —
and we urge the Tribunals to take all possible measures
to complete their work expeditiously — at the same
time we have to accept the reality that the dates set
forth in resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004) will
not be met. We believe that we have reached a point
where the Security Council will need to adapt to the
changed circumstances and extend the mandates of the
judges beyond 2010 in order to allow the Tribunals to
plan their trials and appeals for the coming years.
The arrest of the remaining 13 fugitives,
including Ratko Mladić, Goran Hadžić and Félicien
Kabuga, remains a top priority for the completion of
the Tribunals’ work. We call on all States concerned to

09-63003

fully cooperate with the Tribunals. With regard to the
ICTY, we welcome the most recent report by the
Prosecutor (see S/2009/589, annex II), in which he
states that he is satisfied with the current level of
efforts undertaken by the Serbian authorities in their
cooperation with the Tribunal. We also welcome the
continued efforts by the Croatian Government under
Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor, in particular the recent
establishment of the new task force. The task force
concept has already been crucial to the ultimately
successful efforts of Croatia and the international
community to arrest General Gotovina and transfer him
to The Hague. We welcome the most recent positive
developments that the Chief Prosecutor has been able
to report to us today. We are confident that the new
task force and the intensive interaction and dialogue
between the task force and the Office of the Prosecutor
will help to rapidly address all outstanding issues on
missing documents.
With regard to the ICTR, we welcome the
cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Uganda that led to the arrest of two fugitives
during the reporting period.
As we already stressed this past June, the referral
of cases to competent national jurisdictions is an
essential part of the completion strategy. We therefore
continue to encourage Rwanda’s efforts to improve its
judicial system and witness protection system and hope
that those efforts will enable the Prosecutor to reapply
for a referral of cases in early 2010.
I would now like to give a brief update on the
activities of the informal Working Group on
international tribunals since my most recent briefing in
June (see S/PV.6134). The Group, which to date has
held 21 meetings, has continued to meet on a regular
basis to take forward the discussions on the
establishment of the residual mechanism or
mechanisms. Another meeting of the Working Group
with the Presidents and Prosecutors of both Tribunals
will take place this afternoon. The members of the
Group has also met informally with the President of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone and with representatives
of the Netherlands, Rwanda and Serbia in order to
continue the dialogue with affected countries and host
countries of the Tribunals.
In mid-July, the Working Group started
discussing the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/258)
on the administrative and budgetary aspects of the

13

S/PV.6228

options for possible locations for the archives and the
seat of the residual mechanism or mechanisms for the
Tribunals. The report provides valuable information
about the eight potential residual functions identified
by the Tribunals, discusses the potential structure and
organization of the future residual mechanism or
mechanisms and provides tentative estimates for
staffing and costs. It further analyzes 14 potential
locations for the Tribunals’ archives and the residual
mechanism or mechanisms, which include 13 United
Nations offices and the International Criminal Court.
The report concludes with 13 recommendations
addressed to the Security Council and the Tribunals.
On behalf of the members of the Working Group,
I would like to take this opportunity to highly
commend the Office of Legal Affairs for the
preparation of this report, which provides an excellent
basis for the Group’s deliberations. In September, the
Working Group already reached agreement on
recommendations (l) and (m), which are addressed to
the Tribunals and are contained in paragraph 259 of the
report. By a letter dated 28 September 2009
(S/2009/496), the President of the Security Council
confirmed that Council members welcomed those
recommendations and requested that the SecretaryGeneral write to the Presidents of the Tribunals to ask
that they ensure that the listed tasks are carried out as
part of their completion strategies and that they report
to the Security Council on their progress in
implementing these tasks as part of their regular
reporting, which we have heard today.
In June and July, the Working Group also
considered various requests by the Presidents of the
Tribunals related to the completion strategies,
including the extension of the judges’ mandates, the
appointment of additional ad litem judges and the
redeployment of judges to the Appeals Chamber. On 7
July, following negotiations and the agreement reached
in the Working Group, the Security Council adopted
resolutions 1877 (2009) and 1878 (2009). By letters
dated 29 September, 15 October and 6 November 2009,
respectively, the Tribunal Presidents made some new
requests for the extension of some of the judges’
mandates. In this regard, the Working Group is
currently discussing two technical draft resolutions,
which are expected to be adopted in mid-December.
On 8 October 2009, in order to increase
transparency, raise awareness and provide an
opportunity to hear the views of expert speakers and

14

the broader United Nations membership on the various
key issues related to the establishment of the residual
mechanism or mechanisms, the Permanent Mission of
Austria organized an Arria formula meeting on residual
issues of the ICTY and the ICTR open to all Member
States. Invited speakers included the Presidents of
ICTY and ICTR, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs, as well as representatives of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
International Center for Transitional Justice. We are
grateful to the many Member States who participated
actively and for the interest they showed in the
meeting. The meeting provided the Working Group
with very useful input for its deliberations.
Next week, the Working Group will start its first
reading of the new draft resolution on the
establishment of an international residual mechanism
for criminal tribunals, prepared by the Chair with the
help of the Office of Legal Affairs and based on the
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report.
The negotiations on the resolution are expected to
continue in the spring.
In conclusion, I would like to thank once again
the Presidents and Prosecutors of the ICTY and ICTR
for their briefings. I would also like to express our
gratitude to all the members of the Working Group for
their very active and constructive participation in our
discussions.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Mayr-Harting, as well as Presidents Byron
and Robinson, for their kind words addressed to the
presidency of Burkina Faso.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
extend my congratulations to you, Mr. President, and to
your delegation for your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of December, which, as
we all know, is not the easiest month. Let me assure
you of the full cooperation of my delegation during
your presidency. At the same time, I would like to
thank Ambassador Mayr-Harting and his team for the
excellent manner in which they chaired the Council in
the month of November. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Mayr-Harting for chairing the informal
Working Group on international tribunals and the
excellent deliberations he chaired in that respect. Allow
me to also welcome Presidents Robinson and Byron, as
well as Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow, and thank

09-63003

S/PV.6228

them for their contributions and their presence here
today.

remain a priority, not just for the Tribunals but for the
international community as well.

Since their establishment, the two Tribunals have
had a profound impact on efforts to deny impunity for
the serious crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda, which continue to haunt our collective
conscience. We recognize their vital contribution to the
fight against impunity, advancing the rule of law and
paving the way for reconciliation and cooperation by
providing justice and dignity to victims and by
individualizing criminal accountability.

In facilitating the arrest of all suspects in the past,
in a framework of close cooperation with the Office of
the Prosecutor and in accordance with our
constitutional law on cooperation with the ICTY,
Croatia has established a solid and credible record of
support for the fulfilment of the Tribunal’s goals. In the
same spirit, Croatia is now continuing its full
cooperation with respect to the request regarding
missing documents sought by the Office of the
Prosecutor. This is particularly important in the light of
the hearing scheduled for 16 December by the Trial
Chamber, which is to assess this issue.

Croatia has been a staunch supporter of the
mandate of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) since its inception. The
Croatian Government is firm in its commitment to
continue to provide its full and unequivocal support to
the Tribunal’s efforts to combat impunity by
prosecuting those responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian law.
We look forward to the day when the Tribunals
can close their doors and transition to a residual
mechanism, but not before ensuring that those most
responsible for the crimes committed face justice. We
thus welcome the recent arrest of the high-level
fugitives indicted by the ICTR and hope to see the
early beginning of their respective trials.
We regret that the arrest of the remaining highlevel fugitives still remains elusive for the ICTY, thus
further complicating the projected completion strategy.
Croatia firmly believes that the mandate of the ICTY
cannot be declared complete without bringing to justice
the two remaining fugitives: Ratko Mladic and Goran
Hadzic, who have been indicted for the most atrocious
crimes committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in
Croatia, namely the massacres committed in Srebrenica
and in Vukovar.
More than a year ago another high-profile
fugitive was arrested — Radovan Karadzic. We regret
to note that his case will enter the trial phase only next
spring, despite the fact that more than a dozen years
have passed since his indictment. We also regret to see
the dismay that the trial delays have caused to victims
and their families. We hope that a protracted trial will
not repeat the scenario of the trial of Milosevic, whose
death made impossible a sentence which would have
clearly outlined the role of those most responsible for
the atrocities committed in the former Yugoslavia.
Locating and arresting high-profile fugitives must

09-63003

In that regard, let me express our appreciation for
the Prosecutor’s assessment indicating Croatia’s
determination to further pursue this path of full
cooperation and the leadership shown by Prime
Minister Jadranka Kosor in that respect.
While the administrative investigation has shown
that the Republic of Croatia is not in possession of the
requested documents, the establishment of a task force
and the new findings mentioned by the Prosecutor
clearly indicate the Prime Minister’s determination not
only in complying with the court’s orders, but also
going further in our pursuit to retrieve or fully disclose
the fate of documents which are in the exclusive
ownership of the Republic of Croatia. In pursuing this
path, we look forward to developing even further our
cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor in this
final push, with the aim of securing our common goal
of serving justice, peace, reconciliation and, based on
these values, a future of prosperity in South-East
Europe.
Croatia appreciates the considerable efforts that
the Tribunals are investing in expediting the timely
completion of their work. We take note of the
anticipated dates for the closure of the Tribunals,
which will slip well into the next decade. While we
share the concerns expressed about lengthy trials, we
also recognize the need to be realistic. The early
closure of the two Tribunals is a legitimate objective,
but not at the expense of fair trial guarantees.
As a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, for the past two years Croatia has been
participating in the extensive deliberations of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
currently under the chairmanship of Austria, whose

15

S/PV.6228

efforts we greatly appreciate. Setting up a residual
mechanism that will continue the essential functions of
the Tribunals after their closure remains a pressing
need. The credibility of such a mechanism will
inevitably reflect on the legacy that the Tribunals are
leaving behind. This is an issue of most direct
relevance for the countries under the Tribunals’
jurisdiction. My country hopes that the Council will be
able to define timely solutions along the lines recently
presented by the Chairman of the Informal Working
Group and adopt the necessary decisions. We hope that
our participation has helped the process by factoring in
the experience of a county directly affected by a
Tribunal’s jurisdiction.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Croatia for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I wish you, Sir, and your delegation success
as you assume the presidency of the Council for the
month of December. We also thank Ambassador MayrHarting and the delegation of Austria for their
leadership last month.
We thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for the information they
provided on the situation in the Tribunals and their
efforts to implement their completion strategies.
Today’s briefings give us a further opportunity to
assess the results that the Tribunals have achieved, to
formulate practical recommendations and to chart a
course for the future.

equilibrium in their respective regions. We also note
the Tribunals’ contribution to the development of
national judicial systems and investigative organs; this
will enable national bodies to work independently
without prompting. There are now operationally
independent judicial systems in Rwanda and the States
that came into being in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia. We see no basis for rejecting the sovereign
right of those States to dispense national criminal
justice, especially since those countries have stated
their willingness to independently prosecute accused
identified by the ICTY and the ICTR.
We therefore believe that it is time for the
Security Council to adopt specific decisions on
implementing measures set out in the completion
strategies conveyed to the Tribunals six years ago in
resolution 1503 (2003) and reaffirmed in resolution
1534 (2004). In that context, we must also address the
issue of the deadline for extending the terms of the
current judges. It is our view that in 2010 the Tribunals
will maintain their current intensive pace of work.
Trials — no matter how complex — must not drag on
interminably.
For the successful completion of the Tribunals’
mandates and in order to speed up the trials, it will be
particularly to ensure effective cooperation by States,
first and foremost States in the regions covered by the
Tribunals. Here, we note the positive assessment of the
level of cooperation by the Serbian authorities set out
in the report of Prosecutor Brammertz (S/2009/589,
annex II). We call on other countries to respond
promptly and appropriately to requests by the
Prosecutors of the Tribunals.
I note in conclusion the interesting and diverse
proposals for carrying out residual functions of the
Tribunals when they have completed their work. We
expect the Security Council to come forward next year
with optimal and mutually acceptable scenarios for
establishing a residual mechanism for the Tribunals.

Completing the work of ad hoc bodies of
international criminal justice poses a complex and
multifaceted challenge. It requires not only significant
efforts by the courts themselves but also the assistance
and oversight of the Security Council. Even bearing
ongoing trials in mind, we can say with considerable
certainty that, in both international law and political
terms, the Tribunals are close to completing their
missions.

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Russian Federation for the kind
words he addressed to me.

A significant number of individuals who
committed crimes have fallen into the hands of
international criminal justice. The majority of them
have been convicted and are serving their sentences. As
instruments of post-conflict settlement, the Tribunals
have played their role in restoring peace and political

Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I offer you
warm congratulations, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We very
much look forward to working with you, and we assure
you of our full support. We are very grateful also to
Ambassador Mayr-Harting and the Austrian delegation

16

09-63003

S/PV.6228

for their distinguished presidency of the Council last
month. We are also very grateful to Presidents Byron
and Robinson and Prosecutors Jallow and Brammertz
for their latest reports and for their briefings this
morning.
My Government also associates itself with the
statement to be made later by the representative of
Sweden as President of the European Union.
The United Kingdom welcomes the further
progress that has been made in implementing the
completion strategies of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
over the past six months. We acknowledge the
measures taken by the two Tribunals to expedite
proceedings, but we remain concerned that the latest
reports indicate further slippage in the timelines for
final completion. We recognize that some delays have
been caused by factors outside the Tribunals’ control,
such as the illness of accused or counsel and, in the
case of ICTR, by the welcome arrests of two fugitives.
Nevertheless, we urge both Tribunals to take all
necessary steps to keep the trial and appeal schedules
on track. In that context we would welcome
confirmation from President Robinson and President
Byron that all current Trial Chambers are sitting full
time to hear their cases.
We have noted the comments of both Presidents
concerning the terms and conditions of staff and judges
of the Tribunals, and those points will need to be
addressed by the appropriate organs of the General
Assembly. While the primary responsibility for
ensuring timely completion lies with the Tribunals
themselves, the Security Council must also play its
part. It particular, it is our responsibility to take the
necessary decisions to extend the mandates of those
judges who need to be retained by the Tribunals to
complete the remaining cases.
It is clear from the forecasts by the Presidents
that even with expedited procedures, trial work will not
be complete until 2011-2012 and appeal work not until
mid-2013 — provided that additional resources are
reallocated to the Appeals Chamber. While we regret
the delay, we must accept the reality of those timelines
and act accordingly. If the Security Council fails to
extend judicial mandates until the last minute, there is
a risk that the uncertainty created will cause more
judges to leave before completion of their cases, thus

09-63003

generating greater disruption in the Tribunals’ ongoing
work.
As my Government has made clear on many
occasions, full cooperation by all States is vital to
ensure the completion of the mandates of the ICTY and
ICTR. In particular, the remaining fugitives — two in
the case of ICTY and 11 in the case of ICTR — must
be located and surrendered to The Hague and Arusha.
We reiterate that the mandate of the Tribunals will not
be complete until those individuals have been brought
to justice.
My Government appreciates the detailed
assessments of cooperation by States in the region of
the former Yugoslavia provided by the Prosecutor of
the ICTY, Mr. Serge Brammertz. In relation to Croatia,
we agree that the establishment of the Task Force is a
positive step, and we welcome it. Nevertheless, my
Government is disappointed that the Croatian
Government has not sufficiently demonstrated to the
Prosecutor that they have pursued all avenues of
investigation and that key requested documents
relating to the Gotovina case remain to be found or
accounted for. We welcome the further developments
reported by the Prosecutor this morning and urge
Croatia to achieve full cooperation by taking the
necessary
further
measures
to
complete
a
comprehensive and credible investigation towards
finding or accounting for missing documents.
We are very pleased by Serbia’s sustained
improvement over the last six months, as reported by
the Prosecutor, which demonstrates its increased
commitment to cooperation with ICTY. We support the
Prosecutor’s view that it is essential that Serbia
maintain the current level of cooperation in tracing the
fugitives Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić.
In the case of ICTR, we welcome the
intensification of the Prosecutor’s efforts to track
fugitives, which has led to the recent arrest and
surrender to the Tribunal of two fugitive indictees. We
also welcome the cooperation provided by Uganda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in facilitating
those arrests. The transfer of Idelphonse Nizeyimana to
Arusha only one day after his arrest in Uganda is an
example, as President Byron said, of swift and efficient
cooperation by a Member State with the Tribunal.
Nevertheless, it is deeply unsatisfactory that so many
ICTR fugitives remain at large, and we call on all

17

S/PV.6228

United Nations Member States to cooperate in this
issue.
In particular, we regret that Kenya has not
responded to the Prosecutor’s requests for information.
We urge the Kenyan Government to step up its level of
cooperation with the Tribunal and to share any
information that it may hold on the current
whereabouts of Félicien Kabuga. If I remember
correctly, when the Council debated these issues last
June, the representative of Kenya said that his
Government was certain that Kabuga had left Kenya.
That, of course, meant that the Kenyan Government
knew that Kabuga had been in Kenya and begged the
question what evidence they had of his presence in
Kenya and his subsequent departure, and what they
could do with that evidence to help track Kabuga’s
current location.
My Government notes the Prosecutor’s intention
to refer this matter formally to this Council, and in any
case we would welcome more detailed assessment of
State cooperation in the ICTR Prosecutor’s future
reports. The Security Council needs to be kept fully
informed of developments in tracking the fugitives to
enable us to consider all options.
Finally, I would like to look forward to the
establishment of a residual mechanism to carry out the
essential functions of the Tribunals that need to be
continued following completion of their trial and
appeal work, such as witness protection, review of
judgements, sentence enforcement, management of
archives and, if necessary, trial of fugitives. We
consider that the Tribunals should do everything
possible to refer all appropriate cases to national
jurisdictions to reduce the trial burden of the residual
mechanism. In that context we warmly welcome the
effort being undertaken by Rwanda to enhance the
capacity of their judicial system to facilitate referrals,
efforts which my Government is supporting.
Establishment of that mechanism will be vital for
the legacy of the Tribunals. We welcome the report of
the Secretary-General issued earlier this year, which
provides useful guidance to the Security Council on
how these issues can be managed (S/2009/258). We
also recognize and appreciate the preparatory work
undertaken by both Tribunals in making ready for the
establishment
of
the
mechanism,
including
implementation of recommendations in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.

18

My Government will continue to play an active
role in the ongoing discussions under the able
chairmanship of Austria. We hope we will be able to
reach agreement in the first half of next year on a
resolution on the establishment of the residual
mechanism. Even though final completion of the
Tribunals’ work is still some way off, it is important
that we take timely decisions, particularly on location
and core functions of the mechanism, to allow for
orderly planning of the completion and postcompletion phase of the Tribunals’ activity.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the United Kingdom for the kind
words he addressed to me.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): On behalf of
the delegation of Viet Nam, I warmly congratulate you,
Sir, and your delegation on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. In discharging
your important task, you and your delegation can rely
on the fullest cooperation of my delegation. I would
also like to convey to Ambassador Thomas MayrHarting and the delegation of Austria our sincere
appreciation of their effective leadership of the work of
the Council in November.
I thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings and
their comprehensive reports on the work of the two
Tribunals.
My delegation notes with appreciation the
commitment of the Tribunals to accomplishing their
completion strategies as soon as possible. While
making efforts to complete a large amount of trial
work, both Tribunals have also undertaken measures,
as recommended by the Secretary-General, in
preparations for the transition to the residual
mechanism.
In adopting resolution 1534 (2004), the Security
Council expressed its determination to review the
implementation of the Tribunals’ completion strategies
and to ensure that the timeframes set out in the
completion strategies and endorsed by resolution 1503
(2003) would be met. At present, both Tribunals
estimate their completion date of all appeals to be
between the end of 2012 and mid-2013. That will
require that the Security Council consider proper
adjustments to facilitate the Tribunals’ efforts to

09-63003

S/PV.6228

complete their mandates without further slippage. We
urge the Tribunals to take all necessary measures to
meet the requirements of the completion strategies, and
we call on all Member States to extend full cooperation
with a view to helping the Tribunals with an early
completion of their work.
We support all efforts aimed at strengthening
competent national judicial systems to facilitate the
transfer of cases involving intermediate- and lowerrank indictees, including fugitives, from the Tribunals
to national jurisdictions.
Before concluding, I wish to express our high
appreciation of the work of the Council’s Informal
Working Group on international tribunals concerning a
possible residual mechanism to replace the ICTY and
the ICTR in their post-completion period. The Working
Group has been able to reach numerous common
understandings providing the basic elements of an
initial draft resolution on such a residual mechanism.
Viet Nam encourages the Working Group to continue
its deliberations, in close collaboration with the
Tribunals, to finalize the draft resolution.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Viet Nam for his kind words
addressed to me.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate our Austrian
colleague for the way in which he presided over the
Council in November. I would also like to convey to
you, Mr. President, our best wishes for your presidency
for the month of December. We know that you will
carry out these functions with the necessary firmness
and effectiveness. I would like to add that the fact that
your presidency is being conducted in French will only
lend more clarity, logic and elegance to our work. I see
that my statement has earned unanimous approval
around the table.
I would like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their presentation of
their reports. France endorses the statement to be made
by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union.
The briefings we have heard confirm that the
deadlines set in the completion strategies for the
Tribunals will be missed and that their work will

09-63003

continue beyond 2010. The Security Council must
consider the consequences of this. The first thing to do
is to give the Tribunals the means to complete their
trials and appeals as soon as possible, in full
compliance with the rules of fairness and justice. The
mandate of the appeal judges must be immediately
extended to 31 December 2011. The Tribunals must be
able to exceed the authorized tenure for ad litem judges
by one more year. We hope that, in these decisions, the
Security Council will make clear its resolve to ensure
that the Tribunals will be able to bring their work to a
successful conclusion. Nevertheless, the delay in
implementing the Tribunals’ completion strategies
remains of concern, and we ask the Tribunals to
redouble their efforts to step up the effectiveness and
pace of the work of the Trial and Appeal Chambers.
The work of the Prosecutors is particularly
essential to tracking fugitives, whose arrest and
transfer to the Tribunals is a priority. The fact that
some accused remain at large is one of the major areas
of uncertainty hindering the completion strategies. The
mission of the Tribunals will not be accomplished so
long as these individuals have not been arrested and
tried.
In this regard, the Serbian authorities’ arrest of
Mr. Karadžić was a major step forward for the ICTY.
We now await the arrests of Mr. Mladić and
Mr. Hadžić. Serbia must continue on the path that its
Government has recently taken. Full cooperation with
the ICTY, be it in tracking fugitives or bringing them to
justice, is an essential element of the stabilization and
association strategy being pursued by the European
Union for all countries in the region of the former
Yugoslavia. We trust in the efforts of Croatia to resolve
pending issues.
With respect to the ICTR, we commend the arrest
and transfer of two fugitives to Arusha in the period
under review. Eleven of the accused, including three of
highest rank, remain at large. We call on all concerned
States to provide Prosecutor Jallow with the necessary
cooperation. We reiterate our request to Kenya to fulfil
its obligations with respect to the arrest and transfer of
Félicien Kabuga to the ICTR. We welcome Rwanda’s
efforts to overcome legal obstacles to the referral of
cases to its jurisdiction, allowing it to try lower-rank
fugitives. Ensuring the protection of witnesses remains
critical.

19

S/PV.6228

I would recall that, if the problem of fugitives is
not resolved quickly, it will have to be addressed in the
context of the legacy of the Tribunals. Indeed, it would
be unacceptable for the Tribunals’ closure to entail
impunity for those who are at large. This function will
fall to the residual mechanism carrying out essential
functions once the Tribunals are closed. The Security
Council Informal Working Group on international
tribunals has continued to work on this subject under
the effective leadership of Austria, for which we are
grateful.
An examination of the Secretary-General’s report
on this subject (S/2009/258) will allow the Group to
consider the topic more deeply. The report contains a
number of recommendations addressed to the Tribunals
on immediate preparations for the transition to the
residual mechanism. My country, eager to ensure that
the Council adopts a timely decision on preserving the
integrity of the Tribunals’ legacy, is participating in
that work. The solution must meet the criteria of
simplicity, modesty and economy. It must avoid all
duplication and, indeed, should make use of services
provided by other institutions.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of France for his kinds words addressed
to me.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): At the outset, let me join
previous speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for December. We are grateful to Ambassador MayrHarting and his team for the excellent leadership with
which they successfully conducted the work of the
Council in November. I would also like to thank the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the Tribunals for briefing
us on the latest developments in their completion
strategies.

(S/2009/394 and S/2009/396), the two Tribunals have
affirmed that this was unrealistic on the basis of their
latest estimates. Japan notes with gratitude the efforts
made by the two Tribunals to minimize the delays in
the proceedings, while ensuring fair trials. We strongly
encourage the Tribunals to continue their efforts to
complete their work as expeditiously as possible.
Regarding particular requests by the Tribunals,
such as for the extension of their judges’ terms, we
have been informed that these measures are necessary
in order to accomplish the completion strategy in an
expeditious and cost-effective manner. Based on this
understanding, Japan is prepared to work on the
necessary measures to be taken by the Council. We also
note the remarks on the necessity of staff retention to
the work of the Tribunals.
It is clear that the arrest of the remaining
fugitives is of paramount importance to the success of
the Tribunals. We commend the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda for the
arrest and transfer to the ICTR of Grégoire Ndahimana
and Idelphonse Nizeyimana. On the other hand, it is
regrettable that two suspects indicted by the ICTY,
Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić, and 11 others under
indictment by the ICTR, including Félicien Kabuga,
have yet to be apprehended. We encourage the relevant
States to cooperate in order to secure the arrest of all
indictees as early as possible.
The referral of cases is an important part of the
completion strategy. In this regard, we appreciate the
efforts made by the Rwandan authorities to facilitate
the referral of cases, including the establishment of a
witness protection service within the Rwandan
judiciary.

The contribution of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) to the
development of international criminal law cannot be
overstated. In this regard, we would like to extend our
appreciation to all the judges, prosecutors and staff for
their devoted efforts to ensure the fair and expeditious
operation of these important judicial bodies.

With regard to the ICTY, cooperation from States
of the former Yugoslavia in such areas as access to
archives, documents and witnesses is also vital. We
take positive note of the initiative taken by Croatia to
accelerate cooperation in response to the request of the
Prosecutor in relation to the missing documents. We
also take positive note of the improved cooperation of
Serbia and the adequate response of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the requests of the Prosecutor. We
encourage them to continue their efforts in this regard.

Japan expected and strongly urged the Tribunals
to complete all judicial proceedings in 2010, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1503
(2003). We recall that, in their most recent reports

Given that the ICTY and the ICTR were
established by Security Council resolutions adopted
under Chapter VII of the Charter in an exceptional
manner, they are facing challenges unique to ad hoc

20

09-63003

S/PV.6228

tribunals, including the need for a residual mechanism
after completion, which was not fully anticipated at the
time of their establishment. Japan attaches great
importance to the rule of law, and considers that
impunity for the most serious crimes must not be
condoned and that the individuals involved must be
brought to justice in accordance with international
standards. The residual mechanism should serve to this
end, while efforts must be made to maintain as costeffective a system as possible.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on the administrative and budgetary aspects of residual
mechanisms dated 21 May 2009 (S/2009/258),
submitted pursuant to the Council’s presidential
statement of 19 December 2008 (S/PRST/2008/47).
The report provides a valuable basis for our discussion
in the Informal Working Group on international
tribunals under the chairmanship of Austria. We thank
both Tribunals for including in their reports
preparatory measures taken for the transitional period,
which the Informal Working Group requested based on
the recommendation of the report. We will continue to
take active part in the discussion on the residual
structures to be established, paying due attention to the
progress of the proceedings at the Tribunals.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Japan for his kind words addressed to
me.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, the Chinese delegation wishes to
congratulate Burkina Faso on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. We also congratulate Austria on its
successful presidency last month. I thank President
Robinson, Prosecutor Brammertz, President Byron and
Prosecutor Jallow for their briefings this morning.
We note that since the Security Council
established the completion strategies for the two
Tribunals, both have worked diligently to implement
the strategies and made sustained progress, which we
appreciate and commend. There is only one year left
before the deadline established for the completion
strategies, but trial work is still proceeding within the
Tribunals. It is unlikely that all the work will be
completed on schedule. In that regard, the anticipated
date for the completion of all appeal cases by the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) has been pushed back to 2014, while the

09-63003

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
will complete most of its trial work in 2010, although
the date for the completion of appeal cases has been
pushed back to 2013.
We note the many reasons for such delays and
that certain factors therein were unanticipated by the
Tribunals. However, the completion strategies
established as an overall goal by the Security Council
must always be followed by all actors. We hope that,
based on their past efforts, the Tribunals will explore
further effective working methods to accelerate the
task of fulfilling the completion strategies.
We note that, according to the ICTY’s report
(S/2009/589), between 2005 and 2007 eight cases were
referred to the relevant national judicial organs and that
no cases now remain eligible for referral. The report of
the ICTR (S/2009/587) fully recognizes that the effort
to refer relevant cases to national jurisdictions is a
critical element of the completion strategy and
reaffirms the Tribunal’s commitment to ongoing efforts
in that regard. We reiterate that strenuous efforts to
refer cases and transfer fugitives to willing and capable
countries are key tasks of the completion strategies. We
hope that the two Tribunals will continue to adopt
measures to that end, and call on the countries
concerned to cooperate fully with them.
We are pleased to note that, at the request of the
Security Council, the reports of the two Tribunals refer
to the implementation of the recommendations
contained in paragraph 259 of the report of the
Secretary-General on the administrative and budgetary
aspects of the options for possible locations for the
archives of the ICTY and the ICTR and the seat of the
residual mechanism or mechanisms for the Tribunals
(S/2009/258). That implementation will help the two
Tribunals to transition successfully to the residual
mechanism or mechanisms in the future. We hope that
the Tribunals’ efforts to that end will enjoy early and
substantive success.
The Security Council’s Informal Working Group
on international tribunals is discussing the issue of a
residual mechanism for the two Tribunals and will hold
consultations on a relevant draft resolution. We thank
the Informal Working Group for its efforts. We
appreciate the contributions of the Austrian delegation
in that respect and the comments and suggestions of
the Tribunals to the Working Group in this process. We
hope that the Working Group’s efforts will help to

21

S/PV.6228

promote the
strategies.

implementation

of

the

completion

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of China for his kinds words addressed
to me.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council in December and by assuring
you of my delegation’s full cooperation during this
busy month. Let me also thank Ambassador MayrHarting and the delegation of Austria for their excellent
stewardship of the Council last month.
I should like today to welcome the Tribunal
Presidents and Prosecutors back to the Council and
thank them for their assessments. The United States
commends the representatives and staff of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their work to bring the
perpetrators of some of the world’s most heinous
crimes to justice. We particularly appreciate the efforts
of ICTR President Byron, ICTY President Robinson,
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow, and Registrars
Dieng and Hocking. We salute their continued
dedication to the cause of justice as they prepare for
the closure of the Tribunals. An efficient closure that
continues to support the victims and ensures that they
receive a measure of justice for these crimes will
require difficult, dedicated work.
The United States believes it is important to
create a residual mechanism to manage the necessary
functions of the Tribunals after the completion of their
pending trials and appeals. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the administrative and
budgetary aspects of such a mechanism (S/2009/258),
which will help decision makers develop an effective
and cost-efficient one. We urge both Tribunals to
continue to strive to complete their work by the earliest
possible date, and we thank the Security Council
Working Group chaired by Austria for its efforts to
address and resolve residual issues.
We must remember why the Tribunals were
established — to identify and hold accountable those
responsible for some of history’s worst crimes. We
must not lose sight of the historic importance of this
task. We must work to establish residual mechanisms
that do not allow the 13 outstanding ICTY and ICTR
fugitives to escape justice. Individuals indicted by the

22

Tribunals who remain at large must be apprehended
and brought to justice without further delay. We call on
all States to fulfil their legal obligations to cooperate
with the Tribunals and to take the necessary steps to
ensure that the remaining fugitives are apprehended.
In particular, I should like to underscore the need
to reinforce efforts to bring ICTR fugitive Félicien
Kabuga to face international justice. We are concerned
that the Government of Kenya has not responded to the
Tribunal’s request for certain Government records
relating to Kabuga’s assets and has not provided details
to support the claim that Kabuga has left Kenya. We
urge Kenya to act immediately on the Tribunal’s
recommendations and to take effective steps to deny
Kabuga access to his support networks.
The United States acknowledges Rwanda’s desire
to receive transferred cases from the ICTR. We
commend the Prosecutor’s support for that effort as
well as the work by the Rwandan Government and
others to build up capacity in the Rwandan legal
system to make such transfers possible. We welcome
the transfer last month of eight individuals convicted
by the Special Court for Sierra Leone to Mpanga
Prison in Rwanda, an achievement that highlights
Rwanda’s growing capacity and commitment to
meeting international standards. The ICTR’s ability to
transfer cases to Rwanda and other States as
appropriate is a critical step towards meeting the
Tribunal’s completion strategy.
The United States commends the efforts of States
to cooperate with the ICTY, but vital duties remain
unmet. The two remaining fugitives, Ratko Mladić and
Goran Hadžić, must be arrested and transferred to the
Tribunal to face justice. Cooperation with the ICTY
remains a fundamental obligation for all States in the
region. We commend the Government of Serbia for its
improved cooperation and we urge it to continue to do
everything in its power to locate, arrest and transfer
Mladić to the Tribunal. The arrests of Mladić and
Hadžić are important for the successful completion of
ICTY’s mandate, for Serbia’s full Euro-Atlantic
integration and for the cause of justice and
accountability.
We welcome Croatia’s efforts to response to the
Trial Chamber’s September 2008 order to deliver
artillery documentation from Operation Storm or
engage in a credible investigation into its fate. We
believe that latest ongoing investigation and

09-63003

S/PV.6228

establishment of a task force by the Government of
Croatia are significant steps forward. At the same time,
we encourage the Croatian authorities to explore
additional measures, such as using outside expertise
and more aggressive investigative techniques that
might help recover additional documents.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made great strides to
cooperate with the Tribunal, and ICTY has done a
commendable job in supporting the development of
domestic courts. But last month, the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina informed
us that domestic war crimes prosecutions and reform of
the justice sector have suffered due to the inability of
leaders to reach political decisions that advance
national goals. We note the critically important work
that international judges are doing in that country and
we support the extension of their mandate beyond
December. International judges and prosecutors have
worked tirelessly to bring justice to the victims of
atrocities regardless of ethnicity.
I wish to thank again the Presidents, Prosecutors,
Registrars and Tribunal staffs for their dedication.
Their work remains critically important to the fight
against impunity and for stability and reconciliation in
the regions involved.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the United States for the kind words
she has addressed to me.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I should like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
December. I am sure that, under your able guidance,
the Council will enjoy a smooth and productive
programme of work. I should also like to express our
sincere appreciation to Ambassador Thomas MayrHarting and the entire Austrian Mission for their
excellent leadership of the Council during the month of
November.
I wish to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their comprehensive
briefings. Turkey greatly values the important work
carried out by the Tribunals in combating impunity and
providing justice to the victims of violations of
international humanitarian law committed on the
territories of the former Yugoslavia and of Rwanda. We

09-63003

commend the judges, prosecutors and staff for their
dedication and hard work.
Despite the continued efforts of both Tribunals,
the projected dates for the completion of their work
will not be met, as indicated in the reports of the
Tribunals
(S/2009/587
and
S/2009/589).
We
acknowledge that the delay in the trial schedule mainly
resulted from a number of reasons that are not
immediately within the control of the Tribunals. We
nevertheless urge the Tribunals to continue to
implement the completion strategies and complete their
work at the earliest date possible, while ensuring
international judicial safeguards and standards.
Cooperation between Member States and the
Tribunals is essential for the successful completion of
the Tribunals’ mandates. In that regard, we welcome
the cooperation by Uganda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the recent arrest and transfer
of two fugitives to the ICTR. We also welcome
Prosecutor
Brammertz’s
report
of
improved
cooperation by Serbia, and we share the hope that that
improved cooperation will result in the apprehension of
the fugitives Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić in the
near future.
The arrest of the remaining fugitives sought by
ICTY and ICTR continues to constitute a top priority
for the completion of the Tribunals’ work. All those
responsible for violations of international humanitarian
law committed on the territories of the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda must be brought to justice, and
we appeal to all States to cooperate with the Tribunals
so as to ensure the arrests of the remaining fugitives.
Prosecutor Brammertz’s report (S/2009/589,
annex II) also states that Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina have adequately responded to requests for
assistance by the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTY.
We welcome the continued efforts of both countries in
order to fulfil their obligations to cooperate with the
ICTY. In that context, the establishment of a task force
by the Croatian authorities is a positive and important
step forward.
The referral of cases to national jurisdictions is
another important element of the fulfilment of the
Tribunals’ mandates. The international community
should provide support, where necessary, in order to
strengthen the capacity of the national institutions of
the concerned countries. We welcome Rwanda’s efforts

23

S/PV.6228

to meet the requirements for the referral of cases to its
jurisdiction.

259 of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/258),
which the Council endorsed.

Finally, as highlighted by the Presidents of the
Tribunals, retaining qualified staff is also of great
importance for the timely completion of the mandates.
Thus, both Tribunals should be provided with the
necessary means so that the judicial capacity of the
Tribunals can meet the current circumstances. Turkey
is ready to support every step in that direction.

We acknowledge the efforts by both Tribunals to
accelerate the completion of their judicial activities in
a responsible and efficient way, guaranteeing the main
objective of imparting justice and respecting the due
process rights of the accused. We are aware that
judicial activity will always be subject to a series of
unforeseen conditions and circumstances and that both
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) face them in the best way
possible. However, the actions already undertaken by
both Tribunals give us the confidence to urge them to
implement additional measures to conclude their work
and give weight to the establishment of a residual
mechanism.

Since their inception, the ICTY and ICTR have
made important contributions to international criminal
justice. As we are now approaching their closure date,
we also need to tackle legacy and residual issues. The
Informal Working Group on the International Tribunals
has been working intensively on those issues under the
chairmanship of the Austrian delegation and with the
valuable assistance of the Office of Legal Affairs.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
administrative and budgetary aspects of the residual
issues has greatly contributed to the discussions in the
Working Group, and we are pleased to note that the
Tribunals have already commenced the work on the
recommendations contained in the report. We are
looking forward to intensifying our discussions in the
Working Group with a view to reaching an agreement
on the residual issues in the near future.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Turkey for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to express our best wishes and offer
our cooperation to the delegation of Burkina Faso for
the conduct of the Council’s work during December. I
would also like to thank the Burkina Faso delegation
for the close cooperation we developed with them in
the Security Council over the past year. Mexico would
like to acknowledge Ambassador Mayr-Harting and the
Austrian delegation for their excellent work as
President of the Security Council in November.
My delegation would like to thank the Presidents
and Prosecutors of the International Tribunals for
Rwanda and the Former Yugoslavia for presenting their
respective biannual progress reports (S/2009/587 and
S/2009/589) on the completion strategies of their
activities, including the specific measures they have
adopted to conclude their work, as well as the progress
made in fulfilling the recommendations of paragraph

24

With regard to the report of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, we wish to emphasize
some of the progress that has been made, in
comparison to the biannual report of last June. A
significant number of sentences have been pronounced
and several trials are close to sentencing, that is, before
the end of this year. Two fugitives have been arrested —
one of them of a high rank — thanks to cooperation by
neighbouring States, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Uganda. Significant measure have been
adopted with regard to criminal procedures to preserve
the necessary evidence to begin the trials that we all
hope will take place in the near future against those
accused who are still at large.
Regarding the report of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the transfer to
national jurisdictions of cases of mid- and low-level
accused stands out. That contributes to strengthening
the national capacities of countries in the region to
handle serious violations of international humanitarian
law. Additionally, data on the progressive reduction of
judicial activity are relevant in that the residual
mechanism can have a judicial function limited to
accused of the highest rank.
We have taken note of the valuable judicial
cooperation by the Government of Croatia, and we
encourage it to continue in the same way with issues
pending before the Tribunal. Unfortunately, we have
also taken note — and this is an insult to the
international community — of the need for all States,
not just the States in the region, to end the impunity

09-63003

S/PV.6228

that two of the main perpetrators of the most serious
human rights violations in the Balkans have continued
to enjoy.

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Mexico for the kind words he
addressed to me.

Both Tribunals have emphasized the need to
maintain their staff and to extend certain mandates of
some judges in order to meet the dates that the Council
has established for the completion of their tasks. We
should not overlook the fact that the Tribunals have to
face the ongoing challenge of achieving a balance
between imparting justice, administrative efficiency,
guaranteeing the fundamental rights of the alleged
perpetrators, witnesses and victims, and completing
their work as soon as possible. Nor can we
underestimate the fact that that task is doubly difficult
in the context of judicial proceedings. For those
reasons, the Security Council should continue, in our
opinion, to have a pragmatic and flexible approach
with regard to the Tribunals’ completion strategies. We
believe the best option would be for them to conclude
their work in the very near future, but not because of
peremptory dates.

Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over our
work for the month of December. We are sure that your
skills, experience and leadership and the support of
your delegation will contribute to the success of our
work. I would also like to thank the Austrian
delegation and Ambassador Mayr-Harting for their
excellent work in November, which enabled us to
successfully complete the Council’s work.

Progress in the implementation of the completion
strategies, which the Tribunals have shared with us,
can contribute to the establishment of the residual
mechanism in a more manageable and efficient way. In
the coming months we will be giving shape to the
residual mechanism in the framework of the Informal
Working Group on the International Criminal
Tribunals, on which our colleague from Austria has
given a very detailed summary. We have a very
important foundation for that, thanks to the SecretaryGeneral’s report and to the first-hand, detailed
information on each of the functions to be assumed by
the mechanism that those in charge of the Tribunals
have just presented to us, information based on
experience.
Even in the midst of those minute considerations,
the Security Council must continue to observe the
principal goal, which is that of guaranteeing the
carrying out of justice with regard to the most serious
crimes and atrocities against humanity that were
committed in the context of conflict in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Mexico will continue working
in the next few months to contribute to the successful
implementation of the completion strategies of both
Tribunals and the establishment of the residual
mechanism.

09-63003

I wish to begin by thanking the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunals for Rwanda
and the Former Yugoslavia for their briefings. Costa
Rica acknowledges, and thanks them for, their efforts
to pursue the completion strategies set in resolutions
1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).
Based on the conviction that lasting peace is
inseparable from justice, Costa Rica has supported all
efforts of the international community to strengthen the
international criminal justice system. We have thus
contributed to the development and consolidation of a
cluster of institutions, one that is new in international
law, to prevent the most serious crimes, stop impunity
and guarantee redress.
The Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals has achieved significant
progress in its debate on the essential functions which
should remain active once the Tribunals complete their
pending cases. Costa Rica stresses the importance of
the agreements reached on the need for the Tribunals to
transfer new cases to national tribunals where
appropriate and on the need to continue to strengthen
capacity in the affected countries. There is no doubt
that an important part of the legacy of both Tribunals
will be their achievements in transferring skills and
building capacity in the judicial systems of countries
under their jurisdiction.
Despite this progress, Costa Rica regrets that the
necessary consensus has not been reached on the
elements of a new resolution which should provide
greater precision on the closure of both Tribunals and
agreement on the functions of the residual mechanism
or mechanisms.
Costa Rica appreciates and is grateful for the
Secretariat’s report on the administrative and budgetary

25

S/PV.6228

aspects of the options for possible locations for the
archives of the Tribunals and the seat of the residual
mechanism(s) for the Tribunals (S/2009/258). We
acknowledge that the archives are the property of the
United Nations, but we would like to stress their
condition as historical memory and instruments of
reconciliation and peace, which belong fundamentally
to the countries under the jurisdiction of the Tribunals.
Before closing, I would like to draw attention to
the priority nature of the arrest of fugitives for the
completion of the work of the Tribunals. Without the
prosecution of these fugitives, particularly Kabuga,
Mladic and Hadzic, the implementation of the
Tribunals’ mandates would be incomplete. Costa Rica
calls on all States to cooperate with the Tribunals and
to comply with Council resolutions and provide any
information that would indicate the whereabouts of the
fugitives.
On taking stock of the work of the two
international Tribunals, we would like to acknowledge
the steps taken by Croatia to improve its cooperation
with the ICTY, and we hope that they will be
successful. Costa Rica acknowledges and thanks the
judges, Prosecutors and staff for their contributions and
supports them in their efforts to implement the
completion strategies in the most efficient way
possible. We also call for the consideration of measures
to curb the turnover of technical staff of the Tribunals,
in the hope that its staff will obtain the same
contractual terms and conditions as other United
Nations officials.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Costa Rica for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I assure you of our
full support and cooperation. In the same breath, I
would like to salute Ambassador Mayr-Harting for the
very able manner in which he and his country presided
over the Council last month.
We welcome The Honourable Justice Byron,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, and The Honourable Justice Robinson,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, and thank them for the briefings. We also
thank Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow for
their briefings. Uganda appreciates the tremendous

26

work carried out so far by the Tribunals. We attach
great importance to the delivery of justice and the fight
against impunity for persons who bear the greatest
responsibility for heinous crimes and violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
In resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004), the
Security Council set a deadline and called upon the
Tribunals to take all measures possible to complete all
trial activities. It stressed the importance of fully
implementing the completion strategies. It is now
obvious that these targets cannot be met due to
intervening circumstances outside the control of the
Tribunals. The arrest of Karadzic, in the case of the
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, as well as, more
recently, the arrest of Nizeyimana in Uganda, shows
that dispensing justice cannot be adequately guided by
deadlines. Since the Tribunals have no police forces of
their own but depend upon the cooperation of States,
we call upon States to cooperate with the Prosecutors
and help in the arrest and transfer of the remaining
fugitives.
Even when the Tribunals’ mandates are over,
there are residual issues that will remain until the last
sentence is served. Certain functions of the Tribunals
will not necessarily terminate upon the conclusion of
the trials and appeals. The fugitives, if and when they
are apprehended, the convicts serving sentences, and
the witnesses and victims that may still be under
protection will still need oversight by the mechanisms.
There is no substitute for programmes such as those
that provide protection for victims and witnesses. We
note, for instance, the challenges of residual issues
which are also of concern to other interim judicial
tribunals. Perhaps the only sure way of avoiding
interim measures is to consider embracing permanent
institutions such as the International Criminal Court.
Uganda
fully
supports
an
expeditious
improvement in the conditions of service for the ad
litem judges.
We welcome the measures taken to preserve and
manage the archives. My delegation is aware that the
archives are the property of the United Nations, but we
are also cognizant of the need to keep them in their
respective regions, along with the residual mechanisms
for ease of access by the primary stakeholders: the
victims of these heinous crimes.
We welcome the formation of a genocide
awareness-raising network being conducted in Rwanda

09-63003

S/PV.6228

by the Tribunal and call upon those who are able to
contribute to this effort to do so. The training of
Rwandan jurists, including training in international
criminal law, is welcome, as it ensures that there will
be adequate preparation for the courts in Rwanda to
handle the cases that are not handled by the Tribunal.
The reported high demand for future training
strengthens the case for keeping the archives and
residual mechanisms in the region. Uganda therefore
recommends the establishment of two mechanisms, one
in the African region and the other in The Hague.
Witness intimidation leads to delay in the trial
process and should be curbed by appropriate measures
to ensure that the ultimate credibility of the process is
not put in doubt. We therefore support the allocation of
the necessary resources towards that end. The
formation of three Appeals Chamber benches to deal
expeditiously with the anticipated appeals is also
welcome. The holding of two separate sittings per day
by the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
ensures maximum utilization of the limited number of
courtrooms. We welcome the downsizing exercise
because it is in tandem with the reduced workload.
We are concerned about the high turnover of
highly qualified and essential staff as the Tribunals
near the end of their mandates. That can only
exacerbate an already difficult situation. We commend
the creation of the roster system, which ensures that
qualified replacements are within reach.
My delegation welcomes the outreach and
capacity-building programmes and other legacy matters
that form part of the Tribunals’ completion strategy.
That ensures that there will not be a vacuum upon
termination of the mandate. To that extent, the
Tribunals are exemplary models of international
criminal justice.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): First of all, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your delegation on the
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for December. We are certain that your African wisdom
and skills will enable you to direct the work of the
Council successfully. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Mayr-Harting and his delegation for
wisely conducting the Council’s work last month.
I wish to welcome the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the two courts, the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the

09-63003

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and thank
them for all the information that they provided in their
briefings.
We welcome the noticeable progress made in the
completion strategy work for the two Tribunals and the
strong determination of the judges, prosecutors and all
the staff of the Tribunals to complete their mandates
successfully and as soon as possible. However, we are
aware of the difficulties that the Tribunals encounter
while carrying out their work, in particular when the
swift arrest and extradition of the accused become
impossible. While it is true that we welcome the
cooperation of the Governments of Serbia, Croatia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda on the
arrest and the extradition of some senior accused, we
hope that all countries will continue to fully cooperate
in arresting the remaining fugitives as soon as possible,
given the importance of the arrests to provide equity
for the victims, to uphold justice, to achieve
reconciliation and to provide security and stability in
their respective countries and regions.
We firmly believe that enhancing the capacity of
the judicial authorities in the countries concerned, in
particular Rwanda, is especially important if we want
those national judicial institutions to take on the trials
that the two Tribunals will not be able to take up
because they will have completed their work. It is vital
to transfer as many pending cases as possible to
national jurisdictions, in full conformity with the rules
and procedures for fair trials. Transferring some cases
to national jurisdictions would undoubtedly boost the
rule of law in those countries, in particular access to
documentation, which is even more important than the
judicial procedures themselves in order to know the
history and national reconciliation efforts in those
countries.
We must ensure completion of the Tribunals’
work with scrupulous respect for the deadlines called
for by the two completion strategies, which means that
we must make a decision on the legacy of the
Tribunals. We are pleased to see the efforts made by
the informal Working Group on international tribunals,
chaired by Austria, seeking to reach an agreement on
all pending issues with regard to the legacy of the
Tribunals.
Thus, we would expect the Council to address the
conclusions of the Working Group in the near future,
and for it to establish an international mechanism that

27

S/PV.6228

would guarantee the effective and professional
treatment of the legacy of the two Tribunals after the
completion of their work.
The President (spoke in French): I would now
like to make a statement in my national capacity as the
representative of Burkina Faso.
As is right, I would like to thank the two
Presidents and the two Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) for their reports on their activities during these
past six months and on the implementation of the
completion strategy for each Tribunal, in accordance
with resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).
I would also like to thank Ambassador MayrHarting of Austria for the information that he has
provided us on the work of the informal Working
Group on international tribunals.
We would like to congratulate the two Tribunals
for their efforts to implement their completion
strategies within an acceptable timeline, and we
encourage them to maintain that pace.
Despite the efforts to make progress with pending
cases, the situation of high-ranking fugitives, such as
Ratko Mladić, Goran Hadžić or Félicien Kabuga,
remains a source of concern. We urge the Offices of the
two Prosecutors to continue to make the necessary
efforts to arrest them. We call on all States, in
particular those in the regions concerned, to cooperate
with the Tribunals at the highest possible level to that
end. We congratulate Uganda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for their help in arresting two
fugitives in neighbouring countries.
On the issue of the deadline for completing their
work, we understand that factors beyond the Tribunals’
control have caused delays in their daily work. We
therefore note the necessity of the indicative deadline
of 2013 for the finalization of judicial activities.
In the meantime, it is important that the
initiatives to redeploy staff and reduce the size of the
Tribunals continue. In the same vein, we are pleased to
see that cases are successfully being transferred to
national jurisdictions by the ICTY, and we urge the
ICTR to continue to pay particular attention to the need
to transfer the cases of second- and intermediate-rank
accused to national jurisdictions, in particular that of
Rwanda. That is clearly an essential element of the

28

completion strategy of that Tribunal as approved by the
Security Council.
Although we understand the reasons behind
recourse to the dual employment of some judges who
have decided to return to their national administrations,
we encourage the Tribunals to limit such cases, which
should be exceptional. We urge them to pursue their
awareness-raising and capacity-building efforts and to
further enhance their cooperation ties with national
jurisdictions. Similarly, the protection of victims and
witnesses should be an ongoing priority for the
Tribunals, especially in light of the invaluable
contribution of witnesses to the administration of
justice.
With regard to the status of the ICTR ad litem
judges, most of whom have worked on a permanent
basis for five years or more, we believe that it would
only be fair for the Security Council to consider the
question of benefits for judges, to which they should be
entitled in light of their conditions of service.
Burkina Faso has followed with interest the
efforts of the Security Council Informal Working
Group in addressing residual matters under the
chairmanship of Austria, whom we congratulate for its
leadership and for having prepared the draft resolution
under discussion in the Working Group. We hope that
the draft will enable us to reach a satisfactory solution
to the significant concerns about the functions,
character and structure of the residual mechanism, as
well as the question of the archives of the Tribunals.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Iceland,
Albania,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia align themselves with this
statement.
At the outset I would like to thank the Presidents
of both Tribunals, Judge Robinson of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and Judge Byron of the International Criminal Tribunal
for
Rwanda
(ICTR),
and
the
Prosecutors,
Mr. Brammertz and Mr. Jallow, for their briefings on

09-63003

S/PV.6228

the implementation of the completion strategies of the
Tribunals.
Preserving the legacy and integrity of the
Tribunals is of the utmost importance to the European
Union. The Tribunals have had a pioneering role in the
fight against impunity and made outstanding
contributions to international criminal law and
international humanitarian law. It is a fact that the
Tribunals will not be able to complete their work
within the dates envisaged in resolutions 1503 (2003)
and 1534 (2004). A number of challenges face both
Tribunals in their work towards completing their
mandates.
The European Union regrets that, despite the
continuing appeals of the international community,
13 accused remain at large. The arrest of the remaining
fugitives is necessary for the completion of the
Tribunals’ work. Among those still at large are key
indictees allegedly responsible for the most serious
atrocities, such as Ratko Mladić, Goran Hadžić and
Félicien Kabuga. There have been many commendable
instances of cooperation. However, the European
Union continues to urge all States to cooperate
immediately and unconditionally with both Tribunals,
in full compliance with their obligations under the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
As outlined in the current completion strategy
reports, retaining qualified staff and judges remains a
difficult task. We acknowledge the importance of
enabling the Tribunals to complete the proceedings as
soon as possible without compromising due process.
However, we also reiterate the need for the Tribunals to
ensure that they continue to seek efficiencies wherever
possible and that they move to downsize as soon as
possible, in line with the level of trial and other
remaining activities.
We note with appreciation the ICTR’s high output
in judgements and newly commenced trials in 2009.
The European takes note of the continuing commitment
to the completion of the mandates of the Tribunals. The
EU also urges the Tribunals to continue to identify
further measures to complete their work in an efficient
and expedient manner.
I will now turn to the work of the ICTY more
specifically. The EU would like to recall that full
cooperation with the ICTY is an essential element of
the enlargement strategy of the European Union. This
includes
assisting
in
strengthening
national

09-63003

jurisdictions through capacity-building, as called for in
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2003). Our
commitment to strengthened cooperation and capacitybuilding is demonstrated by the number of EU
members that have concluded agreements with the
Tribunal on the relocation of witnesses, the
enforcement of sentences, the secondment of prison
staff, and the financial and institutional support of the
EU to the Tribunal’s capacity-building and outreach
activities.
We note with appreciation the efforts made by
Rwanda to meet the demands regarding the right to a
fair trial. The ongoing strengthening of the Rwandan
legal system and its ability to adjudicate cases from the
ICTR will, we hope, permit the ICTR to transfer such
defendants to the Rwandan courts. These efforts have
been fully supported by the European Union as an
important step towards the fulfilment of the Tribunal’s
completion strategy.
The primary responsibility for the prevention,
investigation and prosecution of genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity lies with States. Thus, the
European Union continues to support the capacitybuilding activities of both Tribunals, which also
contribute to the enhancement of the rule of law and
regional stability.
The European Union welcomes the work on
residual issues of the Security Council Informal
Working Group on international tribunals, including
identifying functions that need to continue after the
two Tribunals have completed their work. We value the
open and transparent discussions under the Austrian
chairmanship, including by convening an Arria formula
meeting open to all Member States in October.
The European Union stands ready to continue to
work with the Council on finding the most appropriate
solutions to the residual and legacy issues. This
includes addressing questions of a practical nature, as
well as finding solutions to ensure adequate access to
the archives. The archives should foster reconciliation
and memory and contribute to the preservation of the
profound achievements of both Tribunals to secure a
long-term legacy. Existing capabilities should also be
built on and synergies between Tribunals should be
created as part of an overall strengthening of
international criminal justice.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

29

S/PV.6228

Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the Austrian
delegation for its remarkable presidency of the Security
Council in November and also to convey to you,
Mr. President, our best wishes for your presidency.
In addition to this statement, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has aligned itself with the joint statement
of the European Union.
Bosnia and Herzegovina expresses its profound
gratitude to the Presidents of both Tribunals, Judge
Robinson of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and Judge Byron of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
and the Prosecutors Mr. Brammertz and Mr. Jallow, for
their tireless work and determination in seeking justice,
and for their efforts in making their reports
comprehensive and detailed. The work of both
Tribunals has been crucial since they were established
and remains such in combating impunity. We also note
the importance of the Security Council Informal
Working Group on international tribunals and
commend the work of its Chair, Ambassador MayrHarding of Austria, as well as the efforts of the United
Nations Office of the Legal Counsel.
We especially welcome the positive assessments,
presented in the briefings of both the President and the
Prosecutor of the ICTY, of the level of cooperation
between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the ICTY, which
confirms once again our strong determination and
long-standing commitment to the Tribunal’s values,
goals and legacy. This high level of cooperation is also
reflected in the number of accused being transferred to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Of the 13 accused who have
been transferred to the national jurisdictions of
countries of the former Yugoslavia, 10 have been
transferred to Bosnia and Herzegovina alone. The
proceedings against nine of them have been concluded,
and the manner in which these cases were conducted
by the War Crimes Chamber of the State Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina was in full compliance with
the highest standards of international law. In that
context, we also strongly support the efforts that the
ICTY has made through its outreach programme and
the continuous support and assistance provided to
national jurisdictions in the region.
The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have
responded to the Tribunal’s requests for assistance on
documents and access to Government archives. The

30

authorities are also continuing to assist in facilitating
the appearance of witnesses before the Tribunal. In that
context, we want to underline the importance of the
role of the international community, which has been
essential in assisting with witness protection
programmes and, when necessary, in providing support
for witness relocation.
My country recognizes the efforts of Prosecutor
Brammertz to secure justice for victims and their
families.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully aware of the
conditions set out in resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004) for the accomplishment of the completion
strategy, but notes with concern that, with two fugitives
remaining at large, the full completion of the Tribunal’s
work cannot be expected.
There is no doubt that the Tribunals have served
as an inspiration to the international community by
refusing to let perpetrators of the most heinous and
grave crimes to escape justice. Therefore, the
international community itself must stand firm when it
comes to its decision that Ratko Mladić and Goran
Hadžić must be tried before the ICTY. Under no
circumstances can they count on impunity due to the
fact that the mandate of the Tribunal is coming to an
end. It is justice, and not deadlines, that the Tribunal
needs to deliver.
The implementation of the completion strategy
remains of great concern to us. We welcome the
ongoing discussion on an adequate residual mechanism
and understand the importance and complexity of the
issue. The mechanism requires consideration and needs
to be set up in such a manner as to deal adequately
with the issue of prosecuting those subject to
outstanding warrants and arrests and ensure that
impunity is not an option.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina for his kind
words addressed to me.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Serbia.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): First of all, let me
express the gratitude of Serbia to Judge Patrick
Robinson and Mr. Serge Brammertz, respectively the
President and Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, (ICTY), for all the

09-63003

S/PV.6228

effort and professionalism they have invested in
presenting their reports (see S/2009/589, annexes I and II).

matter in order to contribute to the resolution of those
important questions.

My country is highly appreciative of the fact that,
more than ever before, their reports are in essence in
full accord with Serbia’s own assessment of the level
of cooperation that has been reached. Judge Robinson
and Mr. Brammertz have recognized the entirely of the
efforts that Serbia is making to comply with its legal
and moral obligations. The efforts and commitments of
the services engaged in tracking and apprehending the
remaining fugitives have been recognized in a manner
that confirms my country’s political will and the
capacity of its institutions to complete successfully the
remaining tasks.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate once again
Serbia’s commitment to full cooperation with the
ICTY. The reports presented to the Council today
affirm that commitment and attest to the success of the
joint efforts to bring that cooperation to a successful
end.

There are no impediments to Serbia’s cooperation
with the ICTY at this time. Requests for assistance
with regard to the provision of documents, witness
protection and access to State archives are being
handled expeditiously. Most important, the efforts to
locate and apprehend Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić
are continuing unabated. The search for those
individuals is being conducted on an everyday basis.
The Government institutions of the Republic of Serbia
are constantly taking all possible measures in order to
bring the two remaining fugitives to justice.
That will go a long way towards alleviating the
legacies of the past, some of which have hamstrung the
recovery of Serbian society and other societies in the
region for a long time. Also, the resolution of this one
last remaining problem will confirm Serbia’s
willingness to face the truth about the events of the last
decade of the twentieth century and the crimes
perpetrated during the armed conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia. It will also demonstrate its maturity and
readiness to punish those responsible for the crimes
that were committed, regardless of their nationality or
the nationality of the victims.
Serbia continues to support the ICTY completion
strategy in its entirety and has maintained its
communication with responsible authorities on that
issue in recent months. Serbia’s position on the
potential residual mechanism and the future residual
functions was submitted to the Security Council in
October 2008 and March 2009. I would like to reiterate
Serbia’s great and lasting interest in those issues, as
well as to inform the Security Council that we remain
at its disposal for possible future discussions on the

09-63003

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Muchemi (Kenya): I wish to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Council for allowing me to participate
in the proceedings of the Council today and to make
my short statement.
Kenya appreciates the work of both the
Presidents and the Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), as well as the manner in which they have
conducted the affairs of their respective Tribunals. We
strongly support the international criminal justice
system. We recognize that the ad hoc criminal
Tribunals established by the Council and the
International Criminal Court must provide for, and
protect, the proper administration of justice by
prosecuting those who promote impunity. To that end,
the cooperation of Member States is vital if the courts
are to succeed in carrying out their mandates. Kenya is
fully aware of its international obligations and
continues to stand ready to offer its maximum
cooperation in that connection.
As we have stated on previous occasions, Kenya
supports the case put forward by the President of the
ICTR on behalf of ad litem judges. We urge that there
be an urgent resolution of that matter.
My delegation now wishes to comment on the
work of the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTR, and
in particular on the issue of referrals. In paragraph 54
of the report on the activities of the ICTR (see
S/2009/587, enclosure), it is implied that Kenya
continues to provide safe haven for Félicien Kabuga.
We note with disappointment that, despite Kenya’s
demonstrated support and cooperation with the Court
since its inception, both the President and the
Prosecutor, in their addresses this morning before the
Council, have continued to insinuate that Kenya is

31

S/PV.6228

either hiding fugitive Kabuga or is otherwise refusing
to fully discharge its obligation vis-à-vis his arrest. My
delegation strongly refutes that allegation and
reiterates that that fugitive is not in Kenya.
The Kenyan Government’s efforts in cooperating
with the ICTR are not in doubt. My country has
worked closely with the Tribunal. In that regard, we
have arrested and surrendered to the ICTR the largest
number of indictees. Kenya has also played a major
role in the relocation, protection and facilitation of
movement of witnesses for the Tribunal.
Several steps have been taken in a bid to trace
Mr. Kabuga, including the establishment of a joint
Kenya-ICTR task force, obtaining a freeze order on
property registered in the fugitive’s name and offering
cash rewards for anyone giving information that would
lead to his arrest. The search for Mr. Kabuga should
therefore be widened to other areas, because we might
be over-concentrating on Kenya whereas the fugitive
could be comfortably living elsewhere.
On 30 September 2009, as part of its continuing
and unreserved commitment to the work of ICTR,
Kenya concluded an extradition treaty with the
Republic of Rwanda that provides, inter alia, for the
extradition of Rwandans suspected of having
committed genocide. This underscores Kenya’s
commitment to and seriousness in the apprehension of
all perpetrators of the various crimes covered by the
treaty and their extradition to Rwanda to face justice.
My Government calls upon any person,
institution or other actors with information relating to
the whereabouts of the fugitive, whether in Kenya or in
any other country, to provide such information
forthwith to the ICTR, INTERPOL or any other
investigative agency in Kenya and elsewhere to
facilitate the expeditious apprehension of this indictee
so that he can face justice.
I wish to conclude my remarks by re-emphasizing
that, in the Kabuga case, the Government of Kenya has
fully discharged its international obligations and
cooperated with the ICTR officials, as called for by the
Security Council. We reiterate our commitment to the
high ideals of international criminal justice and the
eradication of impunity, and we will continue to
implement the recommendations of the Joint KenyaICTR Task Force and the resolutions of the Security
Council.

32

The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to participate in this
debate, and allow me to congratulate you on assuming
the presidency of the Council for the month of
December. We also congratulate Austria on the
successful conclusion of its presidency.
My delegation wishes to thank the President and
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings. We particularly
welcome their acknowledgement of the cooperation
extended to the Tribunal by my Government.
In the period since the Tribunal’s most recent
briefing to the Council, my Government has
consistently extended the cooperation and support
necessary to enable the ICTR to effectively execute its
mandate. We have continued to facilitate unfettered
access to witnesses for both the defence and the
prosecution and assisted the movement of witnesses to
and from Arusha. I am pleased to report to the Council
that, in my Government’s efforts to ensure the peace
and stability of our citizens, we have continued to
ensure the security of witnesses and, with the support
of the Office of the Prosecutor, established the Rwanda
witness protection service. My Government has
continued to support investigations initiated by both
the prosecution and the defence without prejudice to
either.
My
Government
remains
committed
to
continuing its support to the ICTR completion strategy,
as set out in resolution 1503 (2003). Despite the
decisions of the Trial and Appeals Chambers of the
ICTR to reject the Prosecutor’s decision to transfer
cases to Rwanda, we remain prepared to receive any
future cases transferred to our competent jurisdiction
by the ICTR and to address all of the issues raised in
objection by the Chambers in respect to their decisions.
We welcome the Prosecutor’s recognition of the
reforms undertaken by my Government in the justice
sector and his intention to renew his requests for
referrals to Rwanda.
The recent transfer by the Special Court for
Sierra Leone of five convicts to serve their sentences in
Rwanda is testament to the fact that this Court, after
due diligence, was satisfied that the efforts my
Government had undertaken and continues to
undertake were sufficient to merit transfer.

09-63003

S/PV.6228

We continue to maintain that the transfer to
Rwanda is based primarily on the fact that the crimes
falling under the Court’s mandate were committed in
Rwanda, mostly by Rwandans and against fellow
Rwandans. The evidence and witnesses used by this
Court are also from Rwanda. The end results of the
justice administered by the Tribunal are supposed to be
more visible in Rwanda than elsewhere, and we thank
the President of the ICTR for his recognition of this in
his statement this morning. We remain confident that
this situation will be remedied.
The recent decisions taken by the Trial and
Appeals Chambers continue to hamper my
Government’s ability to pursue and bring to justice
those suspected of genocide all over the world. These
decisions have in tone and content undermined the
efforts my Government has pursued to reject a culture
of impunity and setback the progress registered in
repairing our shattered national fabric, not only in the
justice sector but in all aspects of national
reconciliation and reconstruction. The recent acquittals
of Protais Zigiranyirazo and Hormisdas Nsengimana
and the basis for those acquittals are, in the view of my
Government, most regrettable.
My Government welcomes the arrests of Grégoire
Ndahimana and Idelphonse Nizeyimana and commends
the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Uganda for their efforts in this regard. We
equally welcome the efforts of the Governments of
Canada, Belgium, Finland and Sweden to apprehend
and bring to justice persons within their jurisdiction
accused of genocide. We regret, however, that some
countries have failed to extend the necessary
cooperation to either my Government or the Court, and
we would urge them to do so.

My Government has repeatedly stated its view
that the archives of the ICTR should be transferred to
Rwanda upon completion of its mandate. This
conviction is premised on the fact that these records
constitute an integral part of our history, are vital to the
preservation of the memory of the genocide and will
play a critical role in educating future generations to
ensure the prevention of genocide. We recognize the
ongoing process to determine the final destination of
the ICTR archives and will remain engaged in the
ongoing deliberations of the Security Council Informal
Working Group on international tribunals.
At this crucial juncture, my Government shares
the Security Council’s desire to reach a reasonable and
effective conclusion to the ad hoc mandate of the
Tribunal. We therefore urge the Council to do all
within its power to ensure that the ICTR completion
strategy is reached without creating an impunity gap
and undermining the efforts of my Government. In
conclusion, allow me to reiterate my Government’s
continued commitment to supporting the work of the
ICTR.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda for his kind
words addressed to me.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
Before adjourning the meeting, I would like to
thank, on behalf of Council members, President
Robinson, President Byron, Prosecutor Brammertz and
Prosecutor Jallow for their presentations to the
Council.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

09-63003

33
