General Assembly-Thirteenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SECOND COMMITIEE

CONTENTS
Page

1240 (XIII). Establishment of the Special Fund (14 October 1958) (item 28)...
1255 (XIII). United Nations programmes of technical assistance (14 November
1958) (item 29 (a) ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1256 (XIII). United Nations technical assistance in public administration (14
November 1958) (item 29 (c)) .. . . . . . . .. .. .. . .. . . .. . .. . .. . . . . . . . . ..
1303 (XIII). Question of assistance to Libya (10 December 1958) (item 30)....
1304 (XIII). Report of the Agent General of tht United Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency and progress report of the Administrator for Residual
Affairs of the Agency (10 December 1958) (item 27) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1305 (XIII). Confirmation of the allocation of funds for the Expanded Programme
of Technical Assistance in 1959 (10 December 1958) (item 29 (b))........
1316 (XIII). International co-operation for economic development of under-developed countries (12 December 1958) (item 28) .. . . . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . . . .. .
1317 (XIII). United Nations capital development fund (12 December 1958.)
(item 28) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1318 (XIII). Promotion of the international flow of private capital (12 December
1958) (item 28) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1319 (XIII). Transmission of the report on the proceedings of the symposium on
the development of petroleum resources of Asia and the Far East ( 12 December 1958) (item 28) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1320 (XIII). Rosters of scientific and technical personnel of the less developed
countries (12 December 1958) (item 28) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1321 (XIII). Objectives and means of international economic co-operation (12
December 1958) (item 12) . . .. . . .. .. .. . . .. . .. . .. .. .. . .. . .. .. .. . . .. .
1322 (XIII). Promotion of international co-operation in the field of trade ( 12
December 1958) (item 12) .. .. . . .. . .. .. .. .. . .. . . .. .. . . .. . . . . .. . .. . ..
1323 (XIII). Questions relating to the promotion of international trade and to
assistance in the development of less developed countries ( 12 December 1958)
(item 12) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1324 (XIII). International commodity problems (12 December 1958) (item 12)..

11
15
16
16
17
18
18
19
19
20
20
20
20
21
21

1240 (XID). Establishment of the Special Fund

Part A

The General Assembly,
In conformity with the dete.rmination of the United
Nations, as expressed in its Charter, to promote social
progress and better standards of life in larger freedom
and, for these ends, to employ international machinery
for the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Conscious of the particular needs of the less developed
countries for international aid in achieving accelerated
development of their economic and social infrastructure,
Recalling its resolution 1219 (XII) of 14 December
.1957,
Further recalling previous resolutions on the establishment of an international fund for economic development within the framework of the United Nations,
Noting the recommendations contained in Economic
and Social Council resolution 692 (XXVI) of 31 July
1958,

1. Commends the Preparatory Committee on its
work;
2. Establishes a Special Fund in accordance with the
provisions set forth in part B below ;

Part B
I.

GUIDING PRINCIPLES AND CRITERIA

1. Pursuant to the provisions of General Assembly resolution 1219 (XII) and pending a review by the Assembly of the
scope and future activities of the Special Fund, as envisaged
in section III of that resolution, the Special Fund shall:
(a) Be a separate fund;
(b) Provide systematic and sustained assistance in fields
essential to the integrated technical, economic and social development of the less developed countries ;

(c) In view of the resources prospectively available at this
time, which are not likely to exceed $100 million annually, direct

11

12

General AeaembJ;r-Thirteenth Se11ion

its operations towards enlarging the scope of the United Nations
programmes of technical assistance so as to include special
projects in certain basic fields as outlined hereunder.
The Special Fund is thus envisaged as a constructive advance
in United Nations assistance to the less developed countries
which should be of immediate significance in accelerating their
economic development by, inter alia, facilitating new capital
investments of all types by creating conditions which would
make such investments either feasible or more effective.
2. In establishing programmes, the Managing Director and
the Governing Council of the Special Fund shall be guided by
the following principles and criteria:
(a) The Special Fund shall concentrate, as far as practicable,
on relatively large projects and avoid allocation of its resources
over a great number of small projects;
( b) Due consideration shall be given to the urgency of the
needs of the requesting countries;
(c) Projects shall be undertaken which will lead to early
results and have the widest possible impact in advancing the
economic, social or technical development of the country or
countries concerned, in particular by facilitating new capital
investment;

(d) Due consideration shall be given to a wide geographical
distribution in allocations over a period of years;
(e) Due consideration shall be given to technical, organizational and financial problems likely to be encountered in executing a proposed project;
(/) Due consideration shall be given to the arrangements
made for the integration of projects into national development
programmes and for effective co-ordination of the project with
other multilateral and bilateral programmes;
(g) In accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, the assistance furnished by the Special Fund
shall not be a means of foreign economic and political interference in the internal affairs of the country or countries concerned and shall not be accompanied by any conditions of a
political nature ;
(h) Projects shall be devised in such a way as to facilitate
transfer1 as soon as practicable, of the responsibilities of the
Special Fund to assisted countries or to organizations designated by them.

3. Projects may be for one country or a group of countries
or a region.
4. Projects may be approved for the period of time needed
for their execution, even if more than one year.
II.

BASIC FIELDS OF ASSISTANCE AND TYPES OF PllOJECT

5. The Special Fund shall assist projects in the fields of
resources, including the assessment and development of manpower industry, including handicrafts and cottage industries,
agricu'iture, traTJsport and communications, building and housing, health, education, statistics and public administration.
6. In view of the resources prospectively available at the
time of the initial period of the Special Fund's operations,
projects to be assisted by the Fund might be in one or a
combination of the following forms : surveys ; research and
training; demonstration, including pilot projects. These may
be implemented by the provision of staff, experts, equipment,
supplies and services, as well as the establishment of institutes,
demonstration centres, plants or works, and other appropriate
means, including fellowships, in so far as they are integral
parts of a specific project financed by the Fund, in such proportions as are judged necessary by the Managing Director for
each project, taking into account the type of assistance requested by Governments.

Ill.

PARTICIPATION IN THE SPECIAL FUND

7. Participation in the Special Fund shall be open to any
States Members of the United Nations or members of the
specialized agencies or of the International Atomic Energy
Agency.

!V.

ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

8. There are established as organs of the Special Fund: a
Governing Council, a Managing Director and his staff, and a
consultative board. The Special Fund shall be an organ of the
United Nations administered under the authority of the Economic and Social Council and of the General Assembly, which
will exercise in respect of the Fund their powers under the
Charter.
9. The Economic and Social Council shall be responsible
for the formulation of the general rules and principles which
will govern the administration and operations of the Speci~l
Fund• the review of the operations of the Fund on the basis
of th~ annual reports to be submitted by the Governing Council · and the consideration of the Expanded Programme of
Te~hnical Assistance and of the Special Fund in relation to
each other.

10. The Economic and Social Council shall transmit the report of the Governing Council, together with its own comments to the General Assembly. The Assembly wilJ review
the p;ogress and operations of the Special Fund as a separate
subject of its agenda and make any appropriate recommendations.

Governing C011ncil
11. The immediate inter-governmental control of the policies
and operations of the Special Fund shall be exercised by a
Governing Council which will consist of representatives of
eighteen States.
12. The Governing Council shall provide general poli~
guidance on the administration and operations of the Special
Fund. It shall have final authority for the approval of the
projects and programmes recommended by the Managing Director. It shall review the administration and the execution
of the Fund's approved projects, and shatl submit reports and
recommendations to the Economic and Social Council, including
such recommendations as the Governing Council may deem
appropriate in the light of the relevant provisions of General
Assembly resolution 1219 {XII).
13. The States members of the Governing Council shall be
elected by the Economic and Social Council from among
Members of the United Nations or members of the specialized
agencies or of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
14. There shall be equal representation on the Governing
Council of economically more developed countries, on the one
hand, having due regard to their contributions to the Special
Fund, and of less developed countries, on the other hand,
taking into account the need for equitable geographical distribution among the latter members.
15. States members of the Governing Council shall be elected
for a term of three years, provided, however, that of the
members elected at the first election, the terms of six members
shall expire at the end of one year and the ~rms of six other
members at the end of two years. Retiring members shall be
eligible for re-election.
16. Decisions of the Governing Council on important questions shall be made by a two-thirds majority of the members
present and voting. These questions shall include questions of
policy, the approval of projects and the allocation of funds.
Decisions of the Governing Council on other questions shall be
made by a majority of the members present ;uid voting.
17. The Governing Council shall adopt its own rules of
procedure. includina the method of selectina- ita ofticer1.

Resolutions adopted on the repolU of the Seeond ColDDllttee
18. The Governing Council shall normally meet twice a year
and on such occasions as may be necessary, in conformity with
its rules of procedure.
19. The Managing Director of the Special Fund shall participate without vote in the deliberations of the Governing
Council.
20. The Governing Council shall make appropriate arrangements in its rules of procedure for the representation of the
specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency
and the Executive Chairman of the Technical Assistance
Board. To this end, it shall take due account of the practice
followed by the Economic and Social Council.

Managing Director
21. The Special Fund shall be administered by a Managing
Director under the policy guidance of the Governing Council.
The Managing Director shall have the over-all responsibility
for the operations of the Fund, with sole authority to recommend to the Governing Council projects submitted by Governments.
22. After having consulted the Governing Council, the
Secretary-General will appoint the Managing Director, subject
to confirmation by the General Assembly.
23. The Managing Director shall be appointed for a term
of four years, or for a shorter period. He shall be eligible
for reappointment.
24. ,Appropriate arrangements shall be made for the participation of the Managing Director in the Technical Assistance
Board.
25. The _Managing Director shall establish and maintain
close and continuing working relationships with the specialized
agencies concerned with those fields of activity in which the
Special Fund will operate, and with the International Atomic
Energy Agency. He may also establish appropriate contacts
with other organizations which may be concerned with the
activities of the Fund.

Consultative Board
26. A Consultative Board shall be established to advise the
Managing Director. The function of the Board shall be to
assist the Managing Director with advice in the examination
and appraisal of project requests and proposed programmes of
the Special Fund. The Board shall be composed of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Executive Chairman
of the Technical Assistance Board and the President of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development or
their designated representatives.
'Zl. The Managing Director shall make, as appropriate, arrangements for representatives of the specialized agencies and
of the International Atomic Energy Agency to be invited to the
deliberations of the Consultative Board when projects falling
mainly within their fields of activity are considered.

Staff
28. The Managing Director shall be assisted by a small
group of officials to be selected by him or in consultation with
him, on the basis of their special competence.
29. For other services, the Managing Director shall rely as
far as possible on the existing facilities of the United Nations,
the specialized agencies, the lnternation~ Atomic Energy
Agency, and the Technical Assistance Board. These facilities
should be made available to the Special Fund without charge
except when clearly identifiable additional expenses are involved. The Managing Director may also, as required, engage
expert consultants.
30. To facilitate the field co-ordination between the Special
Fund and the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance

13

in the countries seeking assistance, the Managing Director shall
enter into an agreement with the Executive Chairman of the
Technical Assistance Board concerning the role of the resident
representatives in the work of the Fund.

V.

PROCEDURES

Sources and formulation of requests
31. Projects shall be undertaken only at the request of a
Government or group of Governments eligible to participate
in the Special Fund.
32. Governments shall present their requests for assistance
in a form indicated by the Managing Director. Requests shall
include all possible information on the intended use and benefits
expected to be derived from the Special Fund's assistance,
evidence of a technical nature regarding the projects for which
assistance is requested, data bearing upon the economic appraisal of such projects, and statements concerning. the part
of costs which the Government itself would be ready to assume.
The Special Fund, the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance, the United Nations, the specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency should be ready to assist
and advise Governments, at their request, in the preparation
of their applications for assistance.
33. The Special Fund shall utilize only the official channel
designated by each Government for the submission of requests.

Evaluation and approval of requests
34. The Managing Director shall be responsible for the evaluation of project requests. In this evaluation, he will normally
be expected to rely upon the assistance of existing services
within the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance, the
United Nations, the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency. He shall also be authorized to contract
the services of other agencies, private firms or individual experts for this purpose, in case the services of the United
Nations, the specialized agencies or the International Atomic
Energy Agency are wholly or partly unavailable or inadequate.
35. On the basis of the evaluation of project requests, the
Managing Director shall periodically develop programmes for
submission to the Governing Council. In developing his recommendations to the Governing Council, he shall consult the Consultative Board.
36. The Managing Director shall, at the request of the Government or Governments which have submitted such projects,
submit to the Governing Council for its consideration a report
on project requests which he has been unable to include in
his programme.
37. The Governing Council shall examine the programmes
and projects submitted by the Managing Director. Each project
shall be accompanied by:
(a) An evaluation of the benefits expected to be derived
by the requesting country or countries;
( b) A summary of its technical evaluation;
( c) A proposed budget showing the financial implications
of the project in their entirety, including a statement on the
costs which would be borne by the recipient Governments ;
(d) A draft agreement with the requesting Government or
Governments ;
(e) When appropriate, a draft agreement with the agent
or agents responsible for the execution of the project.

38. The Governing Council shall take final decision on the
projects and programmes recommended by the Managing Director and authorize him to conclude the appropriate agreements.

14

General Assembly-Thirteenth SeHion

Execution of projects
39. Projects shall be executed, whenever possible, by the
United Nations, by the specialized agencies concerned, or by
the International Atomic Energy Agency, it being understood
that the Managing Director shall also be authorized to contract
for the services of other agencies, private firms or individual
experts in the cases mentioned in paragraph 34 above.

40. Arrangements for the execution of projects shall be subject to the approval of the requesting Government or Governments, and shall be specified in an agreement with these Gov-

shall be subject to review by the Economic and Social Council
and the General Assembly.

49. Contributions shall be made without limitation as to use
by a specific agency or in a spedfic recipient country or for a
speciirc project.

50. To the end that the multilateral character of the Special
Fund shall be strictly respected, no contributing country should
receive special treatment with respect to its contribution nor
should negotiations for the use of currencies take place between contributing and receiving countries.

ernments. Such arrangements shall contain provisions regarding
the cost, including any local costs, which the requesting Government will assume and those facilities and services which
it wilt provide.

51. Since programmes shall be developed on a project basis,
there should be no a priori allocation of funds on a country
basis or among basic fields of assistance.

41. Where requests for assistance fall within the sphere of
two or more organizations, arrangements shall be made for
joint execution by the organizations concerned and for proper
co-ordination.

52. Recipient Governments shall be expected to finance part
of the costs of projects, at least that part payable in local
currency. This general rule may, however, be waived in the
case of countries deemed financially unable to make even a
local currency payment.

42. The Managing Director shall make appropriate arrangements to follow the execution of projects:

43. The Managing Director shall report to the Governing
Council on the status of projects and the financial position
of the projects and programmes.
44. The Managing Director and the Governing Council shall
take appropriate measures to ensure an objective evaluation
of the results of projects and programmes.
VI.

FINANCES

45. The financial ::-esources of the Special Fund shall be derived from voluntary contributions by Governments of States
Members of the United Nations or members of the specialized
agencies or of the International Atomic Energy Agency. The
Fund is also authorized to receive donations from non-governmental sources. It is recommended that contributions by Governments should be paid as early in each year as possible.
Furthermore, while contributions will normally be on an annual
basis, it is recommended, in view of the expected longer term
of many of the Fund's projects, that contributions be pledged
or indicated, whenever possible, for a number of years.
46. The Secretary-General is requested to convene annually
a pledging conference at which Governments would announce
their contributions to the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance and to the Special Fund respectively. If a Government pledges an initial lump sum, it should, within a reasonably short period, indicate the division of its contribution between the two programmes.

47. Contributions shall be made by Governments in currency
readily usable by the Special Fund consistent with the need
for efficiency and economy of the Fund's operations, or shall
be transferable to the greatest possible extent into currency
readily usable by the Fund. To this end, Governments are
urged to make available as large a percentage as they may find
possible of their contributions in such currency or currencies
as the Managing Director may indicate are required for the
execution of the Fund's programme. The Managing Director
should, consistent with the criteria set forth respecting the
nature and utilization of contributions, endeavour to make the
fullest possible use of available currencies.

48. The Managing Director shall, at the end of the first year
of the operations of the Special Fund and subsequently as he
deems necessary, report to the Governing Council for its consideration on the extent to which restrictions which may have
been maintained on contributions have affected the flexibility,
efficiency and economy of the Fund's operations. The Governing Council shall also consider what action may be necessary
with respect to currency found not readily usable in order to
facilitate the Fund's operations. Any action in this respect

53. The Special Fund shall be governed by financial regulations consistent with the financial regulations and policies of
the United Nations. The financial regulations for the Fund
shall be drafted by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in consultation with the Managing Director, for approvd
by the Governing Council, after review by the Advisory Committee for Administrative and Budgetary Questions. In the
preparation of these regulations, account shall be taken of the
special requirements of the Fund's operations; in particular,
appropriate provision shall be made to permit the approval of
projects of more than one year's duration arid for an exchange
of ·currencies between the Fund and the Special Account for
the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance. Provision
should also exist under which the Managing Director is authorized in consultation with the Governing Council to establish appropriate financial rules and procedures.
54. The administrative budget prepared by the Managing
Director with the assistance of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations shall be submitted for approval to the Governing Council with the comments, if any, of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions. It shall be
submitted to the General Assembly at the same time as the
annual report of the Governing Council with the comments
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions.

55. The Special Fund shall be authorized to build up gradually a reserve fund by earmarking a specific percentage of the
total contributions of each year up to an amount to be determined by the Governing Council on the recommendation of the
Managing Director.
56. The Governing Council shall be authorized to consider
allocating part of the resources of the Special Fund for assistance on a refundable basis at the request of Governments
for projects within the terms of reference of the Fund.

PartC
Reaffirms the conditions set forth in section IJI of
General Assembly resolution 1219 (XII) under which
the Assembly shall review the scope and future activities
of the Special Fund and take such actior. as it may
deem appropriate.
776th plenary meeting,
14 October 1958.

•

•

•

At its 782nd plenary meeting on S December 1958, the General Assembly confirmed the nomination by the SecretaryGenera/1 of Mr. Paul G. Hoffman as Managing Director of
the Special Fund in accordance with the resolution above.
1

See A/4024.
