United Nations

A/RES/61/174

General Assembly

Distr.: General
1 March 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 67 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2006
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/61/443/Add.3)]

61/174. Situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that States Members of the United Nations have an obligation to
promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms and to fulfil the
obligations that they have undertaken under the various international instruments,
Mindful that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a party to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,1 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 2
and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, 3
Noting the submission by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of its
second periodic report concerning the implementation of the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 4 its second periodic report on the
implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child 5 and its initial report
on the implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 6 as a sign of engagement in international
cooperative efforts in the field of human rights,
Taking note of the concluding observations of the treaty monitoring bodies
under the four treaties, the most recent of which were given by the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women in July 2005, 7

_______________
1

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
3
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
4
E/1990/6/Add.35.
5
CRC/C/65/Add.24.
6
CEDAW/C/PRK/1.
7
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/60/38), part two,
paras. 26–76.
2

06-50487

A/RES/61/174

Recalling its resolution 60/173 of 16 December 2005 and Commission on
Human Rights resolutions 2003/10 of 16 April 2003, 8 2004/13 of 15 April 2004 9 and
2005/11 of 14 April 2005, 10 and mindful of the need for the international community
to strengthen its coordinated efforts aimed at urging the implementation of those
resolutions,
Taking note of the report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, 11 including the specific
concerns relating to women’s rights, the rights of the child, the rights of the elderly,
the rights of persons with disabilities and refugee rights addressed therein,
1.

Expresses its very serious concern at:

(a) The continued refusal of the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to recognize the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea or to extend
cooperation to him;
(b) Continuing reports of systemic, widespread and grave violations of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including:
(i) Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
public executions, extrajudicial and arbitrary detention, the absence of due
process and the rule of law, the imposition of the death penalty for political
reasons, the existence of a large number of prison camps and the extensive use
of forced labour;
(ii) The situation of refugees expelled or returned to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and sanctions imposed on citizens of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea who have been repatriated from abroad, such as
treating their departure as treason, leading to punishments of internment,
torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or the death penalty, and urges
all States to ensure respect for the fundamental principle of non-refoulement;
(iii) All-pervasive and severe restrictions on the freedoms of thought,
conscience, religion, opinion and expression, peaceful assembly and
association, and on equal access to information and limitations imposed on
every person who wishes to move freely within the country and travel abroad;
(iv) Continuing violation of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
women, in particular the trafficking of women for the purpose of prostitution
or forced marriage, forced abortions, and infanticide of children of repatriated
mothers, including in police detention centres and camps;
(v) Unresolved questions of international concern relating to the abduction
of foreigners in the form of enforced disappearance, which violates the human
rights of the nationals of other sovereign countries;
(vi) The violations of economic, social and cultural rights, which have led to
severe malnutrition and hardship for the population in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea;
_______________
8
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
9
Ibid., 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II, sect. A.
10
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2005/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
11
See A/61/349.

2

A/RES/61/174

(vii) Continuing reports of violations of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of persons with disabilities, especially on the use of collective camps
and of coercive measures that target the rights of persons with disabilities to
decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing of their children;
Expresses its strong concern that the Government of the Democratic
2.
People’s Republic of Korea has not engaged in technical cooperation activities with
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and her Office, despite
efforts by the High Commissioner to engage in a dialogue with the authorities of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in this regard;
Expresses its very deep concern at the precarious humanitarian situation
3.
in the country, compounded by the mismanagement on the part of the authorities, in
particular the prevalence of infant malnutrition, which, despite recent progress,
continues to affect the physical and mental development of a significant proportion
of children, and urges the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, in this regard, to facilitate the continued presence of humanitarian
organizations to ensure that humanitarian assistance is delivered impartially to all
parts of the country on the basis of need in accordance with humanitarian principles;
Strongly urges the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
4.
Korea to respect fully all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, in this
regard, to implement fully the measures set out in the above-mentioned resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Commission on Human Rights, and the
recommendations addressed to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by the
United Nations special procedures and treaty bodies, and to extend its full
cooperation to the Special Rapporteur, including by granting him full, free and
unimpeded access to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and to other
United Nations human rights mechanisms;
Decides to continue its examination of the situation of human rights in
5.
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea at its sixty-second session, and to this
end requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the Special Rapporteur
to report his findings and recommendations.
81st plenary meeting
19 December 2006

3
