UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
h
MEETING:

16 FEBRUARY

1983

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

,,.o...............,.........*......

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I............

1

agenda (S/Agenda/2414)
of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative ofMorocco to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative ofNiger to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1.5599) . . . . . . . . , , , . . . , . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

WPV.2414

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . , .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OJlicialRecords of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2414th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday,

16 February

President: Mr. Oleg Aleksandrovich
TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

tatives of Algeria, Cuba, Egypt, the German Democratic
Republic, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Morocco, Niger, Senegal, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, Yemen and
Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber; I invite the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a
place at the Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria),
Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr, Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Krishnan (India}, Mr.
Rajaie-Khorassani(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr. Labaki (Lebanon), Mr. Mrani Zentar
(Morocco), Mr. Oumarou(Niger), Mr. SarrP(Senegal),Mr.
El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Kirca (Turkey), Mr.
AI-Amri (United Arab Emirates), Mr. Sallam(Yemen) and
Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the placesreservedforthemat
the sideof the Councilchamber;Mr. Terzi(PalestineLiberation Organization) took a place at the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda.‘2414)
1. Adoption
2.

1983, at 3.30 p.m.

of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Niger to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Chargt d’affaires a. i. of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15599)

2. The PRESIDENT (inferpretation from Russian): I
should like to inform membersof the Council that I have
received letters from the representativesof Democratic
Yemen and Greece in which they requestto be invited to
participate in the discussionof the item on the agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representativesto
participate in the discussionwithout the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m,
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

At the invitation of the President,Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen) and Mr. Dountas (Greece) took the places
reservedfor them at the sideof the Council chamber.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Niger to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Chargb d’affaires a. i. of the Permanent Mission of Jordan
to the United Naitions addressed to the’president of
the Security Council (S/15599)

3. Mr. TINOCO FONSECA (Nicaragua)(interpretation
from Spanish):It is an honour for me to congratulate you,
Sir, on behalf of my delegation and my Government, on
your assumption of the presidency for this month. Your
diplomatic skill and experience will enableyou to guide
the work now before us with knowledge and rectitude.
4. We also wish to congratulate Mr. Amega, of Togo,
for the skilful and efficient manner in which heguided our
work last month, upholding the good nameof the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, to which hiscountry and
my own belong.

1.. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpretation from Russian): In
‘accordance with decisions ‘taken at previous meetings
[2401st, 2412th and 2413th meetings],’ I invite the represen-

5, The international press has recently seen fit to
remind us of the responsibility of the Government of

I

regime has never heard or read of the following: first,
that the acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible
and that, therefore, Israel must withdraw unconditionally from all the Arab and Palestinian territories it has
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem; and, secondly,
that civilians in time of war, pursuant to the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’ are entitled to the protection of their lives and personal safety and that, therefore, this applies to the Arab and Palestinian occupied
territories.

Israel in the massacres of Palestinians in Beirut in
September of last Year. The results of the investigation
the Israeli Government was obliged to conduct because
of pressure exerted by the Israeli people has given many
sceptics a glimpse of the true nature of the Zionist State
and not only of that of some of its leaders, as some have
maintained, We must bear in mind that this report is not
the first condemnation we have had of the role of the
Israeli Government in the massacres, nor are these the
first massacres that have been carried out against
Palestinian civilians by forces backed by Israel. These
criminal acts of genocide against the Palestinian people
can be regarded as a new, ever more ruthless stage in the
violation of international law, a continuation of the
policies and practices that the Israeli regime has pursued
in the past against the life and interests of the POPUlatiOn
of the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories. Other
signs of this criminal international conduct include
the establishment of settlements in the occupied territories
and the annexationist practices that are the subject of our
deliberations today-specifically,
such abuses as the
illegal confiscation of the goods and lands of the Arab
population, the imprisonment and murder of Palestinians and the introduction of changes in the national
demographic nature and administrative machinery of the
occupied territories.

8. I could go on at great length pointing out the innumerable ways in which the Israeli Government has disregarded
and offended the international community, but it may be
more appropriate to emphasize the fundamental elements
for a solution to the Palestinian problem, which have
already been recognized. As was stressed by the Arab
heads of State at the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference,
held at Fez in November 1981 and September 1982 [see
S/USIO, annex, sect. I], the following are the essential
elements for a just and lasting solution to the Middle East
conflict: recognition that the question of Palestine constitutes the corner-stone of the Middle East problem; Israeli
withdrawal from occupied Arab and Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem; exercise of the inalienable right
of the Palestinian people to create its own independent
State; exercise by the Palestinians of their right to choose to
return to their homes; and dismantling of the settlements
established by Israel in the Arab territories since 1967.

6. Various delegations, and the representative of the
PLO, more specifically, have already presented to the
Council specific facts and figures on the usurpation now
under way and plans for the future usurpation of Palestinian lands, and property. It suffices for us to reiterate
that, at the beginning of this month, 28,000 dunums
of land were confiscated in Palestinian villages in the
Nablus area. In Yatta, near Hebron, the leaders of the
community have been notified that 23,000 more dunums
of land will be confiscated. A revealing article published in The New York Times-a source which, as the
representative of the PLO noted, cannot be described as
anti-Jewish or anti-Zionist-has
already been quoted.
It describes Israel’s plans to settle 400,000 Jews in
the West Bank in the next 5 years and 1.4 million in
the next 30 years.

9. For the United Nations and the Arab States alike, the
situation in the occupied territories has been a source of
constant concern; for the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, it has been a fundamental pillar of its antiimperialist struggle.
10. Through various initiatives, the Movement has
sought a just and lasting solution to the Middle East
conflict. At its ministerial meetings held in Kuwait and
Nicosia last year, the Movement stressed that the conflict
must be resolved within the political framework of the
United Nations. The condemnations of Israel for its
irrational attitude towards the international community
have been quite clear in the various summit meetings of
the Movement throughout its history,

7. Neither international public opinion nor the reiterated condemnations and appeals of the United Nations
have managed to restrain the Government of Israel,
which has thus far continued its expansionist and
repressive actions against the interests and survival of
the Arab people. Except for a similar contemptuous
attitude on the part of the Pretoria racist rtgime, this
brazen disdain for international law is unparalleled in the
Past three decades. Otherwise, in this century it can
only be compared to the attitude of madness of Nazi
Germany, which resulted in a holocaust for millions
of human beings and enshrined barbarism as a politiCal virtue. That this is not empty rhetoric becomes
clear when we recall CounciI resolutions 242(lg67),
446 (1g79)j 465 (1980), 476 (1980), 478 (1980) and
484 (lg80)s which, among many others, have been
grossly bored. As for the principles of the Charter
Of the United Nations, it would seem that the Israeli

11. Hence, at the latest meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries, held at the
ministerial level last month at Managua, the ministers
devoted much of their attention and considerable effort
to pointing out that the growing links between Israel and
the Latin American region, in addition to being interference, were strengthening the economy of the Zionist
State. As at earlier meetings of the Movement, the ministers made it clear that the United States had used
Israel in its policy of interference in the region,
once again making clear their well-known
collusion,
which is a basic source of destabilization and suffering in the Middle East.
12. Without geographical discrimination, imperialism
uses the strength conferred upom it by its economic and
2

military power in dealing with international conflicts. The
responsibility of the United States Government in the
suffering of the peoples of the territories occupied by
Israel is clear-cut in view of the indiscriminate massive
military, political and moral support given by that
Government to the various Zionist administrations. The
brazenness and cynicism with which the invasion of Lebanon was carried out and the permissiveness demonstrated
with regard to the Sabra and Shatila massacres, in spite
of the appalled reaction of the international community,
would not have been possible without that support.

20. This is not the first time that the Council has met to
consider the question of settlements in the occupied territories. But, as Israel is continuing its policy of establishing
settlements against the unanimous opinion of the international community, the Council has once again to take up
the matter.
21. Sharing, as it does, the legitimate feelings aroused
in the world by these actions, the French Government
condemns most energetically the continuation of Israel’s
policy in this area.
22. It might be worth while to recall that the French
Government has always opposed legislative or other
measures taken by the Israeli authorities in the occupied
territories or to create new settlements. My Government
believes that the policy of fait accompli pursued by Israel
in the territories it has occupied since 1967 is unacceptable. It is contrary to the rules of international law, particularly the Hague Convention of 19072 and the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’ whereby the occupying Power is bound to preserve the demographic, economic and cultural nature of the regions it is occupying,

13. However, as we know, unfortunately, it is not
through more words and more unimplemented resolutions of the Council that that desperate situation in which
the peoples of the occupied territories find themselves will
be changed. What is needed is firm and consistent action
by the Council.
14. Only yesterday, the United Nations Commission on
Human Rights, which has been meeting at Geneva since
31 January, adopted resolution 1983/l, in which the
Commission condemned for the umpteenth time the violation of the human rights of the Palestinians and
requested the General Assembly, through the Economic
and Social Council, to appeal once again to the Security
Council to adopt against Israel the measures provided in
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. That
was yet another appeal by the Commission on Human
Rights.

23. My Government especially regrets Israel’s actions
because they have occurred at a time when peace initiatives are emerging in greater number than ever in an
attempt to find a solution to the Middle East conflict.
Whether it be the France-Egyptian draft resolution
[S/1531fl, which, I would remind the Council, is still on
the Council table, or President Reagan’s statement of 1
September 1982,3 or the Final Declaration of the Twelfth
Arab Summit Conference, adopted at Fez on 9 September 1982 [S/15510, annex], the search for a solution
seems to have entered a particularly active diplomatic
phase, The Arab parties concerned, with a determination
which does them credit, seem to wish to seek, through
negotiation, to put an end to a conflict that has lasted for
more than 35 years.

15. In the face of the suffering of his people, the representative of the PLO has already beseeched the Council
to shoulder its responsibility. We understand full well the
limitations and complex nature of the Council; but we
must not forget that it is this loftiest forum which offers
the greatest hope of relief for oppressed and subjugated
peoples and that, therefore, it is urgent that effective
measures be taken and, if necessary, as was pointed out
by the representative of the PLO, that it be decided that
there is no place in the United Nations for such criminals
and perpetrators of genocide.
16.
it.

24. In these circumstances, everything possible must be
done by those who bear responsibility in the region to
encourage such useful and praiseworthy initiatives and
not to undermine them deliberately and without any
valid justification.

This is the challenge, and we must be ready to meet

17.

Mr. de La BARRE de NANTEUIL
(France) (interfrom French): Since this is the first time that I
have spoken in the Council this year, I am happy to
welcome your assumption, Sir, of the presidency for the
month of February, Your qualities of intelligence and
finesse are well known and appreciated by all, and we are
glad to be benefiting from your experience and wisdom.

25. A refusal would risk ending attempts at negotiation
and the hopes of those peoples who have suffered and
continue to suffer from war, with its toll of death, devastation and ruin. The chances for peace are still too slim
for anyone to risk compromising them by unilateral
measures, the urgency or even the usefulness of which is
difficult to understand.

18. I should be grateful to you if you would transmit to
Mr. Amega, who last month presided over our deliberations with great determination and talent, our deep gratitude for the services he rendered to the Council.

26. The French delegation therefore calls upon the
Government of Israel to abide by the rules of international law. But it also appeals to the senseof reason and
responsibility of the Israeli authorities and urges them
not to compromise the chances for peace by regrettable
initiatives. It is indeed by dialogue and not by unilateral
measures that lasting peace can be established in the
region.

pretaiion

19. I am also happy to welcome our new colleagues
from Malta, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan and
Zimbabwe.
3

27. Mr. WHYTE (United Kingdom): Mr. President, you
yourself made a suggestion very informally and very
recently that in the interest of streamlining our procedures
you would be quite happy to forgo the usual courtesies in
which we indulge in the Council. It seems to me, however,
that we have already reached the point at which to follow
your suggestion would itself be a very considerable discourtesy. Accordingly, my delegation salutes you; we congratulate you; we will endeavour, to the best of our ability,
to co-operate with you.

Jewish Leaders from the Commonwealth on 30 November last, in the course of which he appealed for a settlements freeze. After noting that the Israeli Government
had not complied with President Reagan’s call of 1 Sep
tember 1982 for such a freeze, he said:
“In my view, this action does a profound disservice
to the cause of peace, and I say this to you in candour.
The attempt to change the status quo in the territories
which Israel occupies does more than anything else to
undermine confidence that Israel truly seeks a peaceful
accomodation with her Arab neighbours. In saying
that, I am aware, of course, of the strong feeling of
many Israeli Jews that they have a historical right to
settle in the West Bank and Gaza. But the Palestinians
already living in these territories also feel strongly that
their identity as a people is being eroded. With each
new settlemerit-and some Israeli sources estimate that
as much as half of the West Bank is denied to its Arab
inhabitants-despair
deepens. That is why a settlement
freeze is so necessary and so urgent.”

28. We should like also to place on record our admiration for the manner in which the business of the Council
was conducted by Mr. Amega during the past month and,
since this is, I think, the first occasion on which my delegation has spoken in the Council this year, we should also
like to join others in greeting our new colleagues on the
Council, the representatives of Malta, the Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan and Zimbabwe.
29. We have met to resume consideration of Israel’s
settlements policy. This is only one aspect of the ArabIsrael dispute, but it is a very important one. I propose to
begin by addressing directly the question of settlements
and then to go on briefly to the wider aspects of the
dispute.

It is urgent that there should be no more settlement. No
new obstacles to the peace process should be erected. But
there is an added urgency for appealing to Israel at this
time for a settlements freeze, and this urgency lies in the
current state of the peace process.

30. I have listened carefully to the concerns about Israeli
settlements which have been expressed by the previous
speakers. The concerns were not new. But they were
expressed, I believe, with a renewed urgency. The reason
for this urgency is obvious. It lies in the Government of
Israet’s expressed determination to promote a policy of
rapid settlement in the occupied territories and the very
visible evidence of how that policy is being implemented
on the ground.

34. We are once again, it seems to us, at a crossroads for
the Arab-Israel dispute. The harrowing events of last
summer, culminating in the awful massacre of Palestinians in the Sabra and Shatila camps, have acted as a
catalyst for renewed efforts for peace, Important new
peace initiatives have been put forward. It is imperative
that they shotrId not lose their momentum, the more so
since non-Lebanese armies remain in Lebanon and innocent civilians continue to lose their lives.

31. My Government’s position on this matter is quite
clear. We consider that the Hague Convention of 19072
and the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12August 1949,’ are
applicable to all the Arab territories occupied by Israel
since the 1967 war, including East Jerusalem. It is our firm
view that the establishment of Israeli settlements in those
territories, along with any changes in their status and
demographic composition, are contrary to international
law; ultimately, a policy of settlement is hard to reconcile
with the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition
of territory by war, as specified in Council resolution
242( 1967). We recall in this connection our positive votes
in favour of Council resolutions 465 (1980), 478 (1980)
and 497(1981), among others.

35. One very constructive set of proposals, including the
call for the immediate adoption of a settlement freeze by
Israel, has come from President Reagan.3 My Government has welcomed these proposals. We believe that they
could provide a basis for negotiations acceptable to all
parties. We hope that on further reflection neither side will
let slip this critical opportunity to unravel, the tangled
skein and knit the threads together again in a fashion more
secure and more durable.
36. We are somewhat encouraged in this hope by the
proposals which were put forward by the Arab countries
at the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference, held at Fez in
November 198 1 and September 1982 [ibid.]. Those proposals seem to us to show that the Arab side is agreed on
the need to work for a political solution. We welcome the
talks which have taken place already between the Jordanian Government and the PLO as a part of this process. We
hope that the Palestine National Council, meeting even
now in Algiers, will make a further positive contribution.

32. This is the position as laid down by international
law, But we oppose the settlements policy because we also
believe it is against the interests of peace. It conflicts with
the interests of the Arab inhabitants of the occupied territories; indeed, it ignores their rights. But it is also against
the interests of Israel and its people if they want to achieve
a lasting peace settlement with their Arab neighours.

37. As members of the Security Council, it is surely our
common responsibility to urge the parties concerned to
seize the opportunity
which appears to exist at this
moment and which may not last for long. And a major

33. The British Secretary of State, Mr. Francis Pym,
reiterated this view in a speech to the Conference of
4

step in facilitating this would be a freeze on settlements by
the Government of Israel. This could provide a stimulus
to all those involved in the current negotiations to break
through to new and mutually satisfactory agreements.

44. As is well known, these two essential principles have
been set out by the 10 States members of the European
Community in the declaration issued at Venice on 13 June
1980 [S/14009] and in their subsequent statements on the
issue, to which the Netherlands Government firmly
adheres. Within this framework, the Netherlands will continue to be active in pursuing its efforts to promote a
comprehensive, just and Iasting peace settlement in the
region.

38. Mr. SCHELTEMA
(Netherlands): This being the
first time I am speaking under your presidency, Sir, may I
congratulate you on your assumption of this high office
and convey to you my best wishes and those of my
delegation.

45. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
next speaker is the representative of Kuwait, I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

39. May I also take this opportunity to express my appreciation and respect to your predecessor, the representative of Togo, for the competent way in which he carried
out the functions of the presidency last month.

46.

Mr, ABULHASSAN
(Kuwait) (interpretation from
Mr. President, it gives me great pleasure to
address you in Arabic for the first time since it was
unanimously introduced as an official working language
in the Council. The Arabic language reflects the civilization and thought of a nation that has had and still has an
important
role in the mainstream of international
relations.
Arabic):

40. The Netherlands attaches the greatest imuortance to
all matters .affecting the rights of The.population of the
territories which Israel occupied in 1967. We have repeatedly stated that the provisions of the fourth Hague Convention of 1907’ and the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civiiian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949,’ are applicable to the territories occupied
in 1967. This implies that the Israeli settlements in those
territories, as well as the changes in the status and the
demographic structures of those territories, are illegal
under international law and contrary to the principle of
the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war,
as specified in Council resolution 242(1967).

47. Allow me, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency for the month of February and to
confirm the absolute confidence of my delegation in your
competence to conduct the deliberations of the Council,
givqn your wisdom, ability and perfect objectivity.
48. I also want to express the appreciation of my delegation for the way in which your predecessor, Mr. Amega,
the represeritative of Togo, conducted the affairs of the
Council during the month of January.

41. The Netherlands is therefore deeply concerned by
the Israeli policy on settlements. During the last year,
Israel has once again maintained and developed its existing settlements and established yet more new ones. Each
construction or expansion of a settlement will only
increase the strong and justified resentment of the inhabitants of the occupied territories. Moreover, the stated
intention of the Israeli Government further to expand the
settlement programme can only serve to undermine the
necessary basis for dialogue and trust, which are essential
pr&equ?sites for any constructive negotiations to reach a
comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East.

49. I should like also to avail myself of this opportunity
to congratulate the new members of the Council, the
representatives of Malta, the Netherlands, Nicaragua,
Pakistan and ZimI rbwe, and to wish them successin their
new and importar ; mission.

42. The Netherlands strongly supports the call by the
President of the United States for thd immediate adoption
of a settlement freeze by Israel. It would be an encouraging action on the part of the Israeli Government if the
decision further to increase the number of settlements in
the occupied territories were forthwith rescinded. A continuation of the settlement policy, which has met with
world-wide disapproval, would constitute one of the most
serious obstacles to progress towards a peaceful settlement in the Middle East.

50. The illegitinrate Israeli practices and policies in the
Palestinian and . irab territories occupied since 1967 are
no longer a secrr,t. In fact, they have become a widespread
issue, well known to everyone in their totality and detail.
These practicrs and policies, which have been the hallmark of the Israeli leaders since the establishment of the
State of Israel on the Arab land of Palestine, have been
discussed at length in different international forums.
Many resolutions have been adopted which Israel has
disregarded in contempt of the reputation and dignity of
those organizations, reflecting in such conduct the aggressive, arrogant Israeli philosophy.

43. The need for a negotiated, comprehensive settlement
of the Arab-Israeli conflict is more pressing than ever.
There can be no real peace or stability in the region unless
the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
with all that that implies, is recognized and laid down in a
comprehensive settlement which would at the same time
recognize the principle of security for all Stat& in the
region, including Israel’s right to exist.

51. The Israeli record in this respect is brim-full, swelling
with inhumane colonial crimes of which I shall mention,
as examples, the following: first, the annexation of parts
of the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, such as
Jerusalem and the Arab Syrian Golan Heights, by a unilateial measure, without waiting for any negotiations to
be held on the future of the occupied territories, territories
which the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
5

changing the legal status, geographic nature and demographic composition of the occupied territories constitute
a violation of the above-mentioned Geneva Convention
and declared once again that the atrocious Israeli violations of that Convention constitute War crimes and an
affront to humanity. In that resolution, the Assembly
further declared that such measures gravely obstruct the
efforts to establish a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. It requested the Security Council to ensure Israel’s
respect for the Geneva Convention and the application of
its provisions in the Palestinian and Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and to initiate the
necessarymeasures to halt those illegal Israeli policies and
practices.

of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12August 19499’
provides should remain intact and unchanged until their
final future status is determined; secondly, the continuation of the seizure by the Israeli authorities of Palestinian
territories in the West Bank and Gaza, either through
confiscation or through public theft; thirdly, the continuation of the establishment of new kTadi settlements on
Arab territory, the transfer Of Western elements to Settle
there, and the expansion of old settlements; fourthly, evacuation, deportation, expulsion, displacement and transfer
of the Arab inhabitants of the occupied territories and
denial of their right to return-even to their homes;
fifthly, excavations that transform and alter the historical,
cultural and religious character, especially in the area of
the Holy City of Jerusalem, and the pillaging of cultural
and archaeological property; sixthly, collective punishment, mass arrests and arbitrary administrative detention;
seventhly, restriction of religious freedoms and established practices and customs; eighthly, continuous restrictions on educational institutions in an attempt to stop the
Palestinian educational tide; ninthly, restriction of the
freedom of movement of the Arab citizens; and, tenthly,
pillage of the natural resourcesof the inhabitants of the
occupied territories.

54. General Assembly resolution 37188 is but the latest
link in a chain of similar resolutions that condemn Israel’s
continued policies and practices in the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories. Hence, it seems to my delegation that the time has come for us all to understand that
Israel’s continued disregard of whatever resolutions the
United Nations adopts concerning its colonialist expansionist policies in the occupied territories dictates that the
Council, as the Organization’s instrument of peace, face
this despicable situation and exert its international authority in a serious attempt to restore confidence in the United
Nations-a confidence that diminishes further year after
year as a result of Israel’s persistent efforts to shatter the
reputation of the Organization through disregard of its
resolutions. The Charter of the United Nations is clear
and straightforward in the ways to deal with such situations, and reference to Chapter VII ought to clarify what
we should do. Therefore, my delegation calls upon the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities and implement the
provisions of the Charter.

52. The Israeli objective behind theseand other oppressive, arbitrary political practices is a clear, well-known
one that has long been discussed and documented in
various international circles. That long-term objective, of
which all the above-mentioned means and practices are
part, is a prelude to Israel’s permanent annexation of the
West Bank and Gaza, through a policy aimed at the
destruction of the Palestinian and Arab character in the
occupied lands, and even its physical annihilation, a policy that has been expanded to reach every Palestinian,
even outside his homeland, That is what wasexpressedby
the barbaric Israeli invasion of Lebanon and the acts of
destruction and genocide that made the whole world
shiver and culminated in the criminal carnage of unarmed
Palestinian civilians in the camps of Sabra and Shatila,
The Israeli judicial investigation commission has found
some Israeli Government members guilty; but the entire
Israeli Government, as the occupying Power, must be
charged with direct collective responsibility for the perpetration of those massacres,which are part and parcel of
the process of the annihilation of the Palestinian people,
That, in turn, is an inseparable part of the wider Israeli
design that the Israeli leaders intend to carry out over the
scattered dead bodies of the Palestinian people,

55. The Council is requested to put an end to Israel’s
continued disregard by compelling it to withdraw from
the Arab territories occupied since 1967 and to withdraw
completely from Lebanon, in accordance with Council
resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982) and other resolutions; by compelling Israel, in the period prior to its withdrawal from the occupied territories, to respect the 1949
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War and comply with all its provisions
in the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, and to
halt its arbitrary and expansionist policies and practices in
those territories and immediately to cease building new
settlements and remove existing ones so that the owners of
those lands may regain their rights; and by reaffirming
that any change in the legal status, geographic nature or
demographic composition of the occupied Palestinian and
Arab territories constitutes a violation ofthe provisions of
the Geneva Convention and is hence null and void.

53. If that is the Israeli objective behind these endless
atrocities, in the perpetration of which Israeli soldiers
fired their bullets right into the chests of unarmed
children-unarmed
except for stones in their handsthere is no doubt that these practices constitute per se a
violation of KWiOUS international laws and practices and
are a direct violation of the 1949 Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The
General Assembly confirmed that fact in resolution 37188
of 10 December 1982, in which it reaffirmed that the measures taken by Israel, as the occupying State, aimed at

56. The experience of the United Nations with regard to
Israel is, indeed, a unique one in its bitterness, Israel’s
immediate automatic rejection of all United Nations resolutions relative to its policies should prompt the Organization to attempt to find more efficient means of enforcing
its decisions.
6

5’
is

C
Sl
te
IT
E
w
Ci
tl
ii
c
ir
S1
VI
ti

61
S
tt
Sl

F
d
Y

Cm

t1
S‘

9

57. The first thought that comes to mind in this respect
is the concern of some of the permanent members of the
Council not to hurt the feelings of the Israeli leaders, in
spite of their apparent criminal tendencies, under the pretext that logic and not pressure is the most efficient
means of restoring Israel to its senses, a concern which
we can say is ill-placed, because our experience with
Israel has taught us that Israel and logic are like oil and
water-unmixable-and
that the only consideration that
can influence the leaders of Israel is their awareness that
they might have to pay a high price should they wish to
persist in their policies. That price may be related to the
huge economic and military assistance they get from the
United States despite their persistence in pursuing their
inhuman policies, or it may be related to the automatic
support they get in the Council through the use of the
veto against any draft resolution aimed at imposing sanctions against Israel.

64. One need not be particularly perceptive, therefore,
to see that the events which followed the brutalaggression
against Lebanon perpetrated by the Zionist regime of
Israel with the support and connivance of the United
States Government
to prptect its odious “strategic
alliance*‘, the horrendous massacre of Palestinian civilians in the Sabra and Shatila camps and eisewhere in
southern Lebanon, the numerous atrocities committed
daily against the Arab and Palestinian peoples in the
occupied territories, and the unbridled policy of colonization, de-Arabization and extermination carried out by
the Israeli authorities in those territories, including Jerusalem, all constitute flagrant defiance of the authority of
the Council, which is endowed with the highest responsibility for the maintenance ofinternationalpeace
and security by the Charter of the United Nations and by the will of
the international community itself. They also represent
the most dangerous recent development in an explosive
situation which in the past had already brought the world
to the brink of war,

58. Israel’s illegal policies and practices in the West
Bank and Gaza may well be considered a time bomb
threatening the entire region. My delegation therefore
requests the Council to shoulder its duties since it is the
international instrument for creating a just and durable
peace throughout the world.

65. World-wide
condemnation of the brutal acts committed by the Israeli army in Lebanon, especially its clear
responsibility in the Sabra and Shatila massacres, has
been such that, faced with angry protests from many
sectors within Israel itself, Begin’s adventurist, expansionist and exclusivist Government had no choice but to accept the verdict of the commission of inquiry, which
established its responsibility for those events,

59, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement,
60. Mr. ROA KOURi
(Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): I should like first of all, Comrade President, to
tell you how very pleased the Cuban delegation is at
seeing you presiding over the Council for the month of
February. Your recognized qualities as an experienced
diplomat and as a man of justice go hand in hand with
your invariable policy of principle in favour of the just
cause of the heroic people of Palestine. I have no doubt,
therefore, that under your presidency the Council will
successfully conclude its important deliberations on the
question now before us.

66. For justice to be complete, the Zionist criminal
attackers of Lebanon responsible for the massacres of
defenceless Palestinians and the harassment, torture and
persecution of the Arab people in the occupied territories
should meet the same fate as the Nazi war criminals at
Nuremberg.
67. The persistence of the Israeli policy of colonization
in the occupied Arab territories, Israel’s aggression
unleashed against Lebanon and its continued occupation
of that independent and non-aligned State, its expansionist and hegemonic ambitions, as well as its intention of
exterminating the long-suffering and heroic Palestinian
people, deserve the most vigorous condemnation of the
Council.

61. I should like also to commend my colleague, Mr.
Amega, of Togo, who presided over the Council last month.
62. I equally avail myself of this opportunity to welcome
the election and participation as members of the Council
of the representatives of Malta, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan and Zimbabwe, whom I wish every success
in their important functions.

68. It is imperative to reiterate once again that all the
measures adopted by Israel to modify the physical nature,
the demographic composition, the institutional structure
or the status of the Arab and Palestinian territories OCCUpied since 1967,including Jerusalem,as well asthe establishment of new settlements, are devoid of any legal
validity, constitute a flagrant violation of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12August 1949,’ and are an obstacleto
any genuine, comprehensiveand just solution of the Middle East conflict.

63. On many occasions we have expressed in the Council
tlie position of the Revolutionary Government of Cuba
and of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries-over
which President Fidel Castro has presided since 1979-on
the situation in the Middle East; its Gordian knot, the
question of Palestine; and the consequences of that deteriorating situation for international peace and security,
There is also a general awareness of the negative impact
that Israel’s continued illegal occupation of Arab territories acquired by force since 1967 has on a just, comprehensive and lasting solution of the Middle East problem.

69. It is our consideredopinion that the Council should
be in a position to imposeupon the Israeli authorities the
broad and binding sanctionsprovided for in Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations, that it should hold
7

more and more critical. Almost every day, the world
public is faced with acts of terror and violence committed
by the Israeli occupation forces in the occupied territories
in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, East Jerusalem, the
Syrian Golan Heights and southern Lebanon.

them responsible for the illegal and criminal acts commit-

ted in Lebanon and other occupied Arab and Palestinian
territories and that it should demand that Israel immediately a& unconditionally put an end to its prolonged
occupation of those territories, including Jerusalem.

79. Israel’s ruling circles are escalating, without scruple,
their policy of driving the Arab population out of Palestinian territory, of undermining the economy, the national
culture and the educational system of the Palestinian
people, and of imprisoning thousands of Palestinians.

70. It is imperative, too, to adopt the measuresnecessary
to guarantee the security and the rights of the Palestinian
refugees in all territories occupied by Israel.
71. Cuba reiterates its profound conviction that a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Middle East
conflict will be possible only with the restoration of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, especially
their right to return to their homes and to the creation of
their own State in Palestine. No solution can be valid
without the participation, on an equal footing, of the
PLO, the sole, legitimate representativeof the Palestinian
people.

80. The extension of Israel’s land-settlement policy,
which is contrary to international law, is cause for grave
concern. The establishment of a growing number of Israeli
settlements in the occupied Arab territories is an essential
part of the policy of de-Arabization pursued by Israel’s
ruling circles, Also, the debate here in the Council confirms anew the fact to which many representatives have
alluded repeatedly and for a long time: that Israel is systematically pursuing a policy aimed at the final annexation of the Palestinian territories. The process of the
“creeping annexation” of the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip has already made considerable headway.

72. My Government trusts that the members of the
Council will fulfil their lofty duties, as prescribed by the
Charter and as demanded by world opinion, and that they
will put an end to the insolent defiance by the Zionist
authorities of Israel.

8 1. It has also been repeatedly ascertained in this forum
that Israel’s policy of terror and violence is not only a
permanent threat to security and stability in the region,
but also a great threat to world peace.

73. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Russian):The
next speaker is the representative of German Democratic
Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

82. No attempt of any kind to exculpate Israel from this
charge can veil the facts. Not even giving honour and glory
to certain reports in connection with the crimes committed in the refugee camps of Sabra and Shatila can make us
ignore the fact that Israel has been conducting a relentless
extermination campaign against the people of Palestine
for decades.

74. Mr. OTT (German Democratic Republic): Cqmrade
President, at the very outset I should like to thank the
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity to
define my country’s position regarding the situation in the
occupied Arab territories.
75. It is indeed a great pleasure for me cordially to congratulate you, Mr. Troyanovsky, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of February,
because our two countries are linked by close ties of
friendship and co-operation. My delegation wishes you
every successin tackling the tasks facing the Council this
month.

83. It is also well known why Israel’s ruling circles disregard the world public’s demand that they stop immediately their policy of aggression and occupation. Israel is
encouraged to commit new acts of aggression and to
tighten its rCgime of occupation by the unlimited economic, political and military support of the United States.
Only recently, the United States considered increasing its
military and financial assistance to the aggressor.

76. At the same time, I should like to reiterate our
gratitude to the representative of Togo, Mr. Amega, for
his service as President for the month of January.

84. Thus, the Israeli war of aggression against Lebanon
and the atrocious crimes committed against the Palestinian people are direct consequences of the “strategic
alliance’,’ between Israel and the United States. And it is no
secret that this alliance is aimed at extending the military
presence of the United States and the North Atlantic
Treaty Organ&&ion in the Middle East, at implementing
their hegemonic endeavours in that region, and at thwarting the world-wide efforts to bring about a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement in the Middle East. These
plans also include attempts to impede Ihe establishment of
a Palestinian State and to shut the PLO, the sole, legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, out of a
Middle East settlement, There is an attempt to revive the
failed policy of separate agreements with so-called new

77. My delegation would like to congratulate warmly
the new members of the Council and to wish the representatives of Malta, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan
and Zimbabwe every successin the performance of their
duties as members of this important organ,
78. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic
has a great understanding of the request made by the
representative of 3ordan, in his capacity as chairman of
the Group of Arab States, that the debate concerning the
situation in the occupied.Arab territories be resumed. In
fact, since the opening of the debate at the end of last year,
the situation in the occupied Arab territories has become
8

initiatives. But these attempts disclose the intention of
sanctioning the Israeli aggression by political and diplomatic means.

87. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Russian): The
next speaker is the representative of the United Arab
Emirates. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

85. Concerned about the dangerous situation in the
Middle East, and conscious of their great responsibility
for safeguarding peace, the States Parties to the Warsaw
Treaty paid special attention to these problems during
their recent meeting at Prague. In their Political Declaration they therefore point out the following:

88. Mr, AL-AMRI

(United Arab Emirates) (interpretution from Arabic): At the outset I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the current month. I cannot fail to expressour
recognition of the major role played by the Soviet Union
in advocating the struggle waged by the Palestinian Arab
people to win its right to self-determination and liberty.
We are confident that your political experience will enable you to conduct the proceedings of the Council
successfully.

“The participants in the meeting attach particular
importance to the solution of the most protracted and
most dangerous conflict-the
conflict in the Middle
East. They sharply denounce Israel’s invasion of Lebanon, the Israeli aggression against the Palestinian and
Lebanese peoples, and the bestial extermination of the
civilian population of westBeirut. In its aggressive acts,
Israel was encouraged by those who granted it aid and
support from outside.

89. I should also like to avail myself of this opportunity
to thank the representative of Togo, who presided over
the Council’s meetings last month.
90. I would also express our congratulations to the delegations of Malta, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan
and Zimbabwe on their admission to membership of the
Council.

“The participants in the meeting demand the immediate and complete withdrawal of Israeli troops from
Lebanon, and safeguards for the independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of that country.

91. The Council is resuming its consideration of Israeli
practices in the occupied Arab territories, This is an item
that has become a perennial part of the Council’s agenda
because of the repeated acts of aggression committed by
Israel against the Arab States and peoples. As soon as
consideration of one form of Israeli aggression is concluded, the world finds itself once more in the throes of
another Israeli violation, whether in the form of Israeli
military aggression against an Arab State, an escalation in
the building of illegitimate settlements, or the confiscation
and annexation of further Arab territories. The latest
manifestation of such acts of aggression was the recent
war waged by Israel against Lebanon, which resulted in
the destruction of many Lebanese cities and the harassment and murder of many defenceless and innocent Lebanese and Palestinian refugees, as well as in the levelling of
their camps. Israel has further revealed its racist, terrorist
nature byengineering and overseeing the horrendous/ma.ssacres in the refugee camps of Sabra and Shatila that
resulted in the murder of women and children and the
elderly. How bone-chilling was the sight of the dead
bodies of those innocent persons lying dismembered
amongst the ruins and devastation caused by Israel. These
inhuman tragedies perpetrated by Israel constitute a flagrant violation of the most fundamental human rights.
They are acts that are utterly repugnant to the human
conscience. Nor did the matter stop at that stage. Innocent
persons in the occupied territories are still being subjected
to every kind of terrorism on the part of Israel and its
allies. We continue to learn of the plight of Palestinians
and Lebanese in the occupied territories and of the likelihood of further massacres. Such inhuman acts require
that the international
community assume its responsibilities.

“They’ are favourably disposed towards the principles for solving the problem of a Middle East settlement put forward at the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference held at Fez, . , ,” [S/15556, annex, sect. IVJ.
86. In a message of greetings addressed by the Chairman
of the Council of State of the German Democratic Republic, Erich Honecker, to the’sixteenth session of the Palestine National Council that is now under way at Algiers,
the German Democratic Republic most strongly condemns the Israeli aggression against the Palestinian and
Lebanese peoples, the barbarous massacres of the residents of the Palestinian refugee camps in Beirut and the
continuing acts of terrorism of the Israeli occupiers
against Palestinian refugees in southern Lebanon. The
message further says:
“The failure of the adventurous plans of imperialism
to smash the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) has demonstrated to the world that the Palestinian issue cannot be settled by force: It becomes ever
more evident that a comprehensive, just and lasting
settlement requires the convening of an international
conference with equal participation by all interested
sides, including the PLO. Such settlement must’guarantee complete withdrawal of the Israeli troops from
all Arab and Palestinian territories occupied since
1967, including East Jerusalem, and implementation of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, parti&larly its right to self-determination and creation of an
independent State.
“You may rest assured that the German Democratic Republic will continue to side unswervingly in
active solidarity with the Palestinian people and its
sole, legitimate representative, the PLO.”

92. The latest Israeli deeds are a further link in a series
that began with the occupation of Palestine and the dis9

of the Palestinian people. Here, we. see fsrael
seeking to complete this chain, which will culminate ln the
physical
elimination of that people in order to silence its
cries for freedom and self-determination.
placing

93, The policy of establishing Israeli settlements in the
occupied
Arab territories is another example of Israel’s
arrogance
and of its violation of all international
conventions and resolutions, especially those adopted by the
Security Council and the General Assembly. BY that Policy, Israel plans to alter the geographic and demographic
character of the occupied territories in order to Create a
newfait accompfi that will make it easier for it to annex the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip after its annexation of the
Holy City of Jerusalem and the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights. By building further settlements, Israel aims at the
disruption of all peace efforts. That undertaking reflects
Israel’s manifest will to expand at the expense of Arab
rights.
94. Israel’s continued violation of all international
instruments and laws, its daily practices in the occupied
Arab territories and its attitude towards every effort and
endeavour aimed at finding a permanent peaceful solution
in the Middle East prove beyond any doubt that it is not
desirous of peace and is not interested in achieving any
progress towards a solution of the problem. Rather, it
deliberately seeks to sabotage any efforts ic this respect. As
is evident from the course it has taken, Israel seeks to reach
one goal: the impossible goal of the capitulation of the
Palestinian Arab people into accepting the occupation of
its territories and enslavement by Israel.
95. Israel’s expansionist policies have been very costly to
the Middle East area. Since the creation of the Zionist
entity, the area has been in a state of instability and
turmoil. Those policies have also constituted a perennial
source of danger, jeopardizing the entire region as well as
international peace and security. At the same time, Israel
has persisted in riding roughshod over all relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, This
brings into question the usefulness and effectiveness ofthe
Council in maintaining international peace and deterring
the aggressor. These two bodies have become completely
immobilized, unable to put an end to these practices and
to eliminate the injustices to which the Arab people are
subjected in Arab territories,
96. The responsibility for obstructing the Council in
discharging its responsibility with regard to Israel’s terrorist aCtiOnS must be borne by the United States, which uses
its international weight to defend those policies by its
abuse of its right of veto in the Council, in addition to
providing Israel with all kinds of weapons that arc used in
destroying Arab cities and murdering innocent persons.
Thus, it shows that it is sharing responsibility for what is
taking place in the Middle East at a time when we had
expected it to take a different stance, since it is a world
Power with responsibility for the maintenance ofpeace and
since it Voices Slogans about the freedom and selfdetermination of peoples.

97, The international community is more than ever
called upon to take a strong stand in order to stop Israeli
violations and protect the innocent people in the occupied
territories.
gg, The United Arab Emirates talk UpOn the Council to
its historical responsibilities and do whatever is
to put an end to Israel’s violations of all international instruments and resolutions and compel it to
comply with them.

discharge
necessary

99, We refer to all the Council and Assembly resolutions
in this respect. We wish to cite in particular General Assembly resolution 37/86D, adopted on 10 December 1982,
which calls on the Security Council to discharge its responsibilities in such a way as to enable the Palestinian Arab
people
to gain its freedom, exercise the right to selfdetermination and establish its own independent State,
under the leadership of the PLO, the sole, legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.
100. The PRESIDENT (inferpretution from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Lebanon. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
101. Mr, LABAKI
(Lebanon) (interpretation from
French): Sir, I am pleased to address the Council during a
meeting being held under your presidency.
102. This meeting was to be devoted to the question of
the establishment of settlements in the occupied Arab and
Palestinian territories, it being understood that the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories are those that were
occupied in the course of the 1967 war and that the defucto
situation created in those territories could in no way be
compared to the situation prevailing in some parts of
Lebanon-a situation which no one claims to want to
prolong. In any event, this is what was stated in the request
for convening the Council which was addressed to the
President. Therefore, I had not intended to speak, leaving
that task, for the sake of effectiveness, to those of our
colleagues who are more directly affected by the situation.
103. However, since what is happening or might be happening in Lebanon has been discussed far and wide, in
spite of the decisions taken by the Group of Arab States at
the United Nations-a Group of which we are a member
and with which we are in solidarity-I
find myself obliged
to say that, with regard to disinformation, the threshold of
the intolerable has been reached and to recall that, in the
course of the eight years of war imposed upon Lebanon,
which took a toll of more tha’n 100,000 Lebanese lives, in
the terrible silence of the whole world, and destroyed part
of the economic structure of the country, causing damage
amounting to many billions of dollars, Lebanon, always
concerned about safeguarding Arab solidarity, came to
the Council only for the establishment of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and for successive
renewals of its mandate and sought to prevent, and often
to thwart, any polemics with anyone.
10

104
has
see
imI
abc
sub
tha
qut
wit
ant
an
an)
car

10:
is t
OUI

Lel
is ;
ain
ele
the
det
the
exr
intl
mc
enc
the
act
me
the
de1

lO(
th<
thf
sa!
fo1
SU
tiv

10
Tt
hi1
sta

10
YO
rer
OU

YO
ml
rie
bil
rei
th

10
th
ex
la:
cc

104. Lebanon is consistent with the course of action it
has set for itself and is not changing course. However, it
seems that our behaviour and the self-restraint we have
imposed on ourselves have been misinterpreted. It seems,
above all, that some have imagined that they could act as
substitutes for Lebanese authority and deal with matters
that are the sole competence of Lebanon, thus calling into
question our sovereignty and the authority of the State
within internationally recognized borders-a sovereignty
and an authority which could in no way be undermined by
an ongoing and, of course, temporary situation. No one
anywhere could ever replace Lebanese authority. No one
can put Lebanon in the dock.

110. Once more the Council has to consider the Israeli
practices in the occupied Arab territories. Its many meetings on this problem reflect the undiminished concern of
the world community over the policies of the Israeli
Government in those territories. My Government, which
follows closely those disturbing policies, has had the
opportunity to express its views unequivocally and on
many occasions. The question of territory is perhaps the
gravest of the many aspects of this multifaceted problem.
The settlement policies practised by Israel in this context
are constantly aggravating the situation in the area. We
have to note with deep regret that the Government of
Israel has consistently ignored the many resolutions of the
United Nations with regard to the occupied territories, as
well as the views of third countries that play an important
role in developments in the Middle East.

105. Our sole concern today is for the future. Our goal
is to obtain, with the least possible delay, the liberation of
our national territory. Within the Tripartite Commission,
Lebanon is negotiating the withdrawal of Israeli forces. It
is at the same time proceeding to direct consultations
aimed at the withdrawal of all other forces and armed
elements, whose departure has already been requested by
the Government. That is why we refuse to engage in any
debate that might result in obstructing the progress of
these negotiations and these consultations, which we
expect will, in the end, yield results that will safeguard the
interests of all the parties concerned. All these parties
must, of course, endeavour-as
we ourselves are
endeavouring-not
to compromise, by their words or
their behaviour in the field, either the results already
achieved, which have been reported in a very recent statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lebanon, or
the general atmosphere that can promote positive
developments.

111. We have also to mention that, apart from their
illegal nature, these deplorable policies of the Israeli
Government, which include the totally unacceptable
annexation of East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights,
have also resulted in untold human suffering and loss of
life in the area.
112. I am certainly stating the obvious by saying that the
present situation in the occupied Arab territories cannot
be isolated from the problem of the self-determination of
the Palestinian people. I should like, in this context, to
reiterate the basic position of my Government, namely,
that the PLO should be recognized as the sole representative of the Palestinians and should be so enhanced as to be
able to contribute decisively to the realization of the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination, including their right to create their own
State.

106. Everyone must be aware that we wish to draw from
the past and present only what will enlighten our path for
the future. In any event, of course, I would conclude by
saying that we are grateful to all those who in this very
forum, in response to our approach, have given us their
support, as well as to those who have taken sincere initiatives on our behalf.

113. In the meantime, Israel, whose right to exist as a
sovereign State within secure boundaries should be fully
recognized, should withdraw, without any further delay,
from all the territories occupied since 1967, No other
position, it seems to us, would be consistent with the
fundamental principle that the acquisition of territory by
any use of force whatsoever can in no way be condoned.
The more often that principle, enshrined in Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations and in the
Helsinki Final Act, is ignored and violated, the more
imperative becomes our duty to seethat it is implemented.

107. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Greece. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
108. Mr. DOUNTAS (Greece): Mr. President, I thank
you and the members of the Council for acceding to my
request to participate in this debate. Allow me, at the
outset, to express the congratulations of my delegation to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for this
month. I am confident that, under your wise and experienced guidance, the Council will discharge its responsibilities effectively. Our appreciation goes also to the
representative of Togo, Mr. Amega, who wasPresident of
the Council in January,

114. This is the time for action, not only by the parties to
the conflict, but also by the international community as a
whole. The present situation of continuous defiance of
the principles of the Charter and of resolutions of the
United Nations on the Miadle East could endanger international peace and security.
115. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Democratic
Yemen. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

109. Since this is the first time this year that I have had
the opportunity to address the Council, I should like to
extend to the new members, namely, Malta, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan and Zimbabwe, our warmest
congratulations.

116. Mr. AL-ASHTAL

(Democratic Yemen) (interpre-

tation from Arabic): Allow me Sir, at the outset to express

11

to you warmest congratulations
on your assumption of
the presidency for this month. We know from many previous occasions your great expertise and ability in conducting the Council’s proceedings, and we are confident
that your well-known tact will enable you again to conduct them successfully. We are pleased that you represent
a country-the
Soviet Union-that
has advocated just
causes and stood by all peoples struggling for in&pendence, sovereignty and social progress at the same time as
it has called for and worked sincerely towards the maintenance of international peace and security. Indeed, our
countries are linked by bonds of friendship and cooperation.
117. I also wish to avail myself of this opportunity to
express my appreciation to Mr. Amega, of Togo, who
presided over the work of the Council last month with
wisdom and ability,
118. I cannot fail to commend on this occasion Council
resolution 528 (1982) making Arabic an official language
of the Security Council. This is recognition of the cultural
contribution of Arabic, which has become one of the
major languages of the contemporary world.
119. The Council is resuming consideration of the situation in the occupied Arab territories in the light of new
political developments. In addition to Israel’s continued
occupation of the West Bank, Gaza and the Golan, there is
the occupation of what is now called the “North Bank”. By
this I mean Lebanon, the southern part of which is suffering
under the yoke of Israeli occupation. It has been said that
one of the aims of the Israeli authorities in invading Lebanon, in addition to satisfying Israeli expansionist greed, was
to stifle the valiant national resistance in the West Bank,
Gaza and the Golan and to frustrate and pre-empt any
political solution that might lead to the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, in accordance with United
Nations resolutions, especially after it had become quite
clear that the Palestinians inside and outside the occupied
territories were resolutely supporting their national leadership and their sole, legitimate representative, the PLO.
Israel believed that, through its war against the PLO and its
terrorizing of the Patestininn civilians in the Sabra and
Shatila camps, it would discourage the Palestinian people
from struggling against the occupation and settlement.
Israel believed it could shake the confidence of the Palestinian masses in their leadership, but it has seen that the
resistance is increasing in intensity. Today we see the Palestine National Council meeting in order to renew the pledge
and reaffirm the unshakeable determination
of the Palestinian people to achieve victory.
120. The Israeli invasion of Lebanon coincided with a
serious intensification of the settlement process in the
West Bank and Gaza. The Council has listened to an
account of the barbaric acts perpetrated by the Israeli
authorities using all means and methods, from terrorizing
the Palestinians in order to force them to give UP their
property to encouraging new colonists to usurp the land
and establish new settlements. It must be recognized that
this settlement process, although a natural corollary ofthe

Israeli policy based on aggression and expansion, is in fact
a most grave manifestation of occupation, because it aims
at creating a newfuit accompli that makes it impossible to
implement United Nations resolutions concerning the
Palestinian people, especially those concerning the right
to return and the right to self-determination.
121. That is why the Council unanimously adopted its
famous resolution 465 (1980), in paragraph 5 of which the
Council:
‘Defermines that all measures taken by Israel to
change the physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure or status of the Palestinian
and other Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, or any part thereof have no legal validity
and that Israel’s policy and practices of settling parts of
its population and new immigrants in those territories
constitute a flagrant violation of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War and also constitute a serious obstruction
to achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East,“*
122. The adoption of that historic resolution was a decisive answer to all the lame legal excuses put forward by
Israel to invest the settlements which it is building so fast
in the occupied territories with a legal character. Therefore, the representative of Israel stated at that time that
Israel would not abide by the resolution. Indeed, the
Israeli Government decided to flout that resolution by
persisting in its policy of establishing settlements.
123. That Israeli challenge to the Council was not the
first of its kind. During the invasion of Lebanon and the
occupation of its territory by Israel, the Council adopted
resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982), demanding Israel’s
immediate and unconditional withdrawal from Lebanon.
To date we are still awaiting that withdrawal.
124. How can we explain the persistence of occupation
and of the unjust conditions imposed by Israel in return
for a promise to withdraw from Lebanese territory? How
can we hope that Israel will withdraw while it is preparing
for a long stay? And how can we explain the position of
the United States, which voted for the two resolutions, 508
(1982) and 509 (1982), and which is today supervising the
negotiations on conditions for withdrawal, thus eroding
the prestige and authority of the Council?
125. The United States, which provides Israel with military and political support, is the party that encourages the
Zionist entity to flout the international community and
the Council in particular. However, there are those who
expect the United States to pressure Israel into withdrawing from Lebanon and into finding a political solution
that *would put an end to the Israeli occupation of the
West Bank, Gaza and the Golan Heights, ignoring the fact
that Washington itself is the party that is subjected to
Zionist pressure, especially when. elections are approaching.
* Quoted

in English

by the speaker.

126. The valiant resistance has not stopped in the occupied territories; in Lebanon we see that the Lebanese
resistance is inflicting costly losses on the Israeli forces.
The situation in Palestine and the Middle East will not be
stable without the exercise of the inalienable national
rights of the Palestinian people. The whole world now
supports the right of the Palestinian people to return, to
seIf-determination and to the establishment of its own
independent State. The Council has a responsibility to use
its powers as laid down in the Charter of the United
Nations to implement its resolutions. The peoples of the
world are waiting. Will the Council act?

appetites of the Zionist annexationists have been growing.
Recently, an announcement was made in Tel Aviv about
plans for a sharp increase in the number of Israeli settlers
in those areas, up to 400,000 in the next five years and
nearly 1.5 million in the next 30 years.
13 1. Hand in hand with the economic plundering of
Arab lands, Israel has methodically been stepping up
violence against the Arab inhabitants of those territories.
The murder of unarmed people, mass repression and torture, arbitrary arrest and expulsion have become facts of
everyday life in the occupied territories. Thousands of
people continue to languish in Israeli concentration
camps and prisons. In just one of them, the Ansar Camp,
set up by the Israeli army in occupied southern Lebanon,
up to 5,000 arrested Palestinians and Lebanese are being
held. Reports that are coming in about the continuing
abductions and murders of Palestinians and the discovery
of new mass graves in the area of Sidon-a fact to which
our attention was drawn by the representative of the PLO
and which was confirmed by the Commissioner-General
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East-show that Israeli policy
everywhere, whether it be in the West Bank, Gaza, the
Golan Heights or southern Lebanon, is based on naked
terror against the Arab population.

127. The PRESIDENT (inierprelation from Russian): I
will now make a statement as representative of the
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS.
128. The Soviet delegation believes that the initiative
taken by the Group of Arab States in calling for a
resumption of the discussion in the Council of the question of the situation in the Arab territories occupied by
Israel is a timely one. This problem has been under consideration by the Council for many years now, and with
each passing year, with each passing month of the Israeli
occupation, the scale of the expansionist policy of Tel
Aviv becomes increasingly apparent. The goal of that
policy is extremely clear: it is to perpetuate the seizure of
the ancestral Arab lands and to deprive the Palestinian
people of their homeland.

132. With regard to the methods of the Israeli occupiers,
there is eloquent evidence in the recent statement by such
an “expert on pacification” as the Chief of Staff of the
Israeli army, General Eitan, who stated: “This system of
harassment has proved itself in practice. It works very well
with Arabs.” It would appear that those assertions on the
part of the highest-ranking officer in the Israeli army,
who bears direct responsibility for the mass murders of
Palestinians in the Sabra and Shatila camps, require no
commentary. They serve to confirm once again the fact
that the Israeli leaders, carried away by the arrogance of
power, have decided to force the Palestinian and other
Arab peoples to their knees and force them to resign
themselves to occupation and, ultimately, to impose
upon them their predatory Camp David-type peace.

129. Since 1967, the ruling circles in Israel have persistently been undermining all attempts to bring about a just
and lasting settlement of the Middle East conflict. Along
with this, they have been waging in the Arab territories a
campaign of open colonial plunder and preparing the
ground for their final absorption. For almost 16 years
now, the occupation of the West Bank of the Jordan, the
Gaza Strip and the Syrian Golan Heights has been continuing. In the course of all these long years, the Israeli
authorities have, in a planned and methodical fashion,
been carrying out their policy of the colonial “appropriation” of those territories, clearing the ground for the
massive implantation there of Israeli settlers. The map
distributed at the request of the representative of Jordan
as a Council document [S/1.5488, annex II], which shows
the Israeli settlements, has once again made it only too
clear that the occupiers are moving towards the point of
converting the land belonging to the Arabs into isolated
ghetto-type enclaves or a kind of bantustan reduced to
the role of agrarian appendages to the Israeli economy.
The compilers of this map can scarcely be suspected of
inaccuracies or exaggerations. It was Issued by the rural
settlement departments of the World Zionist Organization and the Jewish Agency for Israel, which act as the
principal co-ordinators of the settlements policy in Israel.

133. However, those plans only serve to demonstrate
the extraordinary political short-sightedness of those
who now Stand at the controls of the State machine of
Israel. The facts demonstrate that the Palestinian people,
under the leadership of the PLO, are building up their
resistance to the occupiers.
134. Of course, Israel could not have embarked upon
such a defiant course if it did not have behind it the
looming figure of its “strategic partner”, the United
States. The recent Israeli incursion into Lebanon once
again starkly revealed the very essence of the imperialist
course of the United States in the Middle East and the level
of military and political support afforded Tel Aviv by the
United States. However, the facts show that the entrenchment of Israel in the Arab territories depends in no small

130. As a result of arbitrary expropriations and requisitions of Arab lands, more than half of the territory of the
West Bank of the Jordan and the Gaza Strip have already
fallen into the hands of Israelis. About 140 settlements,
not counting Jerusalem and its suburbs, have been established in those territories, In the course of time, the
13

those demands.The Council must take measuresthat
would erect a solid barrier to the annexationist designsof
the Israeli aggressors-andthe Council hassuchpossibilities pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations.

way on the direct support and assistance Of Washington.
As was pointed out recently by The Washington pod&cat the very least half of United States military and
economic assistance to Israel, which amounts to $2.6
billion a year, that is, $1,000 per capita for all Israeli
citizens, is used to pay for the implementation ofIsraeli
expansion in the West Bank, Gaza and the Golan
Heights.”

139. AS for the Soviet Union, it has unswervingly supported and will continue to SUPPOrt the jI.ISt causeof the
Palestinianand other Arab peoples,as well asthe valiant
struggle of the Palestinianpeople for their legal rights.
The Soviet Union proceedsfrom the belief that a genuine
solution of the Palestinianproblem can be brought about
only within the framework of a comprehensive negotiated Middle East settlement,which should be basedon
United Nations decisionson the Middle East.

135. Those figures shed true light on the hints we hear
from time to time from official Washington to the effect
that the intensive establishment of ever more Israeli settlements is creating certain impediments to the political
game engaged in by the United States concerning a Middle
East settlement. In actual fact, the present United States
Administration, protecting its Israeli protege, far from
reducing, is actually increasing considerably its assistance
to Tel Aviv, providing it with the possibility of gnawing
away even further into Arab territory. For the next financial year this assistance will amount to about $3 billion.
And the United States Secretary of State, replying recently
to the question of the possibility of the Administration
exercising at least a minimum of pressure on Israel, talked
about the inadvisability of “forcing people to do things
they believe to be against their interests”. Clearly, that
approach is welcomed with gratitude in Tel Aviv. However, that policy arouses a completely different view on the
part of the Palestinians, Syrians and Lebanese living
under the heel of the Israeli occupation.

140. As was once again stressedin the joint SovietPalestiniancommunique, issuedon 14 January 1983in
connection with the visit to the Soviet Union of the delegation of the PLO, headedby the Chairman of the Executive Committee, Mr. Arafat, such a settlement should
provide for the total and unconditional withdrawal of
Israeli troops from all Arab and Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, and for
the exerciseby the Arab people of Palestineof their inalienable national rights, including the right to selfdetermination, the creation of their own independent
State, and the right of the Palestiniansto return to their
homes, in accordance with existing United Nations
decisions.
141. The Soviet Union has repeatedly stated its readinessto co-operate practically with all who‘are prepared
to work for the implementation of those provisions
within the framework of honest collective international
efforts, with the participation of all interested parties,
including, of course,the PLO, as the sole, legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. We are convinced
that only such a coursecan bring about a just and lasting
peacefor all States and peoples of the Middle East.

136. The actions of Israel in the occupied Arab territories are a flagrant violation of Council resolutions and of
numerous international conventions and agreements
which Israeli representatives themselves have signed,
including the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949.’
137. Suffice it to recall that in resolution 465 (1980), the
Council determined:

142. I now resume my role as PRESIDENT.

“that all measures
taken by Israel to changethe physi-

143. The representative of the PLO has asked to be
allowed to make a statement, and I call on him.

cal character,demographiccomposition,institutional
structure or statusof the Palestinianand other Arab
territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, . , . have no legal validity”

144. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization)
(interpretationfrom Arabic): I wish to read out a message
from the head of the PalestineNational Council to the
President of the Security Council which I received by
telephone this morning. It states:

and it called upon Israel:
“to rescindthose measures,to dismantlethe existing
settlementsand in particular to cease,on an urgent
basis,the establishment,constructionand planning of
settlementsin the Arab territories . , .‘I,

“The PalestineNational Council, which is meeting
in Algeria, feelsconcern over the practicesperpetrated
by the Israeli forces as well as other Fascist forces
against Palestinians in occupied Palestine and also
against Palestinian refugeesin Lebanon.

The Council unanimouslycondemnedTel Aviv’s annexation of East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights and
unanimouslycalled for the unconditional withdrawal of
Israeli troops from Lebanon. However, none of those
decisionshas yet been complied with.

“Those practices, which victimized scoresof Palestinians living in Lebanon, were meant to terrorize and
displace them.

138. It is the profound conviction of the Soviet delegation that the aggressormust be made to comply
with

“The Security Council is called upon at this critical
period to dischargeits international responsibility to
14

protect these innocent lives and to adopt the necessary
resolutions to guarantee that.”

were peaceful citizens and nobody can accusethem of
being anti-Semites. But there is a messageof hope in the
report:

[The speaker continued in English.]
“A 13-year-old girl named Yael came today and
stood silently and looked at the flame for a long
time. Then she took a candle, stooped, lighted it and
placed it on a stone beside the others.

145. In its persistencein carrying out its repressive
measures and criminal acts, Israel, through its occupation forces in the occupied Palestinian territories,
imposed, on 14 February, a curfew on the Al-Kasaba
quarter in the city of Nablus. Of course, the occupation
authorities had to find a reasonfor that repressivemeasure, and the reason given was that the demonstrations
in Nablus were in support of the current meetingsof the
Palestine National Council.
146. On the sameday, they imposeda curfew on the
Kalandia refugee camp north of Jerusalem. Today, 16
February, The New York Times reported in a brief, isolated story that: “About 200 Palestinians in the West
Bank and Gaza have been arrested in two days”.

“‘I’m here becauseI’m sorry about the man killed
here,’ she said simply. ‘It is important for us to be
here, becauseI show that I care for our rights, and I
want peace.’”
Yes, Mr. President, I should like through you to assure
Yael and the hundreds of thousands of Yaels that my
15-year-old son also wants peaceand to live in peace in
his home, the home his father and his ancestors were
born in. This is his right.
150. The report in The New York Times also says:

147. Again today, Israeli colonial settlers from the
Kiryat Arba settlement, establishedon confiscated land
belonging to the city of Hebron, held a provocative
demonstration in Zahiriyeh village, which has been
under curfew for almost three weeks.Israeli soldiersand
police protected the settlers, who drove around Zahiriyeh in cars, threatening villagers with severemeasures
against those who throw stones at Israeli vehicles.
Xiryat Arba colonial settlers also entered Halhoul, near
Hebron, in cars, uttering through loudspeakerssimilar
threats against its inhabitants.
148. The mayors of Hebron and Halhoul were
expelled by the racist forces of occupation. They were
received by the Council [2223rd meeting], where they
pleaded that they be allowed to return. The Council
decided [resolution 468 (1980)] that the two mayors
should be enabled to return to their towns, but Israel
has not carried out that decision and the mayors are
stil1 among the hundreds of Palestinianswho have been
arbitrarily expelled from their homes.

“The police, who are conducting an intensive
investigation with the help of the army and the security services, hx/e made no arrests in the attack,
which occurred Thursday evening.”
151. We recall those attacks on the mayors of Nablus,
Ramallah and Al Bireh which resulted in the loss of
people’s arms and legs-attacks which the police are
still investigating. Yet the repeated requestsof the Security Council and the General Assembly to the Israeli
occupation authorities to trace the criminals who are
responsible have fallen on deaf ears. But if the criminals
are those who are in power, how can they find
themselves?

The meefing rose at 6.05 p.m.

NOTES

149. In today’s New York Times there is a touching
story dealing with a vigil that was held in Jerusalemat
the spot where a 33-year-old man was killed and nine
other persons wounded as a result of a hand-grenade
attack on peaceful demonstrators condemning the policies of the Government of Israel. The demonstrators

’ United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
* Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, T/feHague Convention and Declarations
of 1899 nnd I907 (New York, Oxford University
Press, 1915).
’ Weekly Compilation
ofPresidential
Documents (Washington, D.C.,
Government Printing Office, 1982), vol. 18, No. 35, p. 108I.

15

idl
i&l

,y

&s

&LI

. &WI

.L;i

;t;:

flJ

cj$l

4 ,i h-4

(Al

cJIJp.LA J.e JyaJ-I

,p,

d&l

,y

4 &I

~j

, ibdl

LA1

,+$I

,ill

;~,AL.

JL

i&.5-

J,Al

: J! +.a ,i b J-k

&

>I

m~wJJFxR+?rsltil#ith
ae~~~~aei~~~~~~~~J~~!~~~~~J~~~~~
lfx6El~tr:N,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

iArtil#~~~llb7R71~~!~!~~a~~~~

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente
du monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupres de votre
Section
des ventes,
New York ou GenBve.

KAK

nO.JlY’QiTb

MsnaHRR

OpraHcl3auwI
A areaTcTBax
DO ~cex

Marasurle

Bnll

ruIuWre

npona~e

Ii3fialiH~i,

COMO

CONSEGUIR

M3,QAHMR

Iiaurln

patiowax
Mlcpa.
nq anpecy:

WasonMTe
OpraHH3auWI

ww

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de 13s Naciones
tcdas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

UNIES

dans les librairies
et les agences
dCpositaires
libraire
ou adressez-vous
& : Nations
Unies,

OP~AHM3At@iM

OGbenrwewndx

HblO-MOpK

DES NATXONS

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

06bE~MH1SHHbIX

I-rAI_IMti

MO)f(HO

KYIlHTb
E KlIHH(HbIX
Mara3ufiax
cnpaealr
0G u3nawuix
n 8au3ebi
KHHXCH~M
06%eaeHeHHblx
HaMI,
CeK4HR
no

)KeHeBa.

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Unidas
estsn en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas,
