United Nations

A/ES-10/PV.9

General Assembly

Official Records

Tenth Emergency Special Session

9th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 17 March 1998, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Udovenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ukraine)

The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory
Draft resolution (A/ES-10/L.4/Rev.1)
Mr. Hachini (Tunisia) (interpretation from Arabic):
The General Assembly is resuming its emergency special
session today to consider “Illegal Israeli actions in occupied
East Jerusalem and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian
Territory”. A year has elapsed since the General Assembly
began its consideration of this question. The Assembly has
adopted numerous resolutions in this respect demanding that
Israel cease its illegal actions in the occupied territories,
including, first and foremost, the establishment of
settlements. In contempt of those resolutions, Israel is
continuing to create settlements, thereby contravening
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions as well
as the Fourth Geneva Convention.
In addition to these negative developments, there has
been no implementation of the urgent request made by the
General Assembly to take action in the context of the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War. The General Assembly,
in its resolution ES-10/4 of 13 November 1997 — the
fourth General Assembly resolution adopted in this
respect — recommended that the Contracting Parties
convene a conference on measures to enforce the

98-85124 (E)

Convention in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem, and to ensure its respect in accordance with
common article 1.
In the same resolution, the General Assembly
recommended that the Government of Switzerland, in its
capacity as the depository of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, undertake the necessary steps to prepare for
that conference, including the convening of a meeting of
experts, as soon as possible and with a target date not
later than the end of February 1998. However, that
meeting has not been convened, despite the fact that the
Swiss Government has contacted and held consultations
with High Contracting Parties, for which we are very
grateful.
This situation, characterized by Israel's continued
illegal practices and policies and the non-respect of
General Assembly resolutions, cannot be allowed to go
on. Its consequences for the region are well known,
namely escalating and intensified violence and the
deprivation of the political, economic and social rights of
the Palestinian people in the occupied territories, as well
as their right to live in peace and security, like the other
peoples of the region.
In view of this emergency situation, the General
Assembly must continue closely to follow the situation,
in keeping with its historical responsibilities vis-à-vis the
Palestinian people and its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations. In this context, we believe
that the new draft resolution submitted to this tenth

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special session

9th plenary meeting
17 March 1998

emergency special session is a balanced one and meets its
objective, given that it reiterates the earlier demands
addressed to Israel as well as the recommendations to the
High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention
and to the depository State of that Convention.

the occupied territory. We are deeply cognizant of the
grave ramifications that these untenable actions pose,
particularly the incalculable damage to the peace process
itself and to the prospects of achieving a comprehensive
and durable solution to the entire Middle East conflict.

We call on the members of the General Assembly to
support this draft resolution, because the situation prevailing
today in the Palestinian territories demands of us all that we
send a clear message to the parties concerned in order to
protect the rights of Palestinian nationals in these territories
from the attacks against them, which contravene the
provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention, the principles
of the peace process and the spirit and letter of the
agreements reached in this respect.

In this regard, the draft resolution before us, in the
light the gravity of the situation, essentially reiterates the
elements contained in previous resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly. My delegation would like to highlight
the text's reiteration of the recommendation to convene a
conference of the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention to enforce the Convention in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and to
ensure respect in accordance with common article 1. The
draft resolution would extend the target date for the
convening of the meeting of experts of the High
Contracting Parties to the end of April 1998.

Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): The General Assembly is
meeting once again today in a resumed tenth emergency
special session to consider “Illegal Israeli actions in
occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the Occupied
Palestinian Territory”. Almost a year has elapsed since the
international community voiced its strong condemnation of
the illegal Israeli settlement activities at Jebel Abu Ghneim
at the first meeting of the tenth emergency special session
of this body, convened on 25 April 1997 and which
adopted General Assembly resolution ES-10/2.
Subsequently, in July and November 1997, the General
Assembly adopted resolutions ES-10/3 and ES-10/4,
respectively, which, inter alia, called for the immediate
cessation of Israel's settlement activities, especially in and
around Jebel Abu Ghneim to the south of occupied East
Jerusalem; the acceptance by Israel of the de jure
applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August
1949 to all the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967;
and the reversal of all illegal measures taken against the
Palestinian population in contravention of international law.
To our utter dismay and disappointment, none of those
resolutions have been implemented. On the contrary, our
deliberations today are being held against the backdrop of
a deteriorating situation on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territory and a continuing deadlock in the
Middle East peace process. Israel has not demonstrated the
slightest indication of the will to cease its illegal activities
by heeding the repeated calls of the General Assembly. In
recent days we have witnessed with deep concern the
indiscriminate use of force by Israeli authorities, without
any provocation whatsoever, resulting in the killing of
innocent civilians at an army checkpoint in the West Bank
between the Palestinian villages of Tarkoumiah and Idnah.
This tragedy has led to escalating tension and violence in

2

Indonesia has long underscored the need to achieve
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East. We wish to reiterate our unswerving solidarity with
the Palestinian people, especially in the exercise of their
inalienable rights and for the establishment of an
independent sovereign homeland on their national soil. It
has been our consistent position that the long-awaited
peace in the region can be attained only through the full
implementation of all relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions, particularly Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), and
on the basis of the principle of land for peace.
Ever since its inception, the United Nations has
borne a historical and moral responsibility towards the
Palestinian people. More than five decades later, the
validity and importance of the role of the United Nations
remains constant and unquestionable; the Organization
must continue to exert every effort to find a solution to
this seemingly intractable question. We must therefore
endeavour to consider further means by which the sacred
Palestinian cause can be advanced. The draft resolution
before us charts the way towards the fulfilment of the
legitimate sovereign rights of the Palestinians and towards
national statehood. The road to peace has been long and
arduous; hence, we should grasp the opportunities before
us.
Mr. Konishi (Japan): As a direct result of the
initiation of the construction of new settlements by the
Government of Israel in East Jerusalem, the peace process
between Israel and Palestine is losing its momentum and
direction. The stalemate in the peace process between

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special session

9th plenary meeting
17 March 1998

Palestinians and Israel cannot but affect the other tracks of
the peace process in the Middle East, such as the Syrian
track, and multilateral consultations, and it is heightening
the tension in the region as a whole.

In conclusion, we should like to express again our
appreciation and gratitude to the Government of
Switzerland for the sincere efforts it has made thus far in
its capacity as a depositary of the Convention.

As a sincere promoter of multilateral consultations,
and also as a country continuously playing a leading role in
economic assistance to Palestine, Japan has been
contributing to the peace and stability of the Middle East.
If the situation continues to deteriorate, the whole region is
bound to suffer critically. The Government of Japan is truly
concerned at such a prospect.

Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretation from
French): I wish first of all, Mr. President, to thank you
warmly for having organized this resumption of the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly.

During the past couple of months, in addition to the
tension surrounding the peace process, we have witnessed
another increase in tension as a result of non-compliance by
the Iraqi Government with resolutions of the Security
Council relating to weapons of mass destruction. The
situation with regard to Iraq is now heading towards
stabilization thanks to the diplomatic efforts of the
Secretary-General and to the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1154 (1998), sponsored by Japan and the United
Kingdom, which endorsed the agreement reached between
the Secretary-General and the Iraqi authorities.
It is high time to put an end to the chronic vicious
circle of the Middle East peace process and to bring that
process back on track. It is our ardent hope that all the
parties, especially the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority, will come to the table with the
desired flexibility for the greater cause of the peace and
stability of the whole region. The Government of Israel in
particular must faithfully implement its commitments
regarding the redeployment of troops in the West Bank.
In recent weeks we have seen tensions mounting in the
occupied territories. The parties concerned must not allow
acts of violence to derail the peace process. We urge the
parties concerned to reinforce their efforts and cooperation
in the area of security.
We are ready to support the draft resolution before us.
The Government of Japan, however, has no doubt that the
most desired efforts in the Middle East peace process must
come from the parties directly concerned. For this reason,
the Government of Japan would like to suggest that, in
determining the timing of both the expert meeting and the
conference of the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, consideration be given to
convening these meetings in such a way that they will not
affect adversely the efforts between the parties directly
concerned.

It has been nearly a year since the General Assembly
called upon the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention to take the measures necessary to
carry out their obligations under that Convention and
ensure that the Palestinians of the occupied territories,
including Jerusalem, enjoy greater protection. The efforts
made thus far, however, have not achieved that objective.
The construction of Israeli settlements has continued
in Jebel Abu Ghneim and elsewhere, reflecting
indifference to international opinion, which is losing
interest in a question that has been on the table for too
long.
The General Assembly is well aware of the
unbearable human price paid by the Palestinian people
because of the construction of settlements and other
illegal activities carried out by Israel in East Jerusalem
and the rest of the occupied territories.
Israel is not only building new settlements, but is
expanding existing ones, building bypass roads,
confiscating land adjacent to settlements and undermining
the rights and status of Palestinian citizens, who
increasingly find that their identity cards, attesting to their
residence in Jerusalem, are being confiscated. To this we
must add the protracted closures of the Palestinian
territories, the confiscation of natural resources, the
diversion of water sources, collective punishment, and the
arbitrary detention of Palestinian prisoners — and,
unfortunately, the list goes on and on.
These practices are all violations on the part of the
Israeli Government and should make us face up to the
disappointing reality that Israel continues to thumb its
nose at the resolutions of the United Nations, the Oslo
peace accords and international conventions, in particular
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
Given such incontestable and unfortunate facts, this
special session has lost none of its urgency. The

3

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special session

9th plenary meeting
17 March 1998

disastrous humanitarian situation caused by Israel's illegal
activities — in particular its construction of settlements —
and the Palestinian population's sense of frustration and
abandonment make more urgent than ever the
implementation of the recommendations made by the
General Assembly in its resolutions ES-10/2, ES-10/3 and
ES-10/4 to the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention to undertake measures at the national
and regional levels to fulfil their obligations under the
Convention.

peace. It is now up to Israel to summon the necessary
will. Our hope is slim, very slim, but we dare yet to hope.

In his statement of 3 March, made on the occasion of
the Festival of the Throne, our national holiday, His
Majesty King Hassan II, President of the Al-Quds
Committee, said:

In this regard, we recognize the efforts made by the
Swiss Government, depositary of the Convention, and
thank it in advance for the measures it will take in
accordance with the General Assembly's recommendations
on the convening of the meeting of experts prior to the
conference of States Parties. Since the date originally set
for that meeting of experts has already passed, we
propose, through today's draft resolution, the end of April
as the deadline for that meeting.

“The hopes for the region inspired by the Oslo
accords are dissipating under the Israeli Government's
obstinacy in turning its back on all its commitments,
persevering in its arrogance and exposing its own
citizens and those of the entire region to dangerous
tensions ...”
This resumed session is therefore most certainly the
time to send a clear and unequivocal message to Israel,
which must recognize that its contempt for the will of the
international community cannot be tolerated forever. It is
time that Israel respect its commitments, end any activity
that could alter the demographic and geographic character
of the Holy City of Al-Quds and the other occupied
Palestinian territories, and abandon any scheme that might
prejudge the final status negotiations.
One of the sponsors of the peace process, through its
spokesperson, recently described the despair of the
Palestinian people before the disastrous way this process
has unfolded. Let us therefore take the opportunity of this
resumed session to give renewed hope to the Palestinian
people and to reassure it of the inalienable nature of its
legitimate rights.
My delegation is firmly convinced that we must focus
our efforts in that direction if we are to get the peace
process moving again and ensure the implementation of the
agreements made between the Israelis and the Palestinians
on the basis of the principle of land for peace. We are also
confident that, during his forthcoming visit to the region,
the Secretary-General will not fail to use his well-known
wisdom and skills to relaunch the peace process, as he
recently did when the memorandum of understanding was
signed with the Iraqi Government. We dare to hope that
this is a blueprint for a comprehensive, just and lasting

4

The draft resolution before us, of which Morocco is
a sponsor, reiterates the recommendations made by the
General Assembly in its previous resolutions, particularly
that of convening a conference of the High Contracting
Parties to the Geneva Convention on measures to enforce
the Convention in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem.

In pursuit of that objective, we recommend that all
Member States vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
Permit me at the outset to extend to you, Sir, our warmest
thanks for resuming the work of the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly. I should also
like to express my appreciation to the Member States that
supported the Arab request to resume this session. The
resumption reveals the eagerness of the United Nations
and its Member States to promote a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
The establishment of the United Nations augured
well for the peace and security of the Member States and
their peoples and for the preservation of their rights as
they aspired to a prosperous future of security under the
umbrella of this international Organization. In this
context, the Palestinian people, chafing under the yoke of
the unjust Israeli occupation, yearns for the day when the
United Nations will bring its long-standing tragedy to a
close and rid it of the injustice of the Israeli occupier,
which has always tried to displace it and to deprive it of
its right to self-determination and to build its independent
State, in accordance with the United Nations Charter.
States Members of our Organization enjoy certain
rights, but they also have responsibilities. Should they fail
to meet these responsibilities, the Organization will be
unable to fulfil its commitments towards them. However,
the Israeli Government has persistently shunned these

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special session
duties by violating the United Nations resolutions and
shirking their implementation by any means. This behaviour
indicates Israel's disregard for the will of the international
community. Israel's continued settlement activities and
illegal acts in the occupied Arab territories, particularly East
Jerusalem, embody the current Government's refusal to
pursue the peace process in the Middle East initiated by the
Palestinian Authority and the previous Israeli Government.
This has led to a stalemate in the process and in the
negotiations and could well adversely affect their ultimate
outcome.
In this connection, we call on the United Nations to
salvage the peace process, which has been blessed by the
General Assembly in its previous resolutions addressing
Israeli settlement activities in the occupied territories and
standing firmly against the Israeli intransigence jeopardizing
the peace process in the Middle East.
My delegation stresses the need for the High
Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to
abide by the provisions of that Convention. Moreover, we
call on Israel, the occupying Power, to respect the
provisions of the Convention and its applicability to the
occupied Palestinian territories. From this perspective, we
support the recommendation that the High Contracting
Parties to the Geneva Convention convene a conference to
elaborate specific provisions on the applicability of the
Convention to the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Holy Jerusalem. Hence, we call upon the General Assembly
to speedily begin preparations for that conference.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress the
need for the General Assembly to put an end to Israeli
colonial activities. At the same time, it should attempt to
prevent Israel from pursuing its expansionist policies in the
occupied territories, as they threaten the Middle East peace
process. Hence, my delegation calls for the adoption of the
draft resolution before us today in order to advance the
peace process.
The President: In accordance with the decision
adopted at the eighth plenary meeting this morning, I now
call on the Observer of Switzerland.
Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (interpretation from
French): The serious issue that we are discussing is the
applicability of the Geneva Conventions. The action of the
Swiss Government, in its capacity as depositary of these
Conventions, is aimed at contributing to effectively
improving respect for international humanitarian law on the
ground. The Swiss delegation expressed this intention last

9th plenary meeting
17 March 1998
November, when it also recalled Switzerland's concern to
avoid any politicization of humanitarian law and action
and to support the peace process.
Since the adoption of resolution ES-10/4,
Switzerland has held informal consultations in order to
draw up a plan for following up on paragraphs 4 and 5 of
that resolution that could be acceptable to all the main
parties concerned. Switzerland has striven to take into
account the ideas that have been presented to it, as well
as the aforementioned goals, which it continues to seek.
In doing so, my country has borne in mind the political
message sent to the parties to the Geneva Conventions by
a very large majority of the General Assembly, in the
form of resolution ES-10/4, as well as the scope and
limits of its responsibilities as depositary of the Geneva
Conventions.
The fruit of this in-depth reflection is a proposal that
was submitted last 5 March to the main parties concerned.
Switzerland suggests the holding of a closed meeting,
which could be repeated if necessary, between the
representatives of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization. Switzerland believes that the presence of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, given its
role as guardian of international humanitarian law, would
be highly desirable. Switzerland would participate in this
dialogue in its capacity as depositary of the Geneva
Conventions.
We believe it is imperative to bring together the
main parties concerned. My delegation stated last
November that in our view the conference called for in
resolutions ES-10/3 and ES-10/4 would be useful only if
the main parties concerned participated. If we wish the
conference to have a real chance to contribute
significantly to improving the situation on the ground, the
preparations for it should be given the utmost care and
the time required.
As to the substance, Switzerland has always felt that
the Fourth Geneva Convention was applicable to all the
territories occupied by Israel, including those whose
annexation has not been recognized by the international
community, and Switzerland will spare no effort to
guarantee real respect for international humanitarian law.
It remains convinced of the need to create, as of today, a
framework conducive to an open and constructive
discussion of the problems mentioned in resolution ES10/4. We are furthermore convinced that the meeting of
experts proposed by my country is not only faithful to the
letter and spirit of resolution ES-10/4 but is also a

5

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special session
necessary step in order to achieve real improvements on the
ground and to assess the possibility of a follow-up. In due
course, Switzerland will present to the High Contracting
Parties to the Geneva Conventions and to the SecretaryGeneral its assessment of this matter.
To reiterate our proposal, here in the General
Assembly, we are requesting that our plan be given a
chance and that a dialogue at least be attempted. In the
spirit of article 1 shared by all four Geneva Conventions,
and in the spirit of resolutions ES-10/3 and ES-10/4, the
direct dialogue that we are proposing would be aimed at
examining all possible measures that could contribute to an
improvement in the application of international
humanitarian law in the occupied territories. Members will
note that the goals of the meeting of experts are both lofty
and very concrete, and they respond to a need.
We conclude by recalling that Switzerland attaches the
greatest importance to its role as depositary of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of
1977. The Swiss Government assumes this role, its
technical tasks included. Furthermore, the promotion of
peace, human rights and international humanitarian law lies
at the heart of its foreign policy. It is from this perspective
that Switzerland has spared no effort to respond to the
recommendations of operative paragraphs 4 and 5 of
resolution ES-10/4. While remaining at the disposal of the
parties to the Geneva Conventions, Switzerland holds to its
proposal and will not fail to implement it as soon as
possible.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in the
debate on this item for this meeting.
We shall now proceed to consider the draft resolution
contained in document A/ES-10/L.4/Rev.1.
If no delegation wishes to speak in explanation of vote
before the voting, the Assembly will now take a decision
on the draft resolution contained in document
A/ES-10/L.4/Rev.1.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,

6

9th plenary meeting
17 March 1998
Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guyana,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Micronesia (Federated States of), United
States of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Bulgaria, Marshall Islands, Romania,
Swaziland
Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.4/Rev.1 was adopted by
120 votes to 3, with 5 abstentions (resolution ES10/5).
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to make statements in
explanation of vote. May I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Millar (Australia): Australia continues to
support the principles underlying this resolution and
therefore regrets that it is not able to support the
resolution itself. We wish to make clear that we regard

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special session

9th plenary meeting
17 March 1998

settlement activity in the occupied territory as harmful to
the peace process.

agreements reached between the two sides, and are
contrary to international law.

Australia remains gravely concerned about the current
state of the peace process and has consistently urged the
parties to commit themselves to effective negotiations to
achieve a just, enduring and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East. There is no substitute for frank, direct and
wide-ranging talks between the parties themselves. We
consider that the draft resolution will not advance that
process, and we have therefore abstained.

We therefore had no choice but to uphold our
position from the meeting of the emergency special
session in November and to vote in favour of the
resolution.

The President: Before the representative of Norway
takes the floor, I should like to say a few words. The
Ambassador of Norway presented his credentials in
January, but he is not a newcomer here, as he served here
many years ago in the same capacity. As members will
recall, his predecessor participated very actively in the
preparation of draft negotiations on issues pertaining to the
reform suggested by the Secretary-General, and in particular
the most difficult part of the reforms — actions. But to my
mind, all the Norwegian ambassadors here have been
reformers.

Mr. Powles (New Zealand): The New Zealand
delegation is pleased to have supported the resolution
before us, particularly because of the way in which it
focuses on the question of Israeli settlements, one crucial
element in the intricate jigsaw of the current peace
process.
We therefore supported the resolution despite the
reservations my Government holds about the utility of an
international conference under the Geneva Convention.
My Government sincerely hopes that a way will be found
for the parties to refrain from further steps that undermine
whatever trust and confidence still remain between them.
We regard such restraint as critical to progress towards a
final settlement.

After this brief introduction, I again welcome the
newly appointed Ambassador of Norway to his position.

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the vote.

Mr. Biørn Lian (Norway): I thank you, Sir, for your
kind words.

I call on the representative of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, who wishes to speak in
exercise of the right of reply.

Norway is gravely concerned about the ongoing
escalation of violence between the Israelis and Palestinians
on the West Bank. We feel that the lack of progress in the
Middle East peace process creates a basis for increased
violence. We call on both sides to intensify their bilateral
contacts on the highest possible level to implement
outstanding issues in the interim agreement, including the
redeployment on the West Bank, and to move as fast as
possible to the final status negotiations.
Norway remains convinced that the holding of this
emergency special session of the General Assembly is not
conducive to progress in the peace process. We also
maintain our reservations in respect of a number of
elements in the resolution. It is the ultimate obligation and
responsibility of the parties themselves to carry the peace
process forward.
Nevertheless, Norway remains deeply concerned about
Israel's continuance of its settlement activities in the
Palestinian areas. Such unilateral steps serve only to
increase the tension. They are clearly not in the spirit of the

May I remind members that statements in exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first
intervention and to five minutes for the second
intervention and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Choe Myong Nam (Democratic People's
Republic of Korea): This morning the Israeli
representative groundlessly accused my country of having
invaded South Korea in 1950. If he were not an
amaurotic person, he would not have distorted the
historical facts so ignorantly. Quite contrary to what he
alleged, my country was the victim of an aggressive and
harsh war imposed by a foreign force.
When the cold war was at its peak, at the beginning
of the 1950s, the United Nations was turned into a place
that was against the then-Soviet Union and other socialist
countries. Against this backdrop, the United States
brought the fabricated, so-called invasion of the south by
North Korea to the United Nations.

7

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special session
In order to prove our position, we requested to
participate in the Security Council, but were rejected, with
no reason given. In my the absence of my country — a
victim of the war — a unilateral resolution was adopted
against it. In the United Nations, where strength was the

9th plenary meeting
17 March 1998
panacea at that time, what else could not have been
fabricated against a small country such as ours?
My delegation categorically rejects the Israeli
allegations, which are based on distorted historical facts.
The Israeli accusation against my country, which is not a
party to the Arab-Israeli conflict, is aimed at hiding its
aggression and brutal, reckless atrocities against the
Palestinian and Arab peoples.
These accusations cannot in any way be justified.
The President: The tenth emergency special session
of the General Assembly is now adjourned, in accordance
with the terms of paragraph 8 of the resolution adopted at
the present meeting.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

8
