UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/20
24 April 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3523rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 April 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The question
concerning Haiti", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the transfer of responsibilities from
the multinational force (MNF) to UNMIH that took place on 31 March 1995 and
shares the Secretary-General’s view, as stated in his report of 13 April
(S/1995/305), that this transfer was a milestone in the overall efforts of
the international community to bring peace and stability to Haiti. The
Council commends the Secretary-General, his Special Representative, the MNF
Force Commander and the other dedicated personnel of the United Nations and
MNF who made the transition possible.
"The Security Council notes, however, that much remains to be done to
institutionalize democracy in Haiti and reiterates the Secretary-General’s
call for the people of Haiti and their leaders to help UNMIH help them.
While UNMIH’s presence will assist the Haitian Government to sustain a
secure and stable environment, the existence of a functioning and fair
justice system and the early deployment of a permanent and effective police
force by the Haitian authorities are central to Haiti’s long-term
stability. The Council joins the Secretary-General and Friends of Haiti in
inviting Member States to make voluntary contributions to support the
international police monitoring programme and assist with the creation of
an adequate police force.
"The Government and people of Haiti bear the primary responsibility
for Haiti’s political, economic and social reconstruction. However, the
Security Council notes that the sustained commitment of the international
community is indispensable for long-term peace and stability in Haiti.
"The Security Council shares the opinion of the Secretary-General that
the issue of security is central to the entire United Nations operation in
Haiti.

95-12110 (E)

240495

/...

S/PRST/1995/20
English
Page 2

"The Security Council underlines the crucial importance of free, fair
and secure elections for the democratic future of Haiti. The Council
stresses the necessity of a secure environment in Haiti, including during
the June and July legislative and local election period, and underlines the
importance of a functioning police force and an established judicial
system. The Council urges the Government of Haiti to take all necessary
steps to ensure the success of the elections, and in particular to register
as many voters as possible prior to the elections and to assure, in
cooperation with the international community, that political campaigning
occurs in an environment free from partisan intimidation.
"The Security Council welcomes President Aristide’s meetings with
leaders of political parties and members of the Provisional Electoral
Council and stresses the importance of dialogue with a view to achieving
the political consensus needed to enhance the benefits and credibility of
the electoral process. The Council also calls on the Government of Haiti
to cooperate fully with the United Nations and the Organization of American
States (OAS) to ensure that the preparations for elections and the
elections themselves can take place in a secure and stable environment.
Consistent with the objectives of Security Council resolution 940 (1994),
the Council emphasizes the importance for the Presidential elections to
take place on schedule before UNMIH’s scheduled withdrawal in
February 1996.
"Finally, the Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s
decision to coordinate UNMIH’s peace-keeping mission with development
activities carried out by others, in a manner consistent with UNMIH’s
mandate, to help the Government of Haiti strengthen its institutions,
particularly the judicial system. The Council hopes this coordination will
promote closer cooperation of all concerned in Haiti as well as improve the
effectiveness of international support for rebuilding Haiti’s economy."

-----
