UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/1226
8 December 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 9 NOVEMBER 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to refer to my letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 10 September 1999 (S/1999/983), as well as to the letters from the
President of the Council dated 16 September (S/1999/984) and 6 October 1999
addressed to me.
In my letter of 10 September, I informed the Security Council of my
intention to appoint Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen to the newly established position of
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and my
Personal Representative to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
Palestinian Authority.
On 16 September, I received a letter from the President of the Security
Council noting my intention to appoint a new United Nations Special Coordinator,
following which Mr. Larsen took up his functions on 1 October.
On 6 October, I received another letter from the President of the Council,
welcoming the signing of the Sharm El-Sheikh Memorandum, and expressing the
members belief that the new agreement opened the way for a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace within a reasonable time-frame in the entire region based on
all relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967 and 338 (1973) of 22 October 1993. Members of the Council also
expressed their determination to keep developments under review and to provide
the necessary backing, giving full support to the agreements reached, as well as
to the timely and speedy implementation of those agreements.
As members of the Council are aware, the Prime Minister of Israel and the
Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization met in Oslo on 1 and
2 November 1999, in a very positive spirit. It was agreed that Israeli and
Palestinian negotiating teams would start "final status" talks in Ramallah
today, and that a deadline for a framework agreement would be set for
15 February 2000, prior to a final agreement to be reached by September 2000.
The United Nations was represented at those meetings by the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process.
With the various tracks of the Middle East peace process entering a new
phase, the United Nations must ensure that it is in a position to respond
99-37988 (E)

081299

/...

S/1999/1226
English
Page 2

quickly and effectively to any requests from the parties as they make progress
in their bilateral and multilateral negotiations. Based on the many discussions
I have had with the parties and others concerned, it is my understanding that
the existing areas of United Nations activity in the Middle East, from
assistance to refugees and regional development activities to peacekeeping
missions, as well as some additional areas of activity, are likely to be raised
by the parties themselves in the forthcoming rounds of negotiations.
It was for this reason that I decided that the United Nations should
establish a unified structure in the region, with a clearly recognized focal
point for the Organization’s contributions to the implementation of the peace
agreements and with overall responsibility for making appropriate preparations,
in consultation with the parties to the Madrid process and the wider
international community, for enhancing United Nations assistance.
In establishing such a focal point on the ground, the United Nations will
be in a better position to respond to requests for assistance, drawing on the
substantive and operational expertise and advice of the United Nations system.
This will enable the Organization to improve the effectiveness of its
traditional activities in support of the Middle East peace process while
preparing it to respond to requests for additional assistance, should this be
agreed by all parties.
In this connection, and to enable the United Nations to respond to the
peace-building challenges that lie ahead, I have asked the Special Coordinator
to reconfigure the existing office based in Gaza, bearing in mind that he is
likely to require additional resources.
I should be grateful if you could forward the present letter to the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
