General Aaeembly - Ninth Senion

B
The General Assembl_,
1. Refers to the Disarmament Commi~sion for a1;>propriate consideration the draft resolution of India
contained in document A/C.1/L.100/Rev.1 ;3
2. Decides also to transmit to the Disarmament Comrr,1ssion for its information the records _of the meetings of the First Committee at which this draft resolution was discussed.
497th plenary meeting,
4 November 1954.
C
The General Assembly
1. Refers to the Disarmament Comm_ission for its
consideration the draft resolution submitted by Australia and the Philippines contained in document A/
C.1/L.101/Rev.1 ;•
.
? Decides to transmit to the Disarmament Comm1ssio-~ for its information the records of the meetings
of the First Committee at which items 20 and 68 of
the agenda of the ninth session of the General Assembly were considered.
497th plenary meeting,
4 November 1954.

809 (IX). Methods which might be used to maintain and strengthen international peace and
security in accordance with the Purposes and
Principles of the Charter: report of the Collective Measures Committee

The General Assembly,
Having received the third report 8 of the Collect~ve
Measures Committee submitted in accordance with
paragraphs 2 and 4 of General Assembly resolution
703 (VII),
Bearing in mind that the reports of the _Col~ective
Measures Committee represent a useful exa~mation _of
ways and means of strengthening the collective secunty
system of the United Nations,
1. Notes •with approval the third report of the C?llective Measures Committee, and in particular the prmciples of collective security contained in that report;
· 2. Directs the Collective Measures Committee ~o remain in a position to pursue such further studies as
it may deem desirable, taking into account the "_Dniting
for ptace" resolution ( 377 A (V)), resolution 503
(VI), resolution 703 (VII) and the present resolution;
3. Requests the Collective Measures Committee to
report to the Securi_ty Council and to the General
Assembly as appropriate.
497th plenary meeting,
4 November 1954.
810 (IX). International cc,operation in developing the peaceful uses of atomic energy

The General Assembly,
Believing that the benefits arising from the momentous discovery of atomic energy should be placed at
the service of mankind,
8 !bid., document A/C.l/L.100/Rev.l.
• Ii,id., document A/C.l/L.101/Rev.l.
• Ibid., agenda item 19, document A/2713.

Desiring to promote energetically the use of atomic
energy to the end that it will ~erve onl)". th~ _peaceful
pursuits of mankind and ameliorate their hvmg conditions,
Recognizing the importance and the urgency . of
international co-operation in developing an~ e~pa!1d!ng
the peaceful uses of atomic energy to assist m hftmg
the burdens of hunger, poverty and disease,
Believing also that all nations should c?-operate in
promoting the dissemination of knowledge m the realm
of nuclear technology for peaceful ends,
A
CONCERNING AN INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC AGENCY

Recalling the ~nitiative o~ th~ Pr~sident of Jhe United
States of Amertca, embodt~d m his address of 8 December 1953,
Noting that negotiations are in progress, and _the
intention that they should continue, for t~e estabhs~ment as quickly as possible of an Internattona_l Atomic
Energy Agency to facilitate the use by the entm: world
of atomic energy for peaceful purposes, and to encourage international co-ope1:ati~n in the fu:ther development and practical apphcatton of atomic energy for
the benefit of mankind,
1. Expresses the hope that the International Atomic
Energy Agency will be established without delay;
2. Suggests that, once the Agency is establis~ed, it
negotiate an appropriate form of agreement with the
United Nations;
3. Transmits to the States participating in _the c~eation of the Agency, for their careful cons1derahon,
the record of the discussion of this item at the present
session of the General Assembly;
4. Suggests that Members of the United Nations be
informed as progress is, achieved in the establishment
of the Agency and that the views of Mem™:rs which
have manifested their interest be fully considered;

B
CONCERNING THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE
THE PEACEFUL USES OF ATOMIC ENERGY

ON

1. Declares the interest and concern of the General
Assembly in helpi11g in every fea~ible way to promote
the peaceful applications of atomic energy;
2. Decides that an international technical conference
of Governments should be held, under the auspices of
the United Nations, to explore means of de".'eloping
the peaceful uses of atomic energy through mternational co-operation and, in particular, to study the development of atomic power and to .c?nsider _ot~er
technical areas-such as biology, medrcme, radiation
protection, and fundamental science-~n which international co-operation might most effectively be accomplished;
3. Invites all States Members of the United Nations
or of the specialized agencies to p_articipate in . the
conference and to include among their representatives
individual experts competent in the atomic energy
field;
e Ibid., Eighth Session, 470th· plenary meeting.
