166

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of
the International Women's Year127 and of progress
made under the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade, 128
Reaffirming Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/28 of 5 May 1978, in which the Council,
inter alia, recommended an integration of the reporting
systems outlined in the aforementioned resolutions,
Recognizing the importance of such reports for the
review of the progress achieved in the promotion of
the full equality of women with men in all spheres of
life,
Noting with concern that the responses received to
the requests for information on the basis of the aforementioned resolutions have been insufficient in number and also often overlap in their coverage, as shown
in the reports submitted to the Commission on the
Status of Women at its twenty-seventh session, 129
Underlining the desirability that all Member States
should submit such reports,
Bearing in mind the burden placed upon Governments when complying separately with the requests in
the aforementioned resolutions,
Convinced that there is a need for rationalization
of the reporting systems referred to in the first and
second preambular paragraphs above,
1. Decides to integrate the reporting systems outlined in the aforementioned resolutions into a single
system and to review the new reporting system in the
light of further developments;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to review in
order to simplify, if possible, the contents of the questionnaires forwarded to Member States, United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, in the context of the integrated reporting system,
paying particular attention to regional requirements by
selecting evaluation criteria which take account of
regional disparities;
3. Urges Member States, when preparing their reports, to make use of national machinery established
to promote the advancement of women and of the
views of the appropriate national non-governmental
organizations;
4. Further requests that the Secretary-General, in
compiling reports based on governmental replies on
the progress achieved in the improvement of the status
of women, provide analytical comments on obstacles
encountered and policies for future action, including,
if possible, comparative surveys on development within
each region.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979
33/187.

International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31/135 of 16 December 1976 and 32/137 of 16 December 1977 concern1 2 7 Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year, Mexico, 19 June-2 July 1975 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.l), chap. II, sect. A .
12s Resolution 2626 (XXV).
129 A/32/216 and Corr.1 and Add.l and 2; E/CN.6/611.

ing the International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General130 submitted in application of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1978/25 of 5 May 1978 and the
preparations made by the Secretariat towards the establishment of the Institute at the administrative, substantive and financial levels,
Noting the results achieved by the 1978 United
Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities, held at Headquarters on 7 November 1978, as
regards the Institute,
l. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General
for the efforts made towards the establishment of the
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue actively the necessary consultations concerning the agreement with the host country;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to proceed with
the appointment of the Director and the members of
the Board of Trustees of the Institute;
4. Decides that, as soon as the members of the
Board of Trustees are appointed, the Institute should
start functioning as a body of the United Nations
financed through voluntary contributions with the degree of autonomy necessary to ensure its efficient
operation;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake and
pursue all appropriate initiatives to attract voluntary
contributions to finance the operations of the Institute;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Economic and Social Council at its first regular session of 1979 a report on the implementation of the
present resolution, including a proposed programme
of operations for the first two years together with the
outline of a budget for the same period;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979

33/188.

Voluntary Fund for the United Nations
Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/133 of 16 December 1976 containing the criteria and arrangements for
the management of the Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Decade for Women,
Recalling also its resolution 32/141 of 16 December 1977, in which the Secretary-General was requested
to report annually on the management of the Fund
and to submit periodically to the General Assembly
progress reports on the execution of projects financed
by the Fund,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the Fund, 131
130 A/33/316; see also A/C.5/33/34.
1 3 1 A/33/198 and Add.1/Rev.1 and Add.2 and Corr.I.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Notes with satisfaction the decisions of the Consultative Committee on the Voluntary Fund for the
United Nations Decade for Women during its third132
and fourth 133 sessions;
2. Also notes with satisfaction the progress of the
regional commissions in the formulation and execution
of projects in the fields of national development, planning, rural development, training of trainers, appropriate technologies, small-scale business and industries,
and technical co-operation among developing countries, including research and information services;
3. Requests the regional commissions concerned
to proceed to the recruitment of the second women's
programme officer as recommended by the Consultative
Committee at its fourth session; 134
4. Urges the regional commissions to increase the
numbers of women employed in policy-making positions within their secretariats;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the relevant organizations and organs within the United Nations system
for their co-operation at the national and regional levels
in formulating and executing projects sponsored by
the Fund;
6. Expresses its appreciation to those countries
which have already contributed, to those which have
pledged contributions and to those which have expressed their intention of contributing· to the Fund;
1. Appeals to Member States to consider giving
support to the Fund in order to assure availability of
adequate resources for the long-term planning of its
activities;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General:

To continue to report annually on the management of the Fund as well as on the progress in
implementation of Fund activities;
(a)

(b) To continue to include the Fund, on an annual basis, as one of the programmes of the United
Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities.

95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979

33/189.

World Conference of the United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, in which it decided to convene a world
conference in 1980, at the mid-term of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development
and Peace,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2062 (LXII) of 12 May 1977, in which the
Council decided to establish a preparatory committee
to make recommendations concerning the substantive
and organizational arrangements for the Conference,
132 A/33/198, sect. II.
133 A/33/198/ Add.2 and Corr. 1, sect. II.
134 Ibid., para. 8.

167

Recalling further all the relevant resolutions and
decisions of the United Nations on substantive and
administrative aspects of the preparatory work for the
Conference,

1. Decides that the provisional agenda for the
World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace shall be as
set out in the annex to the present resolution;
2. Further decides on the following organization
of work for the Conference:
(a) Thirteen working days shall be allocated for
the Conference;
( b) In addition to the plenary, there shall be two
main committees, for which interpretation shall be
provided in six languages;

( c) The general debate, to be held in plenary,
shall be limited to fifteen minutes per speaker;
(d) The number of working groups required shall
be decided upon by the Conference, on the understanding that one working group will be provided with
interpretation;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the documentation for the Conference will be made
available and distributed six weeks before the Conference is convened, in accordance with United Nations practice;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in preparing
the substantive documentation for the Conference, to
make use, as necessary, of the expertise of consultants;
5. Recommends to the executive heads of the
specialized agencies concerned and other relevant parts
of the United Nations system to prepare in a coordinated manner reports evaluating progress in substantive areas relating to the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
due account is taken of the recommendations on the
rationalization of methods in the preparation of the
questionnaire on the implementation of the World
Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year, 1311 in compliance with Economic and Social Council resolution
2060 (LXII) of 12 May 1977, and of the findings
and conclusions emanating from all preparatory work
for the Conference;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the Conference will have at its disposal the documentation referred to in his note of 2 March 1978 on the
preparatory work for the Conference 136 as well as in
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
8.
(a)

Requests the Secretary-General to invite:

All States to participate in the Conference;

( b) Representatives of organizations that have
received a standing invitation from the General Assembly to participate in the sessions and the work of
all international conferences convened under its auspices in the capacity of observers to participate in
135 Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year, Mexico, 19 June-2 July 1975 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.1 ), chap. II, sect. A.
136 E/CN.6/610.
