S/2017/753

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 September 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 2 September 2017 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
In keeping with my responsibility to engage in preventing the outbreak or
escalation of conflict, I take this opportunity to share my deep concern about the
security, humanitarian and human rights situation in Rakhine State in Myanmar. I
have followed closely the events unfolding there since 25 August, which have given
rise to the third major wave of violence in the region in the past five years.
I welcome the Council’s discussion of this matter on 30 August. On that
occasion, the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs Miroslav Jenča shared
the assessment of the situation in Rakhine following the latest organized armed
attacks against the Myanmar security forces by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation
Army. I am deeply concerned about reports of continued violence, including
indiscriminate violence allegedly committed during operations conducted by those
security forces. Early reports indicate that the violence in Rakhine has affected
mainly women, children and the elderly. Tens of thousands have sought refuge in
Bangladesh, some of them wounded and in desperate need of urgent care, and
thousands are stranded at the border and many have lost their lives trying to flee the
violence.
The current situation, appalling as it already is, risks degenerating int o a
humanitarian catastrophe with implications for peace and security that could
continue to expand beyond the borders of Myanmar. While the main responsibility
to provide security and assistance to all those in need lies with the Government of
Myanmar, our collective attention and active engagement will be crucial in helping
to prevent the further suffering of all communities in Rakhine State.
It is beyond a doubt that underlying grievances have festered for far too long.
The current situation only accentuates the urgent need for holistic solutions to
address the complex root causes of violence. The Government of Myanmar
understands this critical need. Its establishment of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State represented a frank recognition of the unte nable situation in Rakhine
and the need for new approaches.
It is important for the international community to send a strong message
emphasizing the need for support and constructive cooperation towards a broader
political strategy and policy framework that can help to end the vicious cycle in
Rakhine.
Furthermore, the international community has a responsibility to undertake
concerted efforts to prevent further escalation of the crisis. I also urge the members
of the Security Council to press for restraint and calm to avoid a humanitarian

17-15325 (E)

050917

*1715325*

S/2017/753

catastrophe, full respect for human rights and international humanitarian law, and
the continued presence and safety of the United Nations and partners to provide
humanitarian assistance to those in need without disruption.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

17-15325
