S/PV.8850

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8850th meeting

Tuesday, 7 September 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Byrne Nason. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ireland)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Maintenanace of international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21‑24395 (E)
*2124395*

S/PV.8850

Maintenance of international peace and security

year, I recall looking down from the podium, together
with Lakhdar, at the bearded men who had taken the
seats in the first few rows.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Her Excellency Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of The
Elders; and His Excellency Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
Elder Emeritus.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency Mrs. Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf, member of The Elders and former
President of Liberia; and His Excellency Mr. Ernesto
Zedillo, member of The Elders and former President
of Mexico.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mrs. Robinson.
Mrs. Robinson: It is a privilege to brief members of
the Security Council once again as Chair of The Elders,
and I thank the Government of Ireland for inviting us to
address the Council. I am honoured as well to be here
together with my fellow Elders — Lakhdar Brahimi,
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and Ernesto Zedillo. Mr. Brahimi
will focus particularly on Afghanistan, and I shall raise
other issues of concern to The Elders.
First, however, I would like to share a memory
of my visit to Afghanistan as United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in early March 2002. I
met with Sima Samar, then Minister of Women’s Affairs,
and Noeleen Heyzer, then Head of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, who had been helping
about 95 women draw up their draft charter of women’s
rights. I was surprised to find that those women had
been judges, lawyers, doctors and teachers who were
active in their community before the Taliban.
They had decided to launch their charter on
International Women’s Day in the cinema they used to
go to before the Taliban. It had been destroyed, but the
women cleared about 15 feet of rubble, and the United
Nations provided the canvas roof cover. The United
Nations also guaranteed it would be safe, and the women
therefore came without their burkas. On 8 March that
2/23

07/09/2021

We saw a woman further back stand, praise Allah
and launch their charter. It was an important reminder
that women’s rights are not Western rights. They are
fundamental human rights, which those Afghan women
had reclaimed in accordance with their cultural values.
In the almost 20 years since then, hard-won gains in
gender equality and women’s rights have been secured
through constitutional, legislative and policy changes.
We cannot allow the women and girls of
Afghanistan to be deprived of those rights, including
the right to leave the country. Members of the Security
Council cannot fail them. I was glad to see the letter
that Ireland and Mexico, as co-Chairs of the Informal
Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security, wrote to
the Security Council in August, reminding the Council
of its responsibility with in this regard. Resolution 2593
(2021), which was adopted on 30 August, is a good first
step, but the Council must now go further. I call in
particular on China and Russia, in their dealings with
the Taliban, to encourage the Taliban to recognize that
the participation of women in society and the education
of girls on an equal basis with boys are non-negotiable
and must be respected.
Collectively, members of the Council have all been
entrusted with a powerful mandate to act on behalf of
the United Nations as the primary international body
charged with maintaining international peace and
security. As all know, that places heavy responsibilities
on all members of the Council to not only reflect the
immediate national interests of their national capitals,
but to also work collectively in the global interest. A
united and purposeful Security Council is needed now
more than ever.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
taken a heavy toll, first and foremost in human lives, but
also economic growth, political momentum and social
inequality. It has also demonstrated manifold failures
of international cooperation. We must be proactive in
learning from them and preparing for the next pandemic.
The report of the Independent Panel for Pandemic
Prevention and Response, entitled COVID-19: Make It
the Last Pandemic, sets out a pathway for strengthening
the multilateral architecture on pandemic prevention
and response. The Elders have called on global leaders
to make a political declaration at the general debate of
21-24395

07/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and securityS/PV.8850

the General Assembly later this month to commit to
implementing fully the report’s recommendations.
The Elders are also alarmed about the existential
dangers posed by nuclear weapons, as recent years
have seen the breakdown of arms control agreements,
the emergence of dangerous new technologies and
cyberwarfare capabilities, and the serious risk of a new
nuclear arms race taking hold among the nuclear Powers.
We are also concerned about the failure to date to secure
a new agreement between the United States and Iran on
its nuclear programme. We reiterate our support for a
full, unconditional return to the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action.
The upcoming Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) will be a critical moment for action.
The non-nuclear-weapon States will be expecting
the five recognized nuclear Powers to demonstrate
concrete progress on their NPT commitments to pursue
disarmament in good faith. Ensuring a successful review
conference should be a top priority for the Security
Council. We urge the Council to maintain the issue of
nuclear weapons actively on its agenda. I am pleased that
Ireland is organizing a Council meeting later this month
to mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the opening
for signature of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty. I urge the Council to use that opportunity to
send a clear message of support for the Treaty’s entry
into force.
Urgency of action is equally needed on climate
change, which is a threat multiplier to all the issues
on the Council’s agenda. The latest science from the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has clearly
shown the risks posed to planetary stability and human
survival. While the Council has already started to
grapple with climate change as a security threat, I hope
it will now engage more decisively and with a resolution,
as it is a core threat to international peace and security.
On the role of the Council in preventing and
responding to violent conflict, I urge members to use
the tools at their disposal. Article 34 of the Charter of
the United Nations states:
“The Security Council may investigate any
dispute, or any situation which might lead to
international friction or give rise to a dispute, in
order to determine whether the continuance of
the dispute or situation is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security.”

That power of investigation should be used
proactively by the Council to engage early in
situations, before large-scale violence breaks out
and hits the international media.
On Tigray, the protection of women and girls must
be a top priority as the conflict continues to escalate.
The Council has been briefed on the severity of the
humanitarian crisis and food insecurity that is directly
resulting from the conflict, as well as on the horrific
scale of human rights atrocities, including the use of
sexual violence against women and girls as a weapon
of war. The Council must take action to incentivize the
parties to negotiate a ceasefire. Ending the fighting is the
only way to cease the suffering. The Council could also
consider making a visit to Ethiopia and Tigray in order
to focus attention on the conditions on the ground and
the urgent need for a political — not military — solution.
A similar unity of purpose is needed on Myanmar,
where, six months on from the military coup, the country
remains in turmoil. The people of Myanmar do not
want a return to military rule. The normalization and
acceptance of an unlawful coup is not a route to regional
stability. On the contrary, the military’s extension of
the state of emergency and the continued unlawful
detention of the National League for Democracy’s
political leadership risk taking the country down a path
of protracted civil conflict and cannot be tolerated.
The Council must support and strengthen, not
hide behind, the role of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), which has so far been unable
to progress the implementation of its five-point plan
agreed in April. I note the reports that there may now be
agreement by the military to a humanitarian ceasefire
until the end of the year, following engagement by the
new ASEAN Special Envoy, and urge all parties to seize
that opportunity.
Common ground among Council members can be
found now on the need for strong action to ensure a
comprehensive United Nations response to COVID-19,
which is devastating in Myanmar, and the humanitarian
crisis. The United Nations Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy should also be empowered to work with the new
ASEAN Special Envoy to find a political solution to the
crisis through confidence-building and dialogue among
all parties. Council members with influence on the
Tatmadaw have a particular duty to encourage it to open
up to the possibility of dialogue.

21-243953/23

S/PV.8850

Maintenance of international peace and security

Finally, on Israel and Palestine, the latest cycle
of violent conflict this year has shown beyond doubt
the need for a fresh approach by the international
community that addresses root causes and is based on
respect for international law. The Council has failed to
address persistent violations of resolution 2334 (2016),
allowing the parties’ actions to undermine prospects
for peace and a two-State solution. The Council should
reaffirm its commitment to the resolution’s terms
and take strong action to hold the parties accountable
for violations. Member States should also encourage
all parties to cooperate with the investigation by the
International Criminal Court into the situation in
Palestine as part of their commitment to the rules-based
international system.
On many of the issues I have just discussed, I
recognize that real and serious divisions exist between
members of the Council and that internal political
divisions have unfortunately led the Council to fall short
of its responsibilities in many instances. Nevertheless, I
urge all Council members to return to the fundamental
basis for their mandate and to work tirelessly to find
common ground and build consensus wherever possible.
Every Council member should recognize that they have
a common interest in upholding global peace, security
and stability. That ought to be a guiding principle for the
Council’s work in the years ahead.
The President: I thank Mrs. Robinson for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brahimi.
Mr. Brahimi: It is an honour for me to address
the Security Council on behalf of The Elders for the
second time.
On the first occasion, four years ago, I spoke
mostly on Palestine (see S/PV.7977). Alas, things in that
unhappy occupied country have not improved — quite
the opposite. The occupying Power is responsible for
what is now an overt apartheid situation. Its excessively
harsh oppression and systematic dispossession
of Palestinians has embarrassed even some of its
unconditional supporters around the world.
The question of Palestine has been on the Council’s
agenda since soon after the United Nations came into
existence, in 1945. Five years ago, the Council adopted
resolution 2334 (2016) — a landmark decision that
set out clearly the obligations of those responsible for
addressing the key barriers to achieving peace, including
the relentless ongoing settlement of occupied Palestinian
4/23

07/09/2021

territory. Is it not high time to put an end to the failed
policies that so unjustly betray the fundamental rights
of the Palestinian people to self-determination and a life
of dignity?
Mrs. Mary Robinson, our President, has eloquently
and clearly set forth some of the key concerns and
hopes of The Elders, including on Afghanistan. Now
that it is my turn to say a few words, I shall speak only
on Afghanistan, but I do not have enough time to say
everything that needs to be said on the subject.
As of Sunday — the day before yesterday — the
brave attempt of Mr. Amrullah Saleh, Vice-President of
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, and Mr. Ahmad
Massoud, son of legendary guerrilla leader the late
Mr. Ahmad Shah Massoud, to resist in the Panjshir Valley
was defeated. The Taliban now exercise practically sole
control over the country’s entire territory.
Afghanistan today is not the Afghanistan I knew in
the late 1990s and from 2001 to early January 2004. I
therefore do not claim to have any expertise or inside
information — only a little experience and mainly deep
feelings of sympathy, concern and respect for the great
people of Afghanistan.
On human rights, there is little to add to what
Mrs. Robinson forcefully said a moment ago. At the
centre of the mandate and action of the United Nations in
Afghanistan is the protection of the fundamental rights
of all Afghans, especially the most vulnerable, namely,
women and girls, the internally displaced, ethnic and
religious minorities and human rights defenders, inter
alia. To continue its work, the United Nations must have
the Council’s support. It will have to establish a system
of cooperation with national and local authorities which,
at present, means the Taliban.
To say that the humanitarian situation is dire would
be an understatement, and needs are most urgent. Yet,
the flow of aid has stopped abruptly and the inclination
of donors is to abandon Afghanistan now that the Taliban
has regained control of the country. The international
community would like to resume its support for the
people of Afghanistan but many, perhaps most, do not
wish to deal with the Taliban and are not ready to grant
immediate diplomatic recognition to the Government
the Taliban is about to form.
On its side, the leadership of the Taliban does not
seem to speak in a single voice. Some among them
say they will return to the views and practices which
were theirs when their regime was defeated following
21-24395

07/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and securityS/PV.8850

11 September 2001. On the contrary, others say they
shall respect and reach out to their opponents and try to
form with them a genuinely inclusive Government.

period — let us say six months, for example — and take
time to prepare the strong mandate UNAMA will need
in the coming new phase.

In the meantime, the country’s State institutions are
paralysed and the people of Afghanistan are abandoned.
Famine and despair look like an inescapable fatality for
millions of men, women and children. What should be
done? I do not claim to have the answer to that question
but what I hear from young, bright Afghans, in and
outside of Afghanistan, is that it is necessary and urgent
to give peace a chance. As a first extremely urgent
step, it is for the Secretary-General, acting with the full
support of a united Security Council, to send a Special
Representative to Kabul to start a frank discussion with
the leadership of the Taliban.

I have the impression that the international parties
involved in Afghanistan realize that boycotting the
Taliban in the 1990s was not the best option. Kept in total
isolation, the Taliban had a distorted image of the rest
of the world. I sometimes wonder if Mullah Mohammed
Omar, with whom I had three long meetings, would
have allowed the destruction of the Giant Buddhas of
Bamiyan had the movement and Government enjoyed
full international recognition at the time. Likewise,
would Osama Bin Laden have been given the opportunity
and protection he needed to prepare and execute the
attacks on 11 September if the Taliban had enjoyed
international recognition?

At the same time, an urgent, important humanitarian
programme needs to be put in place. The United
Nations and its agencies and large non-governmental
organizations in the country have the experience needed
to implement such a programme. Their local staff is
highly competent and dedicated. During the Taliban
rule in the 1990s, the United Nations pulled out all its
international staff, as it has done this time. The local
staff stayed on the job and performed in a remarkable
fashion. The Taliban did not interfere with them.
The United Nations should obtain a clear guarantee
from the Taliban that, like last time, it shall not interfere with
humanitarian operations — those of the United Nations
itself and those of other international, humanitarian
governmental and non-governmental organizations.
I am consciously encouraged by the recent report
from Martin Griffiths, the United Nations humanitarian
chief, that the Taliban has committed to guaranteeing
the safety, security and freedom of movement of all
humanitarian workers, men and women alike, and
humanitarian access to people in need. The United
Nations should hold the Taliban accountable for
those commitments and ensure that that guarantee
extends, not just to the staff of the United Nations, but
also to the staff of humanitarian governmental and
non-governmental organizations.
I understand that the Security Council will examine
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) on
17 September. Circumstances in Afghanistan being
what they are at present, UNAMA is needed more now
than ever before. The Council should perhaps now limit
its action to a technical rollover of a sufficiently long

Just as the United Nations and the international
community are asking themselves those questions, so
should the Taliban look back and ask itself questions. Its
leaders and representatives are now received officially
in regional and international capitals from Jakarta to
Moscow and from Ankara to Beijing. The Taliban thinks
that it now represents the overwhelming majority of the
people of Afghanistan and that it governs on their behalf.
In fact, it is no different from the authors of a coup d’état
or a political party that won an election. Many of its
compatriots do not support it. It must understand that
the hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions of Afghans,
men and women, rushing to the Kabul airport or to the
borders of each of their neighbours are but the tip of the
iceberg — many more Afghans criticize the Taliban and
do not welcome its rule.
I would like to conclude with a point that concerns
not only Afghanistan, but a large number of other
countries. Political Islam is now a reality in many
Muslim majority countries, from Indonesia to Morocco.
We see it in various shades and forms. It is important
and urgent that the various religious, ideological and
political families that live in our shared world learn
how to put an end to mutual exclusion, and understand
instead that it is necessary and beneficial for all if we
accept living together in tolerance, mutual respect
and cooperation.
The President: I thank Mr. Brahimi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I would like
to commend Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders,

21-243955/23

S/PV.8850

Maintenance of international peace and security

and Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, conflict mediator, for their
briefings. I thank other members of The Elders for
attending today’s meeting.
The Security Council, whose primary responsibility
is the maintenance of international peace and security,
must continue to recall the importance of the Charter of
the United Nations, which furnishes it with its tools for
action, and reaffirm its commitment to it. The Security
Council must call for respect for and the implementation
of its decisions, pursuant to Article 25 of the Charter,
and ensure regular follow-up. More than ever before,
we now know that the threats of nuclear proliferation
and climate change are genuine, notwithstanding the
diverging views among members of the Council on
those issues. It is therefore important and necessary to
discuss with and listen to all stakeholders and to use
the tools of negotiation and dialogue to ensure peaceful
dispute settlement among nations.
On the issue of nuclear weapons, my delegation
would like to recall The Elders’ view with regard to the
need for Member States to comply with their four-D
position — doctrine, defuse, deploy and decrease.
Regarding the climate crisis that the world is currently
experiencing, it should be recognized that it has a direct
impact on security in such a way that talking about the
link among climate, peace and security is inevitable
given the various conflicts in the world caused by the
impact of climate change, particularly in the Sahel
region and the Lake Chad basin.
In view of those challenges, multilateralism should
be promoted and strengthened in order to maintain peace
and security, foster sustainable development, combat
climate change, propose peaceful solutions to conflicts
and promote post-conflict reconstruction. My delegation
therefore calls on the international community to
strengthen its commitment to multilateralism by placing
the United Nations at the centre of its actions.
In that respect, we believe that it is important that
the Secretary-General continue to properly fulfil his
mandate under the Charter of the United Nations and to
impartially uphold the Organization’s values and moral
authority. Engagement between the Secretary-General
and other Member States, as well as with the members of
the Security Council, is necessary and should continue.
In that regard, the Secretary-General must always use
his good offices to prevent the emergence, escalation
and spread of international conflicts.
6/23

07/09/2021

The Security Council must continue to act swiftly
and effectively to adapt to non-traditional threats and
rapid-onset crises, such as the outbreak of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In that regard, the
Council must make better use of resolutions 2532
(2020) and 2565 (2021), on COVID-19, by monitoring
compliance with, and the effective implementation
of, those resolutions by Member States and the other
stakeholders. The pandemic has shown us the failure of
the global health system and the need to help each other
in a world where States are interdependent.
To that end, like some other States, my delegation
calls for international solidarity in distributing
vaccines, the global truce requested by the SecretaryGeneral for humanitarian reasons and a strengthening
of multilateralism with regard to health.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to encourage
The Elders, who, given their extensive experience
and influence, could serve as a reference point for the
United Nations institutions, in general, and the Security
Council, in particular. Their earlier messages and those
of today show a strong sense of leadership and practical
advice, which will clearly help us in our future decisions.
The Elders should engage with regional and
subregional organizations and youth and civil society
groups, which are also the Council’s partners and
counterparts, to discuss and share their experiences
regarding climate change, nuclear proliferation,
terrorism and other global phenomena related to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): Let
me begin by thanking Their Excellencies Mrs. Mary
Robinson and Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi for their briefings
today. I also welcome Their Excellencies Mrs. Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf and Mr. Ernesto Zedillo. The United
Kingdom values The Elders’ views on how the Security
Council can play its part in improving multilateral
responses to conflict prevention and evolving threats to
international peace and security.
I would like to focus my intervention on three
points: first, the Council’s response to the evolution of
threats to international peace and security; secondly,
some country-specific examples of where the Council
can have a real impact; and, finally, the importance of a
system-wide approach to conflict prevention.
First, in the 76 years since the Security Council
was entrusted with the responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, the nature of the
21-24395

07/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and securityS/PV.8850

threats that we face has evolved. How we respond to
new challenges, including climate change and building
back better from the coronavirus disease, will shape our
world over the next decade and well beyond.
As the threats to international peace and security
evolve, so too must the Security Council. We should
not self-censor. Where there are clear emerging threats
to international peace and security, we should consider
them in a timely fashion. We should respond more
quickly to the warning signs of conflict and violence
and act earlier to prevent conflict and escalation. We
should therefore be proactive in horizon-scanning and
early warning instead of delaying until conflicts have
already passed a tipping point.
Secondly, there are numerous ongoing crises where a
more nimble, creative Security Council response would
help people affected by conflict. Arguably, we did not
act quickly enough to respond to the conflict in Tigray,
but continued and constructive Council engagement can
prevent further escalation by encouraging the parties to
reach political solutions to the conflict. Such engagement
would also support the efforts of the African Union. In
that regard, I would welcome The Elders’ views on how
the Council can best support the work of His Excellency
Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo as the African Union’s Special
Envoy for the Horn of Africa.
Recent events in Afghanistan have also demonstrated
just how vital it is for us to engage on conflict prevention
and respond rapidly to changing situations on the
ground. The multilateral system and clear, coordinated
messaging across the international community,
including from the Security Council, will be necessary
to ensure that the Taliban’s actions are consistent with
its words. The adoption of resolution 2593 (2021) last
week provides a strong foundation for the Council to
continue to play its part in that vital undertaking.
The Security Council has been united in
condemning violence and calling for the restoration
of democracy in Myanmar. However, the situation
continues to deteriorate. We welcome the appointment
of His Excellency Dato Erywan Yusof as Special Envoy
to Myanmar of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations. It is critical that the Tatmadaw engage with
him to make progress on the five-point consensus and
address the humanitarian situation. In the Council, we
should keep all options under review so as to remain
engaged in support of a political solution.

Finally, the Council has primary responsibility for
international peace and security but it cannot act alone.
A coherent approach to conflict prevention requires
action by the entire United Nations system, combining
humanitarian, development and peacebuilding efforts
and in coordination with regional organizations and
partners. In that regard, the United Kingdom strongly
supports the Secretary-General’s commitment to
embedding conflict prevention across the United Nations
system and to delivering the sustaining peace agenda.
By mobilizing all the tools at our collective disposal, we
can build lasting, sustainable peace for all.
Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends the
Republic of Ireland for convening today’s discussion,
and we thank our esteemed Elders for sharing such
keen insights, which are crucial to the maintenance
of international peace and security. Their continued
dedication to all humankind reinforces the work of
the Security Council, and we pay them a great deal of
gratitude for their unyielding commitment.
The complex web of interwoven peace and security
challenges facing States today necessitate a reformed and
effective multilateralism that prioritizes the collective
good, protects our global commons and privileges the
rights and perspectives of all nations and peoples.
In far too many contexts, a lack of access to
basic public goods, including food and water, shelter
and sanitation, education and health, and stable
employment, leads to growing levels of inequality and
disenfranchisement. A general reduction in public trust
and protracted divisions along ethnic, communal and
political lines subsequently ensue.
In fragile settings, such as conflict-affected
and
climate-vulnerable
States,
poverty
and
underdevelopment remain prevalent features etched
across the social terrain. Those development challenges
often manifest themselves as painful cycles of hostility
and violence and spur devastating humanitarian crises.
We can and we must do better to protect those made most
vulnerable among us and to provide peace and justice to
all, in line with the Sustainable Development Goals.
The bedrock principles of international law
outlined in the Charter of the United Nations compel
all countries to work together to address global
challenges with full respect for — and complete
adherence to — the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of all States. Those tenets

21-243957/23

S/PV.8850

Maintenance of international peace and security

are non-negotiable and must continue to serve as the
centrepiece of all efforts to maintain international
peace and security. National ownership over peace and
political processes must be bolstered, social contracts
rebuilt and earnest attempts at reconciliation pursued.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterates its
calls for a comprehensive whole-of-system approach to
conflict prevention, conflict resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding activities. The Security Council should
collaborate more closely with the other main organs of
the United Nations system — the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council — to fashion practical,
gender-responsive, people-centred and climate-sensitive
development strategies and deliver them to conflictaffected countries in line with their national needs
and priorities.
Capacity-building initiatives should be accelerated
as developed countries honour their overseas
development assistance commitments; and ambitious
targets for curbing emissions ought to be set and met
by major polluters who in turn should provide increased
support for climate adaptation and mitigation initiatives.
As the climate crisis deepens, the attendant security
risks must be taken fully into account by the Council.
Reparatory justice for past abuses — including historical
injustices that left dreadful legacies of inequity and
underdevelopment in their wake — must also form part
of any serious agenda for lasting peace and security.
As we have borne witness throughout this pandemic,
we can protect ourselves only by protecting each other.
The question of global equitable access to safe and
effective coronavirus disease vaccines remains one of
paramount concern. So too is the need for all States
to abandon unilateral practices, including economic
sanctions and other extortionate measures, that impede
efforts to recover sustainably from this pandemic.
Through the unity of purpose of the Security
Council and the collective action of the wider
international community — and further buttressed
by the continued advocacy of The Elders and other
committed stakeholders — a better future for all of
humankind remains within our grasp. Let us work
together with a renewed sense of hope, devotion and
solidarity to provide peace, security and development to
all who yearn for it.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would also like to thank
Ireland for arranging this important meeting. Let
me also express my great appreciation to Mrs. Mary
8/23

07/09/2021

Robinson and Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi for sharing from
their vast experience.
Let me pick up on three key areas where Norway
believes that the Security Council can do more in the
years ahead.
First, the Security Council has a mandate to prevent
conflict. Yet the Council often shies away from acting
early, even when there are urgent warning signs. This is
mainly due to political sensitivities and a wish by States
to avoid Council attention with regard to their internal
affairs. This is regrettable, because it reduces the ability
of the Council to perform one of its most important
roles. Efforts to avert conflict by peaceful means are by
far the most effective way to reduce violent conflicts.
Tapping into available resources in the Secretariat
and country teams, but also by drawing on partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations and
mechanisms for early warning and prevention, could be
institutionalized, discreet and constructive. Initiatives
such as the informal situational awareness briefings
and fact-finding missions are positive and could be
used actively by the Council to engage before conflicts
erupt. Experience shows that transitions pose a risk and
need attention to prevent conflicts from re-erupting.
They demand a coordinated whole-of-United Nations
approach in close collaboration with host States.
Secondly, inclusion is key for lasting outcomes.
Peace processes that include civil society, particularly
women’s organizations, peacebuilders, human rights
defenders and victims, achieve greater ownership and
legitimacy. We must continue to insist on the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of
United Nations peace and security efforts and to address
the gap between that goal and realities on the ground.
As we have learned today, women in Afghanistan
face extreme uncertainty. While some in the Taliban
leadership have stated that women may return to work
and girls to school, other Taliban leaders are saying that
such issues are yet to be decided. Amid that uncertainty,
we see that rightful humanitarian access is hindered
when women humanitarian workers are unable to
safely do their jobs and reach women and girls in need.
The international community will not be able to help
Afghanistan sufficiently and sufficiently respond to
the deteriorating humanitarian situation if women are
not able to provide or receive humanitarian assistance
and services. We must all be crystal clear that there
is no solution to the humanitarian situation without
21-24395

07/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and securityS/PV.8850

women humanitarian workers; there is no sustainable
development without women in the work force; and
there is not sustainable peace without women being part
of a political solution.
Another important lesson from Norway’s experience
in peacebuilding is to be willing to talk to all actors in
a conflict. Engaging actors that others have deemed off
limits can be essential to reaching political solutions.
To Norway, that was evident in the Middle East peace
process, where the Palestine Liberation Organization
was involved at an early stage. The same approach has
been important in many other efforts. Norway has had
contact with the Taliban, for instance, since 2007.
When armed conflict erupts, ensuring the protection
of civilians affected by the conflict is crucial in laying
the foundations for sustainable peace. It is important
that the Council remind the parties to the conflict of
their international legal obligations. Where necessary,
it is also important that the Council take measures,
within its mandate, with the aim of ensuring that parties
to conflict fulfil their obligations in that regard. We
fully concur with The Elders when they point out that
sustainable peace will be reached only when root causes
of conflict are tackled, impunity is challenged and
human rights take centre stage.
Thirdly, the Security Council has a responsibility to
adapt to changing circumstances and develop new ways
of responding to non-traditional threats to international
peace and security. The Security Council has already
recognized that the effects of climate change constitute
a risk to global peace and security. This is also a matter
of conflict prevention.
From Kabul to Tigray, from the outer atmosphere
to the depths of our oceans, the world is facing many
multi-faceted challenges. They can be solved only
through multilateral cooperation, and the Security
Council has a pivotal role to play. Often, the focus is
on what the Council cannot achieve. However, this year
the Security Council has adopted a range of unanimous
resolutions, ranging from coronavirus disease response,
renewed mandates for peace operations and prolonging
the cross-border humanitarian aid mechanism to Syria.
We are generally encouraged by the unanimity and
should continue to build on that productive work.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Irish presidency for having convened this
important briefing with The Elders on “Maintenance of
international peace and security”. I thank Her Excellency

Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders, and His
Excellency Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Elder Emeritus, for
their valuable insights. I also acknowledge the presence
of Her Excellency President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf of
Liberia and His Excellency President Ernesto Zedillo of
Mexico at today’s meeting. It is indeed a privilege to
hear from The Elders, who are well-known proponents
of peace and admired across the world for their
extraordinary work in promoting peace.
The United Nations was established to save
“succeeding generations from the scourge of war”.
Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations refers to
collective measures to maintain international peace and
security, which include actions mentioned in Chapter
VI and Chapter VIII of the Charter. Thus the United
Nations Charter has prescribed a trigger mechanism for
collective action by the Council. Action by the Council
is not the first step but the last, after exhausting all
options. At the same time, another important principle is
that of non-intrusion into the domestic affairs of Member
States. The challenge is to balance those important
articles of faith when initiating action by the Council.
The Security Council, by the very nature of its
composition, has its inherent constraints. While the
United Nations was principally founded on the basis of
the sovereign equality of nations, nowhere else is this
principle more belied than in its principal organ of the
Security Council. More than seven and a half decades
after its inception, that structural inequality continues.
At the same time, we have seen and continue to
witness the distressing consequences of interventions
made without allowing for mediation efforts, especially
regional mediation efforts. We therefore need to draw
the right lessons from history, and calls for preventive
diplomacy should be seen in those contexts.
In recent years, efforts have been made to bring
thematic issues into the Council by projecting them
as peace and security issues. While some of them are
extremely important and timely, such as, for example,
the women and peace and security agenda, we should
be equally careful that instead of reforming the other
United Nations organs, we are arrogating to ourselves
some of their responsibilities.
In that context, I have the following five observations
to offer.
Many of the problems relating to Security Council
decisions stem from one important fact: that the Security
Council is not truly representative of the contemporary

21-243959/23

S/PV.8850

Maintenance of international peace and security

world. As Prime Minister Modi said in his address to
the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session last
year (see A/75/PV.12), reform in the responses, in the
processes and in the character of the United Nations is
the need of the hour.
The world today is significantly different from that
of 1945, and if Member States are to truly believe in
the impartiality of the Security Council, it must take
decisions based on certain impartial yardsticks. The
Council has to be representative of the current realities
to be credible, legitimate and effective. Consequently,
when considering preventive diplomacy, either suo
moto or through the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral, Member States have to be convinced that the
decision taken by the Council is impartial and carefully
considered and is not just a political tool. Only then will
preventive diplomacy be effective or even accepted by
all Member States.
Secondly, the United Nations has several principal
organs, with clearly defined roles and functions. Issues
of social and economic significance are to be primarily
dealt with by the General Assembly, not the Security
Council. We need to, where necessary, reform the other
organs to make them more effective and also promote
cooperative functionalism between the principal organs
of the United Nations. The tendency to burden the
Council with an increasing number of global challenges
premised on their perceived connection to threats to
peace and security will be self-defeating.
Thirdly, the world continues to be confronted with
peace and security challenges, exacerbated by the
ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Contemporary security challenges are not limited to
territorial or political disputes but transcend physical
or political boundaries. To address new and emerging
challenges, we need coordinated and concerted
action across borders. In that regard, strengthening
partnerships and enhancing linkages between the
United Nations and regional organizations is absolutely
critical. With their deep knowledge of local factors and
complexities, regional and subregional organizations are
uniquely placed to contribute to finding better solutions
to conflicts in their respective regions. We have seen
situations where the Council’s decisions are at variance
with how regional groups decide.
Fourthly, the continuing acts of terrorism and the
expansion of terrorist groups continue to pose serious
challenges to the maintenance of international peace
and security. India’s Minister for External Affairs,
10/23

07/09/2021

Mr. Jaishankar, in his address to the Council earlier
this year (see S/2021/48), presented eight principles
of counter-terrorism. The Council needs to have
zero tolerance for non-State terror actors and their
sponsors. Equally important is to end the stalemate and
expeditiously adopt a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism.
Fifthly, regarding the implementation of resolutions
2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021), we need to be clear that
those resolutions are context-specific and limited
to addressing the challenges related to COVID-19
vaccines in conflict-affected regions. Vaccination is
the best hope for humankind to emerge successfully
from the pandemic. India has shared its experiences,
expertise and resources with the global community in
this collective battle.
The year 2021 has been a defining moment in the
history of the world. We remain committed to upholding
the rules-based international order, underpinned by
international law and premised upon respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all Member
States, the resolution of international disputes through
peaceful negotiations, and free and open access for all
to the global commons.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Madam President, for hosting
this important discussion today, and I thank President
Robinson and Foreign Minister Brahimi for their
briefings. I also welcome President Johnson-Sirleaf and
President Zedillo to our discussion today.
The work of The Elders to resolve and prevent
conflict is as urgent now as ever. The experience, the
guidance, the sage advice, the respect that they bring
are appreciated by the Council and by the world.
Eight decades ago we came together to, in the words
of the Charter of the United Nations, “save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war” and “reaffirm
faith in fundamental human rights”. Nothing like this
had ever succeeded before on this scale in the course
of human history. There was every reason to believe
that we might fail to unite, and yet, beginning with the
United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and building from there, we exchanged
“might makes right” for a new set of self-binding
principles — principles that steered us to prevent
conflict, alleviate human suffering, defend human rights
and engage in an ongoing dialogue to improve the lives
of all people.
21-24395

07/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and securityS/PV.8850

The results are undeniable. Since the foundation of
the United Nations, there have been fewer large-scale
conflicts than at any point in history. We have advanced
global non-proliferation and prevented nuclear war. We
have enshrined human rights protections and established
them as foundational tenets of international law, and
we have promoted sustainable development, provided
life-saving humanitarian aid, and worked to improve the
lives of people around the world.
The Security Council has operated at the very
centre of that work. We know as well as anyone how
imperfect this body can be, but it is among the best tools
we have to confront the great challenges before us. And
right now, we are seized of a range of global threats that
know no boundaries. Today I will focus on three of the
most pertinent: the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, the climate crisis and the global erosion of
human rights. All three were mentioned by President
Robinson in her statement.
The COVID-19 pandemic has spared no nation.
It has stressed our global health systems, destabilized
economies and killed more than 4 million people around
the world, including more than 600,000 Americans.
And as we all know, the impacts go beyond the disease
itself. Economies have suffered; instability has spread;
gender-based violence has spiked; and millions of
children, especially young girls, have been forced to
stay home from school, and far too many may not return.
More girls have been pressed into forced marriages.
Childhood pregnancies have increased, and a high
degree of prevalence of HIV/AIDS among young girls
has occurred. We need to stop this virus, and we need
to stop it now.
For our part, President Biden has committed the
United States to serving as the arsenal of vaccinations.
We have already donated more than 126 million
doses of safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines to
countries around the world, and in particular to low- to
middle-income countries and the African Union. We
have provided these vaccines with no strings attached,
and we have provided more than all other countries
combined, with many more doses to come. In addition,
we are advancing major initiatives in partnership with
many other Security Council members to expand vaccine
production, improve access to vaccines and life-saving
treatments and strengthen health-care systems.
We believe that the Security Council itself has a key
role to play in the COVID-19 response. We have already
adopted resolutions calling for a global ceasefire

(resolution 2532 (2020)) and for greater cooperation to
bring vaccines to conflict areas (resolution 2565 (2021)),
and we need to speak out in cases where these resolutions
need to be implemented, such as in Burma, where
continued violence is crippling the pandemic response.
Like the COVID-19 pandemic, the climate crisis
threatens all of us too. In the United States, just in the
past few weeks, we have experienced extreme wildfires
in California, devastating hurricanes in my own home
state of Louisiana, and dangerous floods here in New
York, in our neighbourhoods. Of course, we are far from
alone. The world is experiencing monsoons and droughts,
rising sea levels and toxic air pollution. Climate change
is a challenge for every person in every nation on every
continent, which is why at President Biden’s summit on
climate, he advanced efforts to tackle the climate crisis.
He announced our target to reduce emissions by 50 per
cent below the 2005 levels by 2030 and achieve net-zero
emissions by 2050. Together we need to do everything
we can to keep the goal of the 1.5°C limit on global
average temperature rise within reach.
The impacts of climate change also pose a threat
to peace and security. At its current pace, the climate
crisis is set to drive millions from their homes, and
many of the world most fragile States and regions are
the most vulnerable to climate calamity. In the Security
Council, we are delighted to have joined earlier this
year the Group of Friends on Climate and Security
and have been working with other like-minded nations
toward highlighting the security implications of the
climate crisis.
Finally, I want to talk about human rights. From
the first sentence of the United Nations Charter, the
foundational unit of the United Nations is not just the
nation State, but it is also the human “State”. Universal
human rights are core to the Organization’s project,
but too often our inalienable rights are seen as optional
aspirations. Systemic racism, regular targeting of the
LGBTQIA+ community and persistent discrimination
against religious minorities, people with disabilities
and women and girls continue in every country around
the world. The United States is committed to meeting
our human rights obligations and ending discrimination
in all its forms. To that end, in July, the United States
announced its intent to issue a formal standing invitation
to all United Nations experts who report and advise on
thematic human rights. Looking globally, we are just as
committed to advancing human rights abroad — from
Afghanistan to Ethiopia to Yemen. Most recently, the

21-2439511/23

S/PV.8850

Maintenance of international peace and security

Security Council reaffirmed that the human rights of
all Afghans, including women and girls and members
of minority groups, must be upheld (resolution 2593
(2021)). Only through promoting the rights of the
Afghan people can we lay the groundwork for a stable,
secure and inclusive Afghanistan at peace with itself.
We support efforts by The Elders to advise on Ethiopia,
and we support the appointment of President Obasanjo
as a special envoy for the Horn of Africa.
Some countries, including some members of the
Security Council or those that seek to be on the Security
Council, believe human rights are optional. They are
not. This dangerous notion flies in the face of the selfbinding principles that serve as the bedrock for the
United Nations. Any efforts to rollback human rights
protections in the Security Council, including efforts
to limit human rights monitoring and reporting, will be
met with the strongest possible opposition from us.
As we do this work of protecting human rights,
stopping the pandemic and fighting the climate crisis,
we welcome the wisdom and the guidance of The Elders.
Their contributions are invaluable. As we face the great
challenges of our times, we can use all the help we
can get from The Elders to rally the Security Council
and the United Nations towards a more peaceful and
prosperous world.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We welcome the briefings by the
representatives of The Elders at today’s Security Council
meeting. No one can doubt the need to strengthen the
multilateral foundations of international relations or the
importance of protecting and developing them at the
world’s central global negotiating platform, namely, the
United Nations, and particularly its Security Council.
We listened very closely to their assessments. They are
interesting because, in their time, the briefers also had
the opportunity to work on the tasks facing the United
Nations. Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Elder Emeritus, made a
contribution to resolving complex crises in Afghanistan,
Iraq and Syria, and to developing new approaches in
the sphere of United Nations peacekeeping. Mrs. Mary
Robinson, Chair of The Elders, is a recognized guide
in the promotion of human rights in her homeland
and around the world. We note her principled stand
on many issues. We also welcome the presence in the
Chamber today of the other representatives of The
Elders, Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and President
Ernesto Zedillo.
12/23

07/09/2021

The present system of international relations is
going through a period of deep-rooted transformation. A
multipolar world order is being established. In global and
regional affairs, new centres of economic development
are raising their profile. This is an objective trend.
At the same time, we have to note that, of late,
instead of establishing equal cooperation, we have seen
attempts to artificially divide countries by rank into
those that are allegedly behaving correctly and those that
are breaking the rules. At the same time, the advocates of
the so-called rules-based order often fail to explain what
specifically these rules are and why they are necessary,
given that we already have instruments of international
law, including, first and foremost, the United Nations
Charter, which sets forth clear obligations for States. w
We see in such actions an effort to monopolize
the formulation of important decisions for the
international community and a desire to impose on
everyone else their vision of the further development of
international relations.
Even more regrettable are the attempts to present
the ideology developed by a group of specific States as
a guiding compass for all humankind. These values are
then promoted as a counterweight to any other ideas
about the world order or the make-up of other sovereign
States. Those that do not agree face sanctions or even
the use of force. This sort of patronizing approach serves
only to further divide the international community.
Moreover, as practice has shown, it leads neither to
resolving urgent issues that affect all States without
exception nor to settling conflicts, many of which have
lasted for decades and resulted in the loss of hundreds
of thousands of lives.
We firmly believe that genuine multilateralism is
based on mutually respectful and equal cooperation
among all States, built upon a de-politicized foundation
free of ideology. That is the only way to strengthen mutual
trust, improve the international relations environment
and ensure the predictability of humankind’s
development in the face of global challenges. In our
opinion, focusing on judging whose values are better or
worse is unproductive. We should simply acknowledge
the existence of other values, accept them for what they
are and take them into account.
Decisions will be more robust and viable if they are
developed by everyone on whom their implementation
depends. In that regard, we must strive to pool our
efforts and achieve the broadest possible agreement. The
21-24395

07/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and securityS/PV.8850

United Nations, the General Assembly and the Security
Council are universal platforms that are genuinely
multilateral. Their authority is recognized by all. We
believe that the solution to many of today’s problems
lies in strengthening their central role in international
affairs, rather than seeking alternatives.

and continue to evolve. From mid-March 2020 to the
end of May 2021, the Security Council worked mostly
virtually. We managed to work through the most trying
times of the pandemic, adopt resolutions and other
products, doing our best to deal with conflicts around
the globe.

In taking into account the division of labour
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council plays a singular role in dealing with
matters of international peace and security. We are
convinced that, despite the breadth of its agenda, issues
related to conflict resolution should always remain at the
core of the Council’s deliberations. It is well known that
we are cautious about bringing items before the Council
that are only indirectly related to its core mandate and
could be addressed more appropriately within other
United Nations forums.

We remain worried at seeing the deteriorating
human rights situation around the world, most notably
in Tigray, Belarus and Afghanistan. It remains our
task to uphold the Charter and promote and encourage
respect for human rights, while holding the perpetrators
accountable. I would be glad to hear the briefers share
their ideas on how we as a Council could better help the
people in Tigray.

We believe that Council decisions must always take
into account the principles of non-intervention and the
sovereign equality of States enshrined in the Charter.
Using the Council against legitimate Governments
that have found disfavour with others is unacceptable.
The experience of recent decades has repeatedly
demonstrated that such steps have never brought about
peace or prosperity to people.
In conclusion, we urge our fellow Council members
to always strive to reach solutions that strike a mutually
acceptable balance, while considering one another’s
interests. That is simply imperative if we are to overcome
the crisis of confidence that is apparent to everyone. For
our part, we affirm that Russia is committed to open,
honest and equitable dialogue and readiness to seek
common ground.
Mr.
Jürgenson
(Estonia):
I
thank
the
briefers — President Mary Robinson and Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi — for their insights.
The United Nations was created with the future in
mind. The Charter of the United Nations established a
system of values, legal principles and political tools to
maintain international peace and security and promote
and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The same values and legal principles agreed upon 76
years ago remain just as valid today.
The past two years have been very challenging
for the world. The pandemic has interrupted our lives,
sometimes dividing us on topics on which we have been
most in need of unity. The pandemic has highlighted
how the Security Council must keep up with the time

The main purpose of the Security Council is to
maintain international peace and security. When bombs
have already exploded and people have lost lives, it is
already too late for us. Prevention and preparedness
are the key, instead of dealing with the consequences.
There is an abundance of information for us to act upon.
We must be able to find common ground quicker than
before. It can save lives.
In order to remain relevant and fulfil its responsibility
in upholding international peace and security, the
Security Council needs to address new and emerging
security threats. The world is changing, and the Security
Council must change with it. Over the past years, we
have seen how malicious cyberactivities targeting oil
infrastructure and the food and health-care sectors — our
most basic and critical services — can pose a real and
tangible threat. The humanitarian effects of tampering
with critical infrastructure could be devastating.
As the threats emanating from the malicious
use of cyberspace have become more apparent and
wide-ranging, there is a clear need that States should
implement the framework of responsible State behaviour
and comply with international law. In June, during the
Estonian presidency of the Security Council, the Council
held its very first open debate dedicated to maintaining
peace and security in cyberspace (see S/2021/621), and it
is important that the Council remain seized of the matter.
Lastly, multilateralism and the advancement
of international law are indispensable to tackling
emerging global threats. Multilateralism can function
in a meaningful fashion only within a rules-based
international order. Strong leadership, backed by the
collective decisions of the United Nations, including
here in the Security Council, is needed to ensure that we

21-2439513/23

S/PV.8850

Maintenance of international peace and security

stand up to take on this task. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral that multilateralism must be more inclusive and
more networked and place human rights at its core. In
order for that to happen, we also need to protect and
assist in the creation of a safe and diverse civil society
space, which is vital for resilient communities.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders, and Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi for their briefings. I welcome the presence of
former Presidents Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and Ernesto
Zedillo among us.
The maintenance of international peace and security
is the primary responsibility of the Security Council
under the Charter of the United Nations. The international
security landscape today is fraught with challenges and
the complexity of both traditional and non-traditional
security issues. The ongoing coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated uncertainty and
instability with regard to peace and security.
In order to achieve lasting peace and universal
security while faced by these global challenges, it
is imperative to uphold genuine multilateralism and
translate it into practice. Our shared priority remains
combating the pandemic in unity and solidarity.
COVID-19 is not just a threat to the entire human race
that puts our lives and individual and public health in
jeopardy; it also has the potential to enable and accelerate
the breeding of terrorism and extremism.
Universal vaccine access is a touchstone of the
effectiveness of multilateralism. Today, vaccines are
very hard to come by in many developing countries,
while some developed countries are still hoarding them
in much greater numbers than they need. Those vaccines
are left sitting in storage as their expiry dates lapse.
China calls on those countries to put an end to vaccine
nationalism and to contribute to global vaccine access
and equitable distribution in a tangible way.
Pushing for the political settlement of regional
hotspot issues is the core mandate of the Security
Council. Many such issues on the Council’s agenda are
at a critical stage and it is imperative that we resort to
genuine multilateralism; respect the sovereignty and
independence of all countries and the development
path chosen by their peoples of their own free will; and
promote, through good offices and mediation, dialogue
and consultation among the parties to overcome their
differences. Circumventing the Security Council to
14/23

07/09/2021

impose unilateral coercive measures has no basis in law,
defies reason and is an affront to common decency.
The way the situation in Afghanistan has transpired
recently is proof that foreign military intervention and
the imposition of a so-called democratic transformation
programme does nothing to help solve any issues, instead
creating more problems with failure as the inevitable
outcome. The frantic and disorganized withdrawal of
troops from Afghanistan by the countries concerned has
plunged Kabul into chaos and upheaval. It has created a
major humanitarian disaster and left the Afghan people
to pick up the many pieces. We urge the countries
concerned to honour their commitment to the peaceful
reconstruction of Afghanistan rather than pass the buck
to its neighbours and the wider international community.
In the face of terrorism, climate change and other
non-traditional security threats, the international
community must uphold genuine multilateralism,
strengthen coordination and work together to address
those challenges. Twenty years after the attacks
of 11 September, the threat of terrorism facing the
international community has not been eliminated
for good. Combating terrorism in all its forms and
manifestation remains the common responsibility of the
international community. Double standards and selective
counter-terrorism are the dominant forms of interference
in international counter-terrorism cooperation. We must
reject and refuse such interference.
Climate change is an existential threat to our collective
survival and development. The international community
has forged important consensus on principles such as
common but differentiated responsibilities, equity and
respective capabilities, as well as developing important
frameworks for cooperation such as the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change. It remains for us
to work together to translate that consensus into action.
Developed countries in particular must effectively fulfil
their commitments and help developing countries to
meet the challenges they face in terms of financing,
technology and capacity-building.
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the
restoration of the lawful seat of the People’s Republic of
China in the United Nations. In the five decades since,
China has supported and practised real multilateralism,
lending consistent, sustained and dependable support
to the United Nations. Going forward, we have the
confidence and the ability to make even greater
21-24395

07/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and securityS/PV.8850

contributions to the maintenance of global peace
and security.

global ceasefire in the context of united efforts to fight
the COVID-19 pandemic.

Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I commend Ireland for
convening this meeting and I sincerely thank our briefers,
Mrs. Mary Robinson and Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. At the
same time, we welcome the former President of Liberia,
Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, and the former President of
Mexico, Mr. Ernesto Zedillo Ponce.

In that regard, how best can the Council engage and
implement recommendations in resolution 2532 (2020)
and resolution 2565 (2021) to support calls for increased
global solidarity and cooperation in vaccine rollouts,
to address misinformation and disinformation and to
prepare for the next pandemic, especially in fragile and
conflict-affected countries?

It is indeed a great honour to have this opportunity to
listen to the views and perspectives from the individual
and collective wisdom of The Elders, particularly in
our increasingly interwoven and fragile world. In his
inaugural speech of 18 July 2007, which launched the
formation of that eminent group of leaders, President
Nelson Mandela noted that the core responsibility
of The Elders is to analyse problems, seek solutions,
search out partners and infuse “new energy where
others have become weary”. The Elders’ experience,
based on decades of raising awareness and dealing with
global challenges to peace and security both publicly
and through private diplomacy brings a much-needed
vantage point to this platform.
For years, the Council has been considering
situations where decisions have to be urgently and
strategically made regarding the long-standing and
emerging international security issues on its agenda.
Yet never, especially in recent years, have effective
multilateral solutions and affirmation of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations been
so sorely needed as they are today. That is why Kenya
appreciates the important role of The Elders.
The global challenges with implications for
international peace and security are many and well
known to all of us. I will seek the insights of The
Elders, time allowing, on how the Security Council can
respond effectively to three threats, some of which have
already been mentioned by the Chair of The Elders in
her briefing.
First, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has dramatically showcased the interconnectedness of
our world. It has exposed State vulnerabilities, revealed
stark inequalities within our societies and unveiled
latent weaknesses within international institutions.
Back in 2014, we saw quick and determined efforts by
both the Security Council and the General Assembly
to deal with the Ebola crisis. However, it took three
months for the Council to agree on resolution 2532
(2020) to support the Secretary-General’s call for a

For the world as a whole, is there room, in The
Elders’ estimations, for an international treaty to frame
rules, norms and principles to guide the multilateral
system through pandemics, recognizing that pandemics
also have implications for the sustainability of global
peace and development?
Secondly, there is an urgent need for multilateral
consensus around the nexus between international
peace and security and climate change. It is no longer
tenable, in our view, to underestimate the devastating
effects of climate change as both an underlying cause
and a multiplier of conflicts and insecurity globally. I
would therefore like to hear from The Elders on what
innovative approaches are necessary for the United
Nations in general and the Security Council in particular
to engage with the level of seriousness needed to address
the impact of the climate crisis in Africa, small island
States and the world over.
Thirdly, even as we commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001),
terrorism and violent extremism remain existential
threats to international peace and security. It would
seem that as battles are being won, political struggles
are, at the same time, being lost. Goals that once seemed
attainable in addressing the threat of violent extremism
and terrorism are seemingly out of immediate reach.
Kenya has persistently called for the listing, without
exception, of acknowledged terrorist groups, such as
Al-Shabaab, under the Council’s sanctions regimes,
including resolution 1267 (1999). From the assessment
of The Elders, how should the multilateral system
reconfigure itself, in terms of preparedness and the
response to the intractable threat of terrorism? How can
multilateral approaches be better utilized to mitigate
against opportunities on which terrorist and militant
groups increasingly capitalize to reinvigorate globally?
As I conclude, I note that today’s useful engagement
with The Elders is a sober reminder of the need
for Governments to take responsibility and for the

21-2439515/23

S/PV.8850

Maintenance of international peace and security

international community to decide how best to empower
multilateral institutions, including the United Nations,
to lead global responses to present and future crises.
Nothing less than a stronger, agile and robust rulesbased multilateral system will be able to rise to the task.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank you, Madam President, for convening
today’s session. I thank the former President of Ireland,
Mrs. Robinson, and the former Foreign Minister of
Algeria, Mr. Brahimi, for their remarks.
We also warmly welcome former President of
Liberia, Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, and former President of
Mexico, Ernesto Zedillo, to the Council.
Mexico thanks The Elders for sharing their
experience and wisdom in the quest for solutions to the
major issues plaguing the international community. I
must say that in the millennial culture of my country,
older people are often acknowledged for their wisdom
and the popular advice is that they should be listened to.
I will limit my statement to three areas, which my
delegation deems to be important for the Council, and to
a brief word on the need to strengthen multilateralism to
ensure that it is more effective.
First, with regard to human rights, democracy and
gender equality, the Council must not only support
the efforts of the international community; it must
also prevent any rollback of achievements already
made. We must therefore support actions that foster
a return to democracy in Myanmar and not allow the
progress made in Afghanistan to be overturned. As we
have stated, together with Ireland, as co-Chairs of the
Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security,
the Security Council must remain united so as to reject
any threat to the rights of Afghan women and girls, and
stress the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in any new Afghan Government.
Secondly, disarmament remains an issue that affects
the fate of humankind. The former Secretary-General
and member of The Elders, Ban Ki-moon, rightly stated
that there are no right hands for the wrong weapons. That
is precisely the premise of the Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons. The Security Council must support
multilateral processes, such as the Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula and a Middle East free of all weapons of mass
destruction. As Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), Mexico will strive
16/23

07/09/2021

to ensure that during the next comprehensive review,
measures are strengthened to prevent non-State actors
from gaining access to weapons of mass destruction. We
hope to be able to count on the support of delegations.
The Security Council must pay greater attention
to the threat posed by small arms and light weapons.
That is why, during Mexico’s presidency of the Council,
we will propose an analysis of measures to restrict the
irresponsible transfer of such weapons, which stoke
conflicts wherever they occur. It would be very valuable
to hear any recommendations The Elders may have on
that point in particular.
Thirdly, it is undeniable that climate change, as
with nuclear weapons, is a threat to the very survival of
humankind. It is also irrefutable that climate change can
exacerbate existing conflicts. We see that in regions,
such as the Sahel and the Horn of Africa, as well as in
Latin America and the Caribbean. The recent passage of
Tropical Storm Grace in Haiti compounded the impact
of the earthquake that hit the sisterly nation amid its
ongoing political challenges. Countries such as Haiti
and other small island developing States deserve greater
attention from the Council.
Allow me to conclude by referring to a necessary
precondition to address the challenges that I mentioned,
as well as other challenges that have been mentioned
here today, which are a constant concern to us. How can
we make multilateralism more effective? There have
been numerous occasions when the Council has not been
up to the task of fulfilling its mandate under the Charter
of the United Nations. Its slow response to the pandemic
is an example. There are those who continue to believe
that pandemics are not a matter of international security.
When such views prevail — through the misnamed right
to veto, which is more than a right, but rather a delicate
responsibility — there is an increased risk of the
Council becoming an irrelevant organ. Paralysing the
Council during major crises undermines its authority
and relevance.
It is paradoxical that, at national level, the majority
of States believe that decisions should be taken by a
simple or qualified majority, depending on the case. In
the Council, however, if just one of the five permanent
members so decides, it is possible to hamstring the will
not only of the majority of the members of the Council,
but of the international community. As has already been
said here, the environment that prevailed 76 years ago
does not match that of 2021. Therefore, we again call on
the permanent members of the Security Council to join
21-24395

07/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and securityS/PV.8850

the French-Mexican initiative and refrain from using the
right to veto when there is a risk of mass atrocity crimes
being committed. Indeed, the General Assembly must
act when the Council is paralysed.
We therefore welcome the fact in the light of a
crisis, such as the pandemic, 179 countries co-sponsored
resolution 74/274, spearheaded by Mexico in April last
year, which promotes just, transparent and equitable
access to the vaccines, which we all knew would soon
emerge. However, that resolution was not binding.
Today, 17 months later, we continue to emphasize that, in
order to overcome the pandemic, we must distribute the
vaccines more quickly, more fairly and more efficiently.
In conclusion, it is imperative that the Security
Council play a more active role in conflict prevention.
However, there is a reluctance for the Council to address
issues that may not yet pose a threat to international
peace and security at the time but could become such a
threat. That limits its ability to act preventively. It would
be very interesting to know the views of The Elders in
that regard.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to commend Ireland for choosing to
dedicate today’s Council’s meeting to hearing the views
of The Elders, that exceptional group of international
leaders and actors who dedicate their vast expertise
and rich experiences to the service of peace, justice and
human rights.
I would like to thank Mrs. Mary Robinson and
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi for their valuable briefings, as well
as to welcome the other members of The Elders present
with us, namely, Mrs. Johnson-Sirleaf and Mr. Zedillo.
The Security Council is currently considering a
large number of conflict and tension situations in the
world, including what is new and what has been on its
agenda for several years and even decades, especially the
Palestinian question, during which thousands of victims
have fallen, along with destruction and violations.
Despite the Security Council addressing these
issues periodically, even monthly sometimes, and
despite the huge number of resolutions that have
been adopted on these issues, the paths of political
settlement that have been launched and the United
Nations peacekeeping missions that have been created
and their mandates extended, in addition to the repeated
calls of the Secretary-General for a ceasefire, the
issue of achieving peace and establishing international
security is still elusive in many regions and situations.

Civilians, especially children and women, remain at the
top of the list of victims of violence, acts of aggression
and various kinds of violations, while other regions
witness alternating periods of stability and insecurity
that sometimes turn into armed conflicts obliterating
the peace gains previously achieved. Also, some other
situations can be classified as neither war nor peace.
All these situations are marred by tension and
anticipation, draining the capabilities and energies
of the countries and peoples concerned, disrupting
their development paths and requiring great effort and
follow-up from the United Nations. Most such situations
are accompanied by human suffering and human
rights violations.
That outcome motivates us to intensify and unify
efforts within the Security Council and work to make it
more effective in its handling of these various situations
and the enforcement of its resolutions. It also prompts us
to question how we can make the Council more efficient
in its role, especially with regard to the mandatory
implementation of its resolutions, conflict prevention,
conflict settlement and ending the suffering of millions
of people.
We need an objective diagnosis of the Security
Council’s performance so that we can develop
appropriate solutions. Here, I address the members
of The Elders, seeking their opinion in that regard,
especially in the light of the exacerbation of threats
and challenges to international peace and security,
such as terrorism, climate change, natural disasters,
health pandemics, cyberthreats and weapons of mass
destruction, in addition to the complexity of existing
crises and conflicts and the emergence of new ones.
In that context, the Council may need to develop new
working mechanisms and approaches in order to be
able to address those various challenges. Here, too, I
would like to hear the opinion of the members of The
Elders on the role that the Security Council can play in
dealing with such new threats, especially in the absence
of consensus among its members about whether all of
them fall within its competence. That was proved by the
long negotiations to adopt resolution 2532 (2020), on the
coronavirus disease.
The members of the Security Council unanimously
agree on the strategic importance of cooperation and
complementarity between the Security Council and
regional organizations. Despite the ongoing regular
consultations in that area, the prevailing impression
remains that such cooperation has not reached the

21-2439517/23

S/PV.8850

Maintenance of international peace and security

desired level, especially in the African continent and
the Arab region, which witness the largest number
of issues on the Security Council’s agenda and host
the highest number of United Nations peacekeeping
missions. I would therefore like to pose a question to
the members of The Elders: How do you envisage more
effective cooperation and the sharing of roles between
the members of the Security Council and regional
organizations, particularly given the long duration of
many issues on the Council’s agendas as the situations
continue to deteriorate in many conflict regions?
I would like to once again thank the President
of the Council for organizing this meeting and the
members of The Elders for their rich contribution to
today’s discussion.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Let me start by thanking
the Irish presidency for convening this meeting to
allow a candid dialogue with The Elders. We commend
the efforts of The Elders and highly value their ideas
and insights on issues related to the mandate of the
Security Council.
During our presidencies in January 2020 and
April 2021, Viet Nam had opportunities to invite the
Chair and the Deputy Chair of The Elders to brief the
Security Council on the topics of upholding the Charter
of the United Nations with regard to the maintenance
of international peace and security (see S/PV.8699)
and cooperation with regional organizations (see
S/2021/394), respectively.
At no time has humankind been confronted
with such complex global challenges as nowadays.
International and internal armed conflicts, the arms
race, the existence and proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, terrorism, transnational organized
crime, poverty, climate change and pandemics are
some examples.
As the world that we inhabit is increasingly
globalized and interconnected, we are only as strong as
our weakest link. We firmly believe that multilateralism
based on international law and the collective work of
the United Nations, the Member States and all other
stakeholders is our most effective response to those
challenges. Multilateralism serves both to cure and to
prevent the world’s predicaments.
I listened with great attention to Mrs. Robinson and
Mr. Brahimi’s insightful briefings and thank them for
their wise words and recommendations. In that regard, I
wish to underline the following points.
18/23

07/09/2021

First, conflict prevention ought to be at the core of
the work of the Security Council. The Council should
utilize all the tools at its disposal to contribute to
prevention, post-conflict recovery and sustaining peace
efforts. Peacekeepers require our continued support
and resources to fulfil their mandates in increasingly
complex and evolving situations. We must foster a sense
of ownership among Governments and local authorities,
especially in post-conflict and reconstruction.
Secondly, in order to make the multilateral system
work more efficiently, responsively and in synergy,
reforms are a prerequisite. The Security Council is
no exception. It is critical to enhance its transparency,
democracy, representativeness and effectiveness. Its
solidarity and unity must always be prioritized.
We must also support the complementary role of
regional organizations, such as the African Union,
in maintaining international and regional peace and
security. In our region, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations has affirmed its centrality in the
regional security architecture, including in conflict
prevention and resolution and addressing regional and
international issues.
At the national level, we need a whole-ofGovernment approach that engages the local community,
fosters public-private cooperation and supports the
most vulnerable. The multilateral approach, which
entails national capacity-building assistance, is of the
utmost necessity.
Thirdly, I agree that the Council should not let
new challenges to international peace and security fly
under its radar. The Charter of the United Nations lays
the timeless foundation for an international order that
serves the interests of the international community. Our
collective and individual actions must fully abide by
and uphold international law and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
In that connection, I would like to ask The Elders
what in their view are practical measures to enhance the
Council’s efficiency in tackling new challenges while
maintaining unity and inclusivity.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I take
this opportunity to recall that France joined the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States in condemning the events that took place in
Guinea on 5 September and in calling for a return to
constitutional order and for the release of President
Condé. That crisis is emblematic of the importance of
21-24395

07/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and securityS/PV.8850

regional organizations, which the Security Council must
take into account in fulfilling its mandate.
I thank Mrs. Robinson and Mr. Brahimi for their
briefings. Through them, I commend the work done by
The Elders for international peace and security. We are
fully in agreement with them. The world needs strong
multilateralism and an effective Security Council. That is
essential to meet the challenges of our time. Collectively,
we must think about how to act more effectively.
As members of the Security Council, the guarantor
of international peace and security, we must make full
use of the tools at our disposal. The mandates we give
to the United Nations are a valuable tool. I commend the
work of the Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral and the 80,000 Blue Helmets deployed in
dangerous areas in the Central African Republic, in
Mali and South Sudan. In Afghanistan, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan is playing a
fundamental role alongside humanitarian agencies in a
critical context. That role must continue.
Our unity is a condition for the success of United
Nations action. We demonstrated that unity in 2011 in
the case of Côte d’Ivoire, a country that is now well
on its way to reconciliation. In Libya, peace is within
reach. Our support for the holding of parliamentary
and presidential elections on 24 December is essential
for stability and reconciliation. With respect to Syria, I
call on the Security Council to set aside its differences
to finally resolve the conflict, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015).
Peace cannot be achieved without genuine
equality between women and men or without the
effective participation of women and young people
in decision-making. The $10 billion mobilized at the
Generation Equality Forum in Paris in July must
contribute to that.
In the current environment, the integrity of the
existing non-proliferation norms must be maintained.
At the heart of those norms is the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. That requires a
strong and united response to proliferation, including by
working hard to promote the mutual return of the United
States and Iran to compliance with their commitments
under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, agreed
in 2015 in Vienna. That also requires working on the
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization of
North Korea. Those are the conditions for a world free
of nuclear weapons with undiminished security for all.

Making optimal use of the tools at our disposal is
one thing, but we must also see together how we can go
beyond that. France is committed to Security Council
reform in order to strengthen its authority and its
representativeness while preserving its decision-making
character. We support its expansion in both categories
of membership and an increased presence for Africa.
We also call on all Member States, in particular the
permanent members of the Security Council, to join
the initiative that we have put forward, together with
Mexico, for the voluntary and collective suspension of
the use of the veto in cases of mass atrocities.
We can also expand our response. That is the objective
of the project that the countries of the Sahel, France and
their partners are promoting through the Coalition for
the Sahel. It seeks to respond to all the dimensions of the
crisis: the fight against terrorism, the strengthening of
military capabilities, the redeployment of Government
services, and humanitarian and development efforts.
The European Union fully supports those efforts. The
United Nations must do more.
Responding to crises also means fighting impunity
and ensuring respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law. We call on all Member States to join
the call for humanitarian action that we have launched
with Germany.
Lastly, the most effective tool for addressing crises
is prevention. Prevention means identifying tomorrow’s
crises. It also means containing threats before they
escalate. For example, we provided a collective response
to the coronavirus disease with resolutions 2532 (2020)
and 2565 (2021), which must be implemented as a matter
of urgency.
We also know that the consequences of global
warming are unprecedented. If that issue is better
reflected in our resolutions, its impact on international
peace and security must truly become a central element
of our response to crises.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ireland.
First, I want to thank The Elders for being here
with us today. President Robinson’s and Elder Emeritus
Brahimi’s briefings today were both important and
alarming. I also thank former Presidents Johnson-Sirleaf
and Zedillo for their presence with us today. The
Security Council needs the wisdom, clarity and courage
that their messages convey.

21-2439519/23

S/PV.8850

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mary Robinson and Lakhdar Brahimi have called
our attention to the deep challenges we face, the
challenges we often struggle to recognize and the
challenges we have many times failed to address. In their
calls, they recognize a common inescapable reality: the
challenges we face are too great and too global for any
one country — whether a small island like my own or
a global super-Power of which several are represented
at this table — to overcome alone. That is why we all
sit together in this symbolic horseshoe, looking across
at each other, talking about working together and not
always succeeding in doing so.
Time and again we pay lip service to the imperative
of unity of purpose and to the need for the Security
Council to listen to other voices — the voices of regional
organizations and of influential and experienced actors,
such as The Elders. Their messages today drive home
the truth that we are bound together by our inaction,
as well as by the responsibility for the consequences of
that inaction.
The inescapable reality is that multilateralism must
be at the heart of how we seek to deal with our global
challenges, not least to the threats to international
peace and security. That was the ambitious vision of the
drafters of the Charter in 1945, with the almost unbridled
optimism that their determination to work together could
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
That is actually the momentous responsibility placed on
the shoulders of the Council every day, and that is the
clarion call that we heard this morning from The Elders.
For a small country such as Ireland, multilateralism
is in our DNA. We are a global island, deeply connected
in everything we do. It is at the core of how we approach
international peace and security. It is expressed in our
commitment to the Blue Helmets of United Nations
peacekeeping. It is expressed in our commitment to
promoting disarmament in Ireland’s foreign policy, and
it is grounded in our lived experience of conflict — an
experience that continues to teach us that for peace
processes to be sustainable, they must be inclusive,
ensuring that the voices of the most vulnerable, often
women and other marginalized groups, are not only
heard but listened to. Our commitment to multilateralism
is matched by our courage to defend it.
The threats to peace and security have changed since
1945. Today climate change is the defining challenge of
our generation. Its impact is global, and our collective
security is at risk. We have heard first-hand in the
Council how the negative effects of climate change are
20/23

07/09/2021

compounding other drivers of conflict such as poverty
and inequality to undermine stability in regions such as
the Sahel and the Horn of Africa. If we fail to face up to
the realities, the destabilizing effects of climate change
will eventually be felt in all countries.
We are using our presidency this month to consider
the concrete steps that the Council can take in response
to climate security risks. We must put the necessary
systems in place to allow the Council to take account of
the adverse impacts of climate change in the delivery of
its mandate.
Like many around this table and around the world, I
am inspired by the work and wisdom of The Elders. For
me, as an Irish woman, the words of Ireland’s former
President Mary Robinson have particular resonance.
Many have mentioned the crisis in Afghanistan today.
With the plight of women and girls in Afghanistan
foremost in my mind in recent weeks, I am reminded
of something that former President Robinson once said:
“In a society where the rights and potential of
women are constrained, no man can be truly free. He
may have power, but he will not have freedom.”
The Council will continue its urgent consideration
of the situation in Afghanistan in the debate to be held
on Thursday and in the negotiation of the mandate for
the United Nations Mission in Afghanistan. As we do
so, I call on the Council to do everything in its power
to promote and protect the human rights of the brave
women of Afghanistan. A key measure of the new
dispensation in Kabul will be how it treats its women
and girls.
Afghanistan is but one of the many crises that the
Council is grappling with. From Ethiopia to Yemen, to
Haiti and Syria, we must work together on collective
responses to increasingly complex challenging
circumstances. The promotion of respect for human
rights, including the protection of civil-society space
and of human rights defenders, must lie at the heart of
our commitment to those and other countries in crisis.
It is a lesson hard learned that we in the Security
Council simply cannot afford to be divided on issues that
require urgent action. If and when we are divided, the
vulnerable in fragile contexts suffer the consequences.
Appeals for a united Council may sound idealistic, but
that is not merely an ideal. That is a reality for millions of
vulnerable people around the world. Those people, many
faced with war, famine or sexual violence in conflict,
are relying on us here in this Chamber to come together
21-24395

07/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and securityS/PV.8850

and to act. That is our responsibility, individually and
collectively. That was the promise of the Charter in 1945.
That is still the promise of the Charter in 2021. We know
that The Elders are working tirelessly to help realize that
promise, and we will rely on their encouragement today
to fortify our efforts at this table.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mrs. Robinson to respond to the
questions posed and comments made.
Mrs. Robinson: I would like to begin by thanking
all members of the Security Council for the very warm
way in which they have welcomed the contribution that
both Lakhdar Brahimi and I have made, welcomed the
presence of Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and Ernesto Zedillo,
and welcomed the work of The Elders. We deeply
appreciate this, because we are very passionate about our
work; we are very committed to it, and it is a privilege
for us to be able to brief.
Members heard not very long ago from Ban
Ki-moon, now one of my deputies but, obviously, also
my former boss on at least three mandates, and we
would hope to continue that relationship. We believe
that it actually is an opportunity to discuss and go back
to the fundamentals of the Security Council and to both
remind members and have them remind one another,
because, as I listened, I was actually quite struck by the
strong affirmation of many members in support of the
importance of a coherent, integrated multilateral system
and the fact that we need that in the world.
In many ways, I felt that maybe having conversations
of this kind or dialogues of this kind with The Elders
from time to time gives members an opportunity to
be on their very best behaviour as a Security Council;
indeed, I feel that today they have been on their best
behaviour, and that is good, because it shows that they
have the capacity to perhaps find more in common
than they sometimes do on a daily basis; when they are
tackling the weeds of a problem, they may find that it is
more divisive.
Members asked a number of very relevant and very
good questions. I am going to give short answers, not very
adequate ones, probably, at this stage; but, fortunately,
Madam President, through the generous hosting by
Ireland of a lunch for us afterwards with all four of my
colleagues, you will be able to hear in particular from
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and Ernesto Zedillo and hear

more from Mr. Brahimi and myself in response to the
questions posed, and there may even be more questions.
Let me deal with some of them that I felt were very
much to the point.
First, let me touch on early questions posed by the
representatives of the United Kingdom and Estonia about
Tigray, specifically about the appointment of former
President Obasanjo as High Representative for the Horn
of Africa. We certainly welcome that appointment; there
is some concern that he may not be as well received on
the Tigray side, but, hopefully, that will work. But we
also, members will recall, in my address this morning,
suggested — and we did this deliberately — a possible
visit by the Security Council, because if members
visit, they will go to Addis Ababa, and that would give
the Security Council the opportunity to link with the
African Union on this issue in a very, very visible way.
I am aware that the Security Council has made
a number of visits to the Sahel and Lake Chad and a
number of visits to countries including the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, when I served with my mandate
on the Great Lakes, and that they have not been able to
recently because of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
But perhaps it would be good if it were possible for the
Council to consider as early a visit as possible and in a
close dialogue and link with the African Union and its
efforts in relation to Tigray.
I was very touched by the fact that the representative
of Kenya spoke of our mandate from Nelson Mandela.
I have those words ringing in my ears at all times. He
referenced a number of issues and spoke about the
inequalities of COVID-19, as a number of others did.
One of the inequalities that The Elders are particularly
focused on at the moment is the inequitable access to
vaccines, which, in our world today, is quite shocking.
Two of The Elders — the two who have not taken
the floor this morning, but who will be with us at
lunch — are deeply involved with this issue. President
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf co-chaired the Independent Panel
for Pandemic Preparedness and Response, and President
Ernesto Zedillo was a member of that Panel. I think that
the recommendations of the Panel were very well thought
through especially because it did not see COVID-19 as
only a health problem. It is obviously a health problem,
but it is also so much more: it is an economic problem, a
political problem and a social problem. That is why we
urge the General Assembly to adopt a holistic declaration
on COVID-19 because the pandemic is not something
just for the World Health Organization. It is much more

21-2439521/23

S/PV.8850

Maintenance of international peace and security

than that. It is for heads of States and Governments to
live up to their responsibilities to address it. Hopefully
that will take place shortly during the high-level week at
the General Assembly.
With regard to the reference to international human
rights and democracy and gender equality, I actually
wanted to recall that visit to Afghanistan in March 2002
because I wanted to emphasize that human rights are
not eastern or western or northern or southern rights.
They are fundamental human rights, and every State,
every State represented in this Chamber, has recognized
that. Not only do States Members of the United Nations
constantly refer in different instruments, such as the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, with the
Sustainable Development Goals, to the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, but every country accepts
the Universal Declaration. Most accept one or more of
the additional covenants or the conventions. This gives
a collective sense of their importance.
But human rights are also embedded in the culture
of countries, and that is the important message that
the women of Afghanistan have given us. It was their
Charter, not some external Charter. The Charter was
their Charter. They praised Allah in launching it, which
means that it was in conformity with their culture.
Further, a great deal of progress was made in the
Constitution, the laws and the policies of the country,
which have helped at women and girls and increased
the participation of women and girls in Afghanistan.
I plead with the Security Council — and, as I said
earlier, specifically with those countries that will be
very actively dealing with the Taliban over the coming
months — to remember that we have just marked, as
the representative of France said, the holding of the
Generation Equality Forum. What would, women
and girls in the world think if we allowed the rights
that women themselves had secured to be completely
abolished by a military takeover, basically a coup, by the
Taliban? It would be extremely shocking. It is therefore
extremely important that we keep that in mind.
I was also very glad that a significant number of
Council members made reference to climate change. I
know that we are increasingly having to deal with the
issue and that there is an informal group co-chaired by
Ireland on climate and security. Knowing that I had the
opportunity to come and speak with the Council briefly
today, I recently asked a number of top climate scientists
how they would tell the Security Council to consider
climate change a security issue. They said,
22/23

07/09/2021

“but how could it not consider it to be so? Climate
change is a threat multiplier: with respect to any
issue, climate change makes things so much worse.
It is an existential threat. How could it not be seen
as a security issue?”
That was absolutely the response that I got from
climate scientists.
I therefore urge the Council to see climate change as
a security issue, and I would urge members, if they do
come together around a draft resolution, that they make
it a strong resolution, because a weak Security Council
resolution would not help at all. Since a strong resolution
is needed, it may take some time for the implications
for the world to be thought through in terms of really
understanding the threat that is posed by climate change.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has in
its recent report and in its special report on the impacts
of global warming of 1.5°C told the Council in no
uncertain terms some things that Council members can
certainly take on board.
I was glad that there was a reference to the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty and to the nuclear issue. As I
said in my briefing, I am pleased that Ireland is raising
the broad nuclear issue later this month.
Perhaps I can end by recognizing that opportunities
such as today’s meeting for the Security Council to stand
back a little bit from its very tough agenda — I acknowledge
that it has to deal with very difficult issues and that its
members have different national positions — and to
reflect are good for members’ collective commitment.
Members are not individuals when they come to the
Security Council: they are members of the Security
Council, they are the elected 10 and the permanent five,
and they have to take the opportunity to forge a collective
spirit and work together. The world needs them to work
as well as they can despite all the deficiencies that
have been mentioned, including the composition of this
body, which is not representative of the real world, and
yet it has great responsibilities and must uphold those
responsibilities.
I would therefore like to end by simply saying
that The Elders of course support the restraint on the
veto in cases of mass atrocities, which a number of
countries — France, Mexico and other countries — have
been putting forward. We would also like to see other
reforms. Ban Ki-moon has spoken before and to the
Security council about ways in which it can improve,
including in the way press statements are made. Press
21-24395

07/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and securityS/PV.8850

statements should not require unanimity although that
has been the required practice until now.
I end by again thanking Ireland for inviting us, four
of us Elders, to sit in the Chamber — two of us given the
opportunity to speak — and for hosting a lunch that will
allow further discussion about the important areas for
which the United Nations Charter charges the Security
Council with responsibility.

The President: I thank President Robinson for
her clarifications as well as all of the Elders. I thank
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi and Presidents Zedillo and
Johnson-Sirleaf for their presence in the Chamber today.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

21-2439523/23
