NATIONS UNIES

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES·VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTIl YEAR

No. 22

QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 22

FOUR HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH
MEETING

QUATIIE CENT DIX.NEUVlEME
SEANCE

Held at Lake S1lCceSS, New York,
on Wednesday, 16 M(ITCh 1949, at 3 p.m.

Tanue a Lake Sttccess, New-York
le nwrC1rJdi 16 11tarS 194.9, it 15 hf'llr;s.

Pre.ddent: Mr. A. ALVAREZ (Cuba).

Pr~side11t: M. A. ALVAREZ' (Cuba).

Present: The representatives of the follewing
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukra:nian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republic:s,
ULited Kingdom, United States of A:nerica,

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Arge~tine, Ca~cla, Chine, Cuba, Egypte, France,
Norvege,
~epublique
socialiste
sovietique

cl'Ukraine, Union des Republicues soeialistes
sovietiques, ~oyaut:le-Uni, Etats~UIlis d'Amerique.

1. Provisional agenda (SI Agenda 419)

1. Ordre du jour provieoire
(SI Agenda 419)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de I'orclre du jour.

2. The Indonesian question:

2. La question indoOliisienne:

(a) Report dated 1 March 1949 5ubmit:ed to

the. Security Council by the United
Nations Commission for Indonesia in
accordance with the Security CDuncil
resolution of 28 January 1949 (5/1270
and 5/1270/Corr.l);
(b) Letter dated 2 March 1949 from the
representative of the Nethe~lands to the
President of the Se.;;urity Council <;oncerning the Council's resolution of
28 January 1949 on the Indonesian question (5/1274);
(c) Supplementary report dated 7 :.YIarch
1949 submitted to the Security Council
by the United Nations Commission for
Indonesia in accordance with the Security
Council resolution cf 28 Tanuarv 1949
(S/127D/Addl);
--

a) Rapport, en date du ler mars 194-9,
adresse au Conseil de securite par la Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Inco·

(d) Second supplementary report dated
10 March 1949 submitted to the Security
Counci: by the United Nations Commission for Indonesia in accordance with
the Security Council resolution of 28 Jan""y 1949 (S/1270/Add.2 and 511270/
Add.2/CoTT,l);
,

nesie conformement a la resolution du
Consei[ de sckurite en date du 28 janvier
1949 (S/12iO et Sj1270/Corr.l);
b) Lettre, en cate du 2 mar; 1949, adressee
au President du Conseil de securite par le
repre~e.nt;Lnt des Pays-Bas, concemant la
resolution du Conseil en date du 28 janvier
1949 relative a. la question indonesienne
(5/1274) :
c) Rapport supplementaire, en date du 7 mars
1949, adresse au Cotlseil de securite par
la Commission des Nations Unies pour
]'Indonesie conformement it la resolution
du Conseil (le securite en date c1u 28 janvier 1949 (3/1270/ Add.1) ;
d) Deuxieme rapport supplementairc, en date
dtt 10 mars 1949, adresse au Conse-it de
securite par la Commission des Nations
Unies pOtU j'Indonesie, confonnement it
la resolution du Conseil de securite en date
du 28 janvier 1949 (5/1270/Add.2 et
S/1270/Arlr'l.2/Corr.l) ;

(e) Third supplementary report dated
L1 March 1949 submitted to the Security
Council by tl:e United Nations Commis-

e) Troisieme rapport sllpplementaire, en date
du 11 mars 1949, ad resse au Consei1 de
securite par la Commission des Nations

2
siO:1 for Indonesia in accordance with the
Secllrity Counc.il resolution of 28 J<J.nu~
"y 1949 (S/1270/Add.3).

Unies pour j'!nd::mesie confonne:nent a la
resolution du Conseil de securite en date
dtl 28 j'lnvier 194-9 (5/1270/ !\dc.J~.

2. AdtJption of the a@enda

2. Adoption de l'ortlre du jow'

The agenda 'was adopted.

3, Continuation of the discu~!'Jion on the
Indonesian rruestion
At the invitaiio-n ef :he President, Mr. Haod,
representative of A'U~trclia; Mr. VCl1 Lan-gen!l.()7)e,
represlnttal"ive of Belgil~m,. U Ba Maung, repn-

.uJztc,ti'l':c of Burma,' Mr n. R. Selt, relmwmtcliz'c
of Ind'ia; Mr. van Roije1t, representative of tr.e
Netlier;an(/,s, Mr. Abdttr Rahitn Khan, represent(1r
titN! of PcldItan,. Ge/uTal ]({)mulo. rqpresl;llt(lJi~'e
of the Philippine.s; and Mr. PalM, representative
of il'ldomsia, took their pl;1ces a.t fire S()c~jriiy
COitllcil frlblc.

L'O'Ydre d1t jour est adO/de.

3. SULte de la dLScussLon sur fa question
indonesienne
5"r !'iwitation du Prcsidwt, Af. Hood, repre~
sen/cmt de l'Amtralie; M. ?Jall Lang.fmho1!e,
representant de la. Belgiqul?,' U Ba }.tfouny, I·CpnJse11[(l1It de Ix Einnanie; M. B: R. Sen, 'Tlpresentonl de i'InJe; 1-1. va» Roijen, re.f'rEs/!'ltto,l1f
des Pays-Has,. M. Abdl"r Rahim Khrr.tI, repr(;sentant dli Pakistan/le .qhrerol R(J,ltldo, 1·eiJrcsen£ant

des Philippines, et M. Pala", representa1!t de la
Rp.jnLhZiqtw d'Indoncsi(. prennent pllJ.Ce a la table
dll Conseil.

The PRESW2NT ~ tralw'IDied from Spanish):
As usual, there will be cc,nsectltive interpretation
for the speeches ::>f members of the Coul;cil and
simlllt.weou5 interpret~tion £0:- those of invited
representatives.

Le PRESlllE:NT (trad,tit de fcspognol): C()1n1l1~
d'habitude, j'inte;pn~tation consewtive scn~. utiIisce pour les discol1rs des membres du Conseil
et l'interpretation simu;tanee pour les dlscours des
rf'p"'e~~ntants invites a sieger au Conseil.

Mr. SUNDE- (Noww:i.Y~: I have listened' with
great interest to the varioLs staterr,en:s which have
hee:l made during this debate. AlbOtlgf; at the
outset the sittlation seemed very diffic~ll indeed,
we ate hap?y to fini novr bat ttere is still some
ho~e of :-eaching a.n agreemcnt. We were especially ir,terested ar:d pleClsed to hear tW(; partictllar
:J11<.ses of the discussion during thE last few
meetings; first, the sta:ements of the parties,
whiel: were made in a more conciliatory manner
and which show that the:e is still a pnldicaI
possibility that Eo cDnference, as proposed by the
Nether1ancs, maybe hdJ if the parties can agree
on c~rtain preliminary ste?S; and se:or.dly, the
::;t;;.teOlents by the representat;ve3 nf Car.ada and
Ch;ina, who ;nade a wise and constructive suggest;ilI1 namely, to try this poss:bility of a settlement by agreement between the par.ies. We think
that it would ~ a good procedure first to solve
the preliminary problems, as laid d::nm in the
first two p'oragraphs of the Securitv Council
resu:utioll [$/1234], concerning the cf':1.se-fire and
t}e re-establishment of tlJ/~ Republican Government, :hrougl1 r:1i,cussions between the Net:'1erlands and the Rel=ublic ur:der tJ.e auspices of the
l:nited Nati::>m; Commission, and then, to salve
the Jrcader problem of a final settleoent, indud·
ir.~ ,he transfe~ of real sovNeignty to the United
States of Indcmesia, :hrough a conference in
which the Netherlands a:ld at parties in I:1don;:siu, would be repri'sented.

M. SU:<fDE (Norvege) (!radldt de l'{mg!ai~') ;
J'ai ccaute avec un grand inter(~t les dlYf'r!'.es de.darations qui ont ete i",ites au cour, ce ce de-bat.
La situation parais~ait etre pleine de difficultl~s au
debut, mais nom SOIT'.UlCS heureux de constater
maint\Cntut que tout espOlr de parvcnir a UIl
accord n'est pas perdu. Au cours de;> ~erniere:s
seances, deux phases de 1<.; discussion nous ant
semble panicullen:[Jlent int<':~cs3autes et satisfaisantes: il s'agit d'abol'd des de:larations des
parties, faites sur un ton pins concili;;.nt, qui ant
montre qu'il reste po~sible, pr8.tiqucMent, de
n~llnir \lne conference, COlTIme le proposel1t les
Pays-Bas, si le:> intercsses lle·lvent se mettn;
d'2.ccord sur un certain nomln·e ce disposit:ons
preliminaires; ensuite, ce sonlle~ declaloutions des
representants du Canada et de la Chine, qui ant
formule un€ ?roposition dt caractere constmdif.
tendant a essayer de mettre a p:-of.t la possibilite
de rC:gler la question par voie cl'accord entre les
parties. A notre avis, ce serait une bonne methode
de commencer pa, resoudre les quc:stions prelimillaires qui font l'objct des deux premiers para~
graphcs de 1::1 resolutio:l du Conseil de securite
[Sj123iL], c'est-a-din:l ce11cs dc la cessation de.,>
hostilites et clu re:aclissement du Gouvernernent
de la Rcpublique w moye:t (k nefociafons entre
les Pays~Bas et 1;;. Reyubliquej sous Ies auspices
de la Commission des Nations Unic5; enstlite, la
question plus ....aste dtl reglement dennitif, comprenant le transfert de b souverainete effective
dUX Etats-Unis d'Indolle~ie, ,cl·ait resolue all
cours d'unc conference ou se:-aient rep:-esentes
les Pays,...:iJus et toutcs 12s p<1.rtics jntere,se~s d'!ndonesie.

Vfe th·nk this suggestion might serve to give
tile N f'therlands plar: for a round table conference
at The Hague a d.ance of success by bringing
it into hannor:y with :he Security Council resobtion and therety creJ.ting the conditions under
which there is hepe that it WOllld be 8.ccepted by
uoljj .partie5. I wish tr.erefore tn S1IpPOr: the
procedure outJir.:ed by the representat:ves of
Cmab ~nd China.

Nons croyons C;ue, grace f. (;~lte propo.-::ition, le
pl'ojet des Pays·Bas tendant .it reun:r une conference de la table ronde a La .H8.ye :'l.ur::tit. IlUC
chance d'abontir; en effet, cette proposition le
rendrait con forme ~" la resolution C:u Ccnseil de
sect1rite et creer~it ainsi des c:.ondi~ions permettanto d'esp,erer qu'i1 s~r~, accepte ?1\r les deux
parhes. l. es~ pOLlrquOl J approuve la p,ocedun:
que les representants du Ca.nada et de :ll. Cbine
ont exposee dan~ St~ grandes lignes.

3
· With the President's .permission, I should also

hke tot draw
tt to
hO the
h Seem"lt)' Council'~
~ a en len to

a mat er "!. le

.r regard as a humanitarian and

not a polltlt.aJ ISSUe; J trust therefore that all
the ,members of the Council will be in agreemen"
on It.
'

In all the dis~utes involving dashes hetween
arme~ forces v.:h1Ch have been considered by the
Secunty ~ou~clI, a.ccusations have been made by
b~th partIes mvolvIng charges of atrocities coni~
~lt~ed by t~e other party, inclUding torture and
ktlhng of pnsoner~ of war, and other acts which
are ,not merely Vlolations of th~ G<;:ncva COllventlOn Of} the treatment of prisoners of war and
other conventions, but [lre also contrary to th

most basic moral principles which are commo~
to all peoples and all faiths.

a Sille ~l'eside!1t In'y autorise, jc voudrais ut!0si
ppe ,el- I atten~lOn du Conseil sur l1Ee questi~n
qUi! _a mo~ aYl.S, est d'ordre humnnitairc "t non
~o lhgue:. Je sms nDnc convaineu que les l~cmhres
U Conseli scront to:tS d'accord sur cc poitlt. .fajs to~s J~~ differends examines par le Condes
sel 'e secunte et q:.li ant dOll ne Ji~ll
comb~t,~ entre ?CS ~orees :J.:mees, cba~lle pnrtic a
aCCllse ; aut.re d avolF comm~s des atroeites, notamment d aVOlr torture et CXeCute des prisonnicrs de
guerre et perpetre d'autrc, aetes qui, non seulelllt:nt C~ll~tltUt:~lt ut::s violations de la CCnver.tion
d~ Geneve, matS encore sOnt contraires nux princlpes m{)~atlx les pIllS esscntiels com1llons A t<1U.c:;
les pettples, quelles (jue soient letl:·s eroY<lnCCS.

a

My deleg<l;tion has always been shOCked to hear
.!.uch a.<:(;tl~aUQl1S made, because we feel as strongly
as ~11 other peoples. who have been subject to
:faSCist terror t,h::tt :hl.'l W'l.'; one of the basic evils
we were fightmg In the last war and wllich we
hoped to end once and Eor all.

,I?e t;lles accnsations ont to:ljotlr~ revolte mn
deleg.atlon, parce ql1e n<1l~S cr:nsioerons, comme
Ies .autres pel:ples qlli ont COl11ltl 1, terrcur
fasc!ste, que ces procedes fent essen~icJl('ment­
parh des maux que nOU3 avons combattns au
co~rs de
demiere gttcrre et auxqllels !lOUS
aVlOns espere rnettre fin nne [oj,'; pour 10U1<.;5.

My country has been a me.mber of the Sectlrity
Council only since 1 January of this year, and we
have 1].ot th~refore Im.d an ?pportunity to express
OUT YJews In conneXlon WIth tarHer accmations
which have been made in the Indonesian clisDute
and in other disputes before the Council. it is
only now, that fresh accusations have been made
t1l2l we feel called upon to bring this rmbJf':m to
the attention of the Security Council as a separate
problem which, in our view, s~ould not be linked
with the political as;Jects of the particula, dispute
which the Council is now considering.

Mon pays n'est rnembre dlt Consel1 de securite
que c1epuis le ler janvier de cette annee; c't:st
pourquoi nous n'avons pas eu l'occ<lsirm
d'exprimer lIotre lIianitl'e ele voir all sujCt d('s
accusntions de cette nature qd Dnt deja. ete
fornHllcc~ pendant l'eX,1l11en 'ltl clilferend indonesien et d'autl'es differends dont le Conseil a
e~e saisi. M~!ntenant que de nOlnellcs accusations
vlennent cl ctre lancees, nous croyons d('voi:
appeler l'attention dn Conseil de sceurite sur ccUe
question, consi(Ieree en dle-l\lemc, illc.:cpcndumment des aspects poEtiques du diffhc:ld que le
Constil est cn train C'examiner.

My delegation feels that thf>: Sf>:curity Council
cannot ignore the fact that, in spite of all its
efforts, armf'cl dashes have taken place in Indonesia and elsewhere and that tbis may happen
again, as much as we regret it. The most important task is, of cOUrse, to try to bring military
operations to an end as soon as possible, Dllt,
since it is not alway:s possible to prevent t.hem,
we feel we should at least do what we can to
prevent atrocities, whidl arl'. contrary both to
inte.national law and to all alllnan standards of
morality, in the course of such military operations,

,La delegation nOI-vegienne cstime que le Consell de securite ne saurait se ciissimulcr le fa~t
que, en depit de tous ses efforts, des rencontres
armees ant eu lietl e11 bdonesie et aille:lrs, et qtle
cl'autres combats ptuvent encore eclater, quelqlle
tristesse que ..ela puisse nous causer. Evidemment, ce qui importe le p:us, c'est de s'etIorccr <le
mettre fin le plus tot possible toutes les opCra~
Hons militaires; rnais, counue 1: u'a pas etc toujours possible de {aire cesser les combn.ts, le
Conseil dewait, pell->ons-nous, fairl'. nil moins ce
qu 'i1 peut pour empec:ler que 1'0:1 commette, au
wurs des operations mil:talres, des atrocites C011traires au droit intemational et WX principes
fon{lament<tt.lX de la moralite hl1ITai:1e,

In the concrete issue before the Security Council, the Indonesian dispute, acctlsations of atrocities have been made first against the Republican
troops and now against the Netherlands troops.
VVe do not know, nor can we know without in"..estigating the facls, whether these accl1sations
are correct. As far as the accusations against the
Netherlands are concerned, T sllOuld like to say
at once that r do not think the fact that the
acctlsaiiom have appeared in Netherlands newspapers can be taken as conclusive evidence of their
truth. The Netherlands has a free Press, and in
:t country with a free Press it is not cllstomary to
inferfere in advance with st1temeIlts made in the
Press, even if only to establish the truth of the
facts involved, I am also sure th~t both GoyernnJents are as conremeo as we are that atrocities
shall not take place, and 1 understand that the
represf".ntative of the Netherl2.nds is gdng to

Dam le (:as precis eu differend dont le Conseil
s'oeeupe en el'. mon;ent. la 9uestio~1 indonesi~,nne,
c:e sent lcs troupes repubhcames qUI, les prC.lllercs,
ont ete accusees de commettre des atrocite" et,
maintenant c'est cont:-e les troupes l)eerlanclais~s
que I'on p~rte des accusations du mel1le ordre,
Nons ne savollS pilei si ces I1ccusafons ):;ont f(Jodees, et nom ne pourrons le savo~r que par line
enquele sur les faits. En cc qUI e,or.eerne. 1e5
accusations lancees contre les forces neerlandalses,
je tiens <:Jeclar~r tQ~t, de s,:i,te que le rnit. que
ces aceusatlons ate:]t ete pubhees daus des J01Jrnall" neerlandais ne saurait, selon moi, etr.;: ~nr.­
sided: cotnme une prellve o:onc!uallte, de leur hrl"nfonde. Aux Pays-Bas, lil pressc est llbre; or, clans
un pays ou la prcssc est librf', iI n'e~~ pas d't~snge
de cOlltroler a l'avunee ee que pubhcnt les Journaux, meme pocr s'assllrer de l'e~aetitud,e rr.ate:
rielle des f;::its en questlOl1, ]e SUl5 eertal11 ;'~l1SSl

!a

a

a

refer to this question later today. Both the
Netherlands and the Indonesian people know
from eX[Jcrience in tile Second World War the
horror and the effects of such methods and they
would therefore never permit them to be employed
where they con Id prevent it, I am therefore sure
that there will be full agreement between the
parties. concer;1ed an~ the members of the Security
COlI:1CII on thIS prinCIple.

que :es deux Gouvcrnements tiennent alltant l'un
que. :'al1tre ce qu'il n'yait pas d'atrocites, et je
crols comprendre que le representant des PaysBas va aborder cette cuestio:1 tout l'heure. Le
pcuplc des Pays-Bas- et celui de l'Indones'e
savent tous deux, [Jout en a'foir e.te les victimes
penC:ant la deuxieme guerre mondiale, c:ombien
de telles methodes s0nt horriblcs; ils en CO:1.mlissent les consequences, e; jjs ne pel'Jl1ettro:Il
jamais qu'on y .ait recours lorsqu'ils pourro;1t
l'empecher. Aussi sl1is-je slir que les parties interessees et les membres dn Conseil seront pleinement d'accord sur cc principe.

The only questiOI~ left to be solved would be
whether the Security Cour.ci! can do anything-, in
the matter and, if "c, what. For: var:iol1s reasons
it might seem best to treat this problem as ~
special one, separate from all pJlitical questions.

11 reste encore savoir si le Conseil de serur:te
pent faire quelque chese en l'occu~rence et, dans
l'~ffirm:J.tl'le, ce ClU'il peut faire. Pour diverses
raisons, il sembk pref~rable de traiter cette ques~
tioll comme une question speciale, independa;nment de lOlltes considerations d'onlre ?olitique.

Rules of humanitarian nature were laid down

Des regles humanitaires Dnt He enoncees dans
les lois et coutt.:mes de la guerre, adoprees a La
Haye en 1907, et aussi, oe fa~o[J plus precise,
dans Ies ConvwtioI15 d~ Geneve relatives au
traitement des prisonniers de gllerre, des blesses
et des mala des par suite de la guen·e, conventions
que {'on revise actuellement. II paraitrait de~
sirablc que, en plus de ccs regIe!'; fondamentales,
fitt institue 110 organisme ou une prod~dt1re qui
permit de s'assurer que, lorsque e.::latent des conflits, d'envergure reduite, comme ceux dont le
CO:lseil de sectrite s'est ocwpe, les n~gles enon~
cees dans ces conventions sont obsel'lecs.
Je n'ai pas l'intention de form111er maintenant
une propositior: concrete concernant la procedure
adopter. Toutefois, je tie:1s attirer l'attention
ou COllseil et des parties en c'ause - si, comme
je l'espere, eiles sout d'accord sur le principe Sllr l'inlerel qu'il yt ul1tait a examiner ce ql:e le
Conseil de securite peut fa:re dnns le cas present
all dans des :irconstances analogues; it serait
egalement utile d'ex<:miner le po:nt de savoir s'i!
convient que, en attendant l'institutiof, d'un organisme et d'l111e procedure appropries dans le
cadre de l'Organisation des Nations Unies 011 en
dehors d'cIle, le Conseil demande
:.m organe
quelconque des Nations Doies Dll
tlllC autre
organisation internationale, gouvernementale ou
non gouvernementale, de proceder une enc.uete
S1:r Ies alrocites I'p:i aur<:ient ete co:nmises cn
Indonesie.

ill the Rules of Warfare adopted at The Hagl.te

in 1907 and :1.1so, more specifically, in the Geneva
CO:lVentions on the treatment of prisoners of war
and of wounded and sick in war, which are now
being revised. It WOllld seem desirable if, in
addition to t.hese r!lles of a substantive nature
some machinery or procedure could he established
throngh which it would be possible also in the
case of minor wars. :ike those with which
the Security Council has d~alt, to ascertain
whether the substantive !l11es of the said conventions were heing follOWed.
I do not want at this ::lOint to make any Concrete proposal concerning the particular procedure
t~ be ac.opted. I do want, however, to draw the
attention 01 the Co~mCll and of the parties to this
problem and to the importance of considering1£ they agree, as I bope they do, on the principle
-what the Security Council can do in this and
simi1.ar cases, and whether, pending the establishment of adequate T:l.achinery and pl"Ocedure insicle
or outside the United Nations, the Council shOuld
ask any other organ of the United Nations or any
other international orgar.ization, governmental or
non-governmental, to investigate the question of
alleged atrocities in Indonesin.

Mr. CHAlJVEL (France) (translated from
French) : Several of the representatives who have
made speeches in this deba:e-ar.d they ha\-e
been remarkable speeChes-have pointed out that
in spite of certain appearances, considerable prog~
.ess has been made in the past few weeks :'.owards
a satisfactory solution of the Indonesian que;Hon, in ot~eT words, towards the independence
of IndoneSIa. No one c:lntest; that indppenden:e
in principle. No one denies that it should be
<lchieved quickly. The Netherlands pro:)Qsal to
make the transfer of sovereignty one year e.arlier
is a new fw:tor, the importance of. which cannot
be over-estimated, and which represents a very
important step forward towanls a final scttle
ment.
The Chinese representative has analysed and
commentec1 [417th meeting] on the elements of
agreement [toiting the parties and the elements
of di:;agreemcnts dividing H:em. A round ta"Jle
conference wO"1.1ld obviollsly help to make the

a

a

a

a

a

a
a
a

M. CHAUVEL (France): Plusieurs des rep resent ants Cjui sont InterVel111S dans ce debat - et
leurs interventions ont etk remarquables - se
sunt pIu a socligner que la qt1es~inn indonesienne
avait, en depit de certaines apparences, progresse
l1:1tablement. ces dernieres 3emaines vers uut solution satisfaisante, savoir l'independance de l'Indonesie. Nul ne con:este le principe de cette independance. Nl1l11e conteste la l1ecessite de la realiser a bref delai. La propusition faitc pur les
Pays-Bas d'avancer d'une annee le transfert de
la' souveraincte constittte. a cet ega::-d, 11l: fait
r:ottveau don: la grande importance ne sal1rait
trap etre sotllignee, et represente une Hape tres
notahle ver.~ 1111 reglement final.

a

Le representant de la Cbine a analyse et commente [417emeseance] les elements d'accord qui
rCllniSsEnt les parties et les elements de desaccord
Qui les separent. Uue conlCrence de la table ronde
serait manifestement i.ltile a l'exploitutioll de ccs

5
most of these elements of agreement. The pro-.
posal, made to all parties by the Netherlands
Government, has been agreed to by the Federalists
b\.1t the Republican leaders, while not objectincr t~
it in principle, have made reservations as reg:rds
its application,

elements cl'accord. Proposee i toules les parties
par le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas, elle a obtenu
l'assentiment des federalistes, cependant que les
chefs republicains, sans en ecarter le principe, se
montraient reserves sur son application.

Mr. Soekarno, President of the Republic, wrote
to the United Nations Commission on 4 March
[S/1270/AddJ, appendix 1] that the responsibility for the decision could be assumed only by
the Government of the Republic of Indonesia
£tllly exercising its authority in its territory and
seated in Jogjakarta, Nevertheless, Mr. Hutta,
Prime 1'finister of the Republic, before the
Netherlands proposal had been made, asked in a
letter of 3 Febrnary 1949 addressed to the Chairman of the BFQl [S/1270, amtex II to appen.
dix E] for a joint conference of the parties to
study first, the formation of a federal interim
government; secondly, the implementation of the
Security Council resolntion concerning the restoration of the Republic and the return of its
Government to J ogjakarta,

M, Soekarno, President de la Republique, a
ecrit .i la Commission des Nations Unies, it la
date du 4 mars [S/1270/Add.1, annexe 1}. que
la responsabilite de la decision incomhait all Gouvernement de la Republique, jouissant d'unc plcinc
at:.torite sur son' territoire et siegeant it Djokjakartn. Cependnnt, M, I-Iatta, Premier Ministre de
la Repu1Jliqlle, :l.lors que la proposition des PaysBas n'avait pas enCOre ete formulee, rcclamait,
dans tlne lettre du 3 fevrier 1949 au President dn

BFOl is/1270, piece iointe a l'allllexe B If]
une conference mixte reunissant les parties,
notamment afin d'etudier: premierement, la constittltion d'un gouvemement federal provisoirc;
deuxiemement, I'application de la resolution tlu
Conseil de securite en ce qui concerne la restauration de la Republique et le retour de son Gouvernement i Djokjakart;l.
Il est clair que, a la date ~u 3 ~Cvriel', six: jotl~'S
It is clear that on 3 February, six days after
the adoption of the Cou1H:il resolution, Mr. Hatta apres l'adoptioll de la resolution ciu Consell,
1Jelieved that the conference must precede the M, Ratla consicierait la conference cOllnne devallt
return to the capitol, inasmuch as its pUrpose was preceder le retom dans la capilale, pl~isque cet~e
to prepare for that retnTn, The letter of 4 March, conference avait l10tctlllment pour ohJe! de ~re·
parer ce retour, La lettre da 4 mars, all contra,He,
On the other hand, gave the impression that, Mr,
Hatta's suggestion having been taken over by the donne I'impression qne, 11:. Gouvernemell,t neerNetherlands Government, Mr. Soekarno was no lctndais ayant fait siennc la s\lg~estl.on uc
longer satisfied by it, "Vhile the first was con- M. Eatta, M. Sockarno ne s'en sat1sfa1t plus:
tent to return to Jogjakarta after the conference Alors que le premier se contcntait de rentrer a
which he had asked to be called, the second, Djokjakarta apres la conference dont il dCI~al.l'
once the idea of a conference had been accepted, dait la reunion, le second, des lors que lldce
set another condition for Republican participation. d'une conference est acceptec, subcrdonne la participation republicaine a l'execution d'une nou·
veHe condi tion.
Ce processus pourrait se potlrs:liyre sans
Such a process could go on forever, thoug~ that
Telle
n'est pas, j'en suis sur, l'mte\1t1D~ des partl(,~,
is not I am sure the intention of the partIes, I
J
e
ne
puis cr,oire ql1e, la, sol~tion a. laql1c~1c 11
cannot believe tllat, the proper soh,tion being
taut tendre n'etant contestee, 111 par 1une, III par
contested by neither one of them, they cou!d I'autre d'entre clles, ces parties puissent dcmeurcr
remain divided by disagreement on the order m
separees par U11 diffcl'en;J rela~i~ a l'or~rc d:ns
which the elements of the programme they both leql1d doivent etre abordes les elements cl tlll p,o~
accept should Le approaclled,
gramme dont l'ensemble \eur est commUll,
Comme M, Tsiang 1'!L indique" l~ ,dellat, unns
As Mr, Tsiang has remarked, the present phase sa ph<lsC actuellc, est stnctement h1l1;te aux: f'aysof the debate is limited strictly to the Netherlands Bas et ilia Republiqtte, aim's que le reglement de la
and the Republic, while the settlement of the question indonesienne i,nt~resse toute~ les popul~.
Indonesian question concerns the whole popula- tions de ces vastes terntOlrcs. 11 ser~lt don~ log!tion of that vast territory. It would therefo~e que de demander aux Pays·Bas et a la ~e~tlbll­
be logical to ask the Netherlands and the ~epubllC que de reehercher Une solution, ,d~ lenr dlfferend
to try to solve their difference~ at a m:etmg held dans une reunion tenuc, sous 1e,g1de de b .Co~­
tinder the auspices of the Untted NatlOns Com- mission des Nations Unles, et, Sl ellc, aboutlssalt,
mission and, if that were achieved, to meet de se retrouver iml1lediatement apre3 dans pne
immediately a fterwards at a round table confer~ conference de In table ronde, it laquel1e aum~~nt
ence attended also by the Federalists, who were acces les federalistes ,exclus de la premiere
absent from the first meeting:.
reunion,
Vne nouvelle communicati~n: e~ da~e d~
A further communication, dated 10 Mar,ch, 10 mars, dtl President de la delegab~~ rep~bhfrom the Chairman of the Republican de1eg~t:on
, [S/1270/;1dd.3J, rappelle la pos1t10n repu[S/1270jAdd.3] repeats the Republican posItion 'baI,me. q"i avait deJ'a ele exposee dans tine corn..,"
e
lcalne
already stated in a communication of 28 Febru- munication dn 28 fevner,
a savotr, 9- tlU t;
ary, that is to say, that a round tabl: conference
'
do la table ronde ne pourralt
f ercnce ..
1 jamals
J
could never be regarded as supersedmg the pro- con
,etre conSI'd'ere"
'" co""me
pOl1l'ant
temp
'"
'I acer es
visions of the Council's resolution,
dispositions de la resolution du Consel .

ril .

, BY$onatr Ftderaal Ovcrlcg,
1

BYJ:Ollatr Federaa/ Over/tg.

6

This is .apparently a mist:nderstanding which

~he. Counc.ll ;;hould clear IIp. The provis;ions of

lts ri'SolutlOn constitute a framework intended as
a guide to the negotiators in their wQr~c, rather
thatl ~s h~,rcl ~:H] fast nl1es. The Belgian rl:!presentatlve .:n hI'>. last st.1telllent [417th mceNngJ
recalled, In parbctt:ar, that the numerous resuhtions:of the Connci} on the Kashmir and Palestine
qllest:ons had OCC:l inte;rpretcd broadly in the
·interests of peClce. both by the Committee of Good
Office~ in Kashmir an" hy thf' Acting Mediator in
Palestme. The Council has on r.o occasicn con·
sirlered tbt by its resolution .it was laying cov.-n
the law. It has all the tj.ore reason. to maintain
this yosi~:on in :he Indones:an question since, as
the Belglan representative r.as s;;.iJ-aud I :nust
a.polo~ize for C]tlOting him once more--the
Secunty <,=oun:-il haa no at1thority o~ any kinrl
to determine eIther the fate of a ter:-ltorv or its
allegiance. Tt noes not seem therefore that the
Coundl ShOtlJd permit these formal considerations
to divert it from the task it thought it should
assume, a task which of necessity is one of con:cilia:ion and consists of le:1ding its good offices
to bring abDut an agreement between the parties.

Il J:". a ta, sar.s. doute! ~n malent'::ld1.l qu'il
appartten! au C;onseJ1 de dlsstper. Les dIspositions
de Ce$ resolubons fo~ment un cadre destine a.
guider les negociatel.lTS da.ns leurs trav3.ux, mais
elles ne constituent pas des r~gler.]t::lt5 ir.tangiblcs,
Le representant c'.e I.a Belg:ql1e a :appele notatnIvent, daus sa derllie.€ ;ntcr'-'entio n [41?eNe
s~anceJ, flue les nombrecses resolutions adoptees
par le Cnnf;eil it propos des affaires d!t Ca~hemire
et de la Palestine avaient ete interpretees de fa<;on
tres larg-e. pour le Mr.efice de la paix, au:;si bien
par la Commission de bans offices au Cachemire
que par le Mediateur par interim en Palestine.
Le Conseil n'a, dans H\:C11!1 aut!1; cas. a aUCl1n
moment, estime que ses resolut:ons constittaient
les tabic3 de la Loi. Dans la qnf:stion de 1'Il1do~
ntsie, :1 a d'autant plus de rai~or:s de c(mserver
cette -position que, co'.nme l'a dit le representant
de la Belgique - que je m'ex::use- de der t:ne
fDis de plus - le Consei' de £e.c~trite est depourvu
de toute espece d'autorite, at:.ssi Lien ponr :-cgkr
le sort d'un lerritoire que poer determiner son
alJegeance.. I1 ne: semble clouc pas que le Cllnseil
puisse se laisser detollrner par ces considerations
formclles de la tachl" q\l'il a cru devoir aSSl\oer
et qui est mkessairement U:1.e tache de wr:dliation
('oosi.L:;tant preter 3es bons offices pom 1<1 realisation d'un accord entre les parties.
A cet egClrd, la suggest:on du representc.nt cln
Canada parait heurel:se. Le Cotlsei{ n'a pas manque de noter que le representant des Pays-Bas
l'a acceptee dans les te:-mes memes du commentaire qu'en a presente [418emc: s~a.nc.J le representant du Royallme-Uni. Cl; conconn d'nrinions
me semble er.courageanl. Je ne doute pas que la
Commission puisse en t:rer "ur place le plus utile
part~ en favorisant LIne discuss:or. preIiminaire
Ql1i permettrait S<l.:1S cloute de lenr certaincs incertitudes qui subsistent encore sur les intentiOI:S
reciproques des parties en cause et de preparer
U]1 acco:-cl direct.
La merne Commis3ion 3erait ruieu:x placee que
quiconqne pour defir.ir, ere contact avec \cs pa:-ties
et en liaison avcc le ConseiI, Ies conditiom de la
discussion prc!imina;rc ct pour en ebblir If> prOgramme.

a

In this connexion, the Canadian representativc's
suggestion seems a happy one. The Council will
have nuted Lh<lt the N ctherbnds rep:-esl"ntati"e
has accepted it in the same terms as were used
in th.e. comment!; made on it by the United King-darn representative [418tJ: lJleeti~lg]. I think this
concUrrence of opinior. encouraging, and :eel sure
that the Commission can make the greatest ll.'it;:
of it on the spot by p:'"omoting a prelimrr.ary discussion which WOclld probably help to dispel
certain doubts still remaining as regards the
re;cipmcal intenti:ms of the parti<,.s concerned and
prepare for a direct agreement.
That same Commission would be in the best
positior, to define, in wnsultatian with the 'Darties
and L.1nde~ the C0l1l1cil's guidance, the conditions
and programme of tie rreliminary disC11ssion.

The PRESIDENT (triJlIdatcd from Spanish;,:
For reasons uf courtesy, tJ.c Cubon rep:resent~tive
WQltld have liked to be the last speaker on this
much disct1ssed qllestirm. But. as all the ::zations
which submitted tr.e :1raft reso:ution have already
.o;pClken, r shall, with apologies to those w};o have
now requested to speak, express the vi€ws of my
cOllntry.

Le PRESIDENT (tradlJ.it dt i'esplJg1wI): Par
souci de courtcisie :'aur~is voulu etre le dernier
exposer mon poir.t de vue, en ta.nt que repr~~
scnt<lItt de Ctlba, sur cette qllfst:on c'Jntroversee;
cependant, etant donne que tous les tnfmbres du
Conseil qui ont presente le projet de resolution
ont deja pris la parole. ie me permettrai
d'exprimer l'opinion de mOll Gcuvenement, tcut
en rn'excusant a.upres des autres representants <;.ui
ant demande inte:-venir.
En ma quallte de re~resentant d~ CUBA, j'ai
le regret de dire que Ir.on Gouverr.el11er.t a. He
de<;u de l'accueil fait par le G011Vernement des
Pays-Bas a la :esolution du Con:;til du 2g janvier
1949, resolution que, par esprit de cClmpromis,
la delegatiu:1 ..le C.1ba tLvait appttY~f: conjointement aye:: la delegation de la. Chine, des EtatsUIlis et de 1:1 Nf)n'~ge, bien Que 1es dispos',tions
de cette resolution fussent trap souples.
COn!Ol'mernent a cette re!';nlution, les Pays-Bas
devaient, er-tre autres choses: pHmierement, :remeHre en liberte, inunediate:nent ct s:ms coz:dition, tous les prisonniers POlitiques; deuxiemement, facili:er le retour immediat des dirigeants
indonesiens a Diokiak"a~ta e:l yut: dt1 rctablisse-

a

a

Speakirlg as tbe re-presentative ()f CtrDA, I muclt
regret to h~Ye to express my Government's disappoiulIllwl at :hc manner in which the Netherlands Gov€rnment has receivcd the Cou:1dl's
resolution of 28 ]anuar)' 1949. Cuba endorsed
this resolution jointly with China, the United
States and Norway, by way of comprClmise, although it considered the resolution too eJastk.
In accordance with the Council's resolution, the
Nethetlands should, among other things: nrst,
immecliately and uneonditionillly free all political
prisoners; secondly, facilitate th€ immediate
return of, the Indo:l.csia..l, leaders to !ogjakarta
so that they can re-establish the Government of

7
the Republic of Indone~ia and carry out their
duties, including the administration of Jogjakarta
and its environs; and tl:irdly, immel'intr.ly cease
military operations against the people of the
Republic. None of these three conditions has
been fulfilled by the Netherlands Government, as
is dear franl the statements just made before the
Council and from the. report [5/1270] of the
United Nations Commtssion on Indonesia, dated
I March 1949. What is even worse, the Netherland~ Government has not paid due attention to
the reqnests of the United -Nations Commission
and its Executive .fv:tilitary Board, and has even
failed to reply to some of its co~munications.

ment du Gluvernement de la Republique d'Indonesie, afin de leur permettre d'assumer les
fonetions qui leltr incombent, y comp,is l':l.d~
ministration de cette ville et de ses environs;
troisiemement, cesser immediatement les ope-raM
tions militaires dirigees contre le peuple de la
Republique. Le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas n'a
respecte aucune de ces trois conditions, com:lle
l'ont mOlltre les declarations que son representant
vient cle faire devant le Consei! et le rapport de
la Commission des Kations Unies pollr 1'1ndon~sie en date du ler mars 1949 [S/1270]. Bieu
plus. le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas n'a pas
accorde toute l'atteotion vOl1lue aux recommllndaM
tions que lui ant adressees la COl7lmission des
Nations Vnies et son Comite executif militaire;
les autorites lleerlandaises O'Ol1t meme pas pris
la peine de repondre
une seule de ces comM
munications.
Le Gouvernement neerlarulais JL'en a pas moin5
On the other hand, the Netherlands Goventment is attempting to ha Id a round table con- l'intention de conyoauer une conference de la
ference with the object of recol::nizing the sover- table ronde, dont l'obJet est de decider b reconeignty of the United States of Indonesia, and has naissance de la souverainete des Etats-Unis d'In~
invi:ed the leaders of the Republic of lndo- donesie; il a inviLe les ditigcallts de la Republinesia to attend, although they do not enjoy real que d'lndonesie a prendre part.i cette conferen.;e,
freedom and the existence of the Republic is alars que ceux-ci ne sout pas veritablcment libres
not recognized by the Government of the Nether- et que ['existence de la Republique n'a pas ete
lands, The presence, only the presence, uf the reconnuc par le GOllvernement des Pays~Eas.
United Nations Commission in that conference D'autre part, ce dernier a fait savoir que la
wodd be welcomed by the Netherlands Govern- Commission des Nations Unies pour I'lndouesie
serait la bic:nvenue a cette conference, mais rien
ment.
de plus.
La delegation de Cuba consklere qlle l'acloption
The Cuban delegation feels that the adoption
of any measure which IS 110t in conformity with de toute mesure dont le but n'est pas conforrr.e
the Council's resolution of 28 January 1949 con~ la n§soltltion du Comeil un 28 janvier 1949 est
stitutes a violation of that resolution and a lac)' U(l~ violaiion de ccttc resolution et un mal1f}ne
of respect for this body, which represents the de respect eovers le Conse;1 de securite qui represeute l'Organisation des Nations Dnies toute
whole of the United Nations.
entiere.
Man Gouvernement cunsiden: (,ue, a l'heure
To attempt at the present time to alter the
sense of the Council's resolution amI manoeuvre actuelle, il est partlclllie:oelllcnt grave de uHormer
to push it aside, scemos to us to be a very serious le sens d'une resolution du COl1seil et d'emp1oyer
malter. What faith in the futUre could the small la ruse pO',Jr tentel' de l'e[uder., Com~ent lr:s
nations of tIle '\-'orld have in the impartiality and petites natiuus pourrotlt dIes desonn:\ls aYOlr
wisdom of the: United Nations if they observe confiance dans l'impartialite et clans la surete de
that this organization does not have the same jugement de l'Organisatiol? des N~tions :Unies ~i
jllstice for all nations? lIo,v could they continue dIes constatent que, contralrement a ce qUI devralt
to have faith in it if they observe that it is severe etre cettc Organisation n'a PH"" la meme justice
pott; toutes les nations; comment pOllrraient-e]Jcs
with some and lenient towards others?
conserver cette confiance si €lIes constatent que
l'Organisation est severe avec les unes et accommodante a\'ec le!l <l1ltres?
Quels que soient les liens qtli t\nisscntles memWhatever the relations which same members
of the Security Council may have with the Nether M bres du Conseil de secmite au Royaume des
lands, all will agree that - this nation has failed Pays~Bas, nOllS sonu.nes tous .Obli~s ~e re conto implement the Council's resolntion and is naitr~ que cette natton a omlS cl 3pphque,r les
attempting to solve the Indonesian question in its dispositions de la resol~tion elu. Conse!l et pretend
own way. Same countries may find excuses for resoudre la qt1e~tian llldoneslenne a sa fa<;on,
such an attitude; Cuba does not. My deleg-ation Certains pays par;viendront peut-Hre it exctl.ser
feels that every rnetnber of th: Council has the cctte attitude, m~i<; Cuba ne potlrra pa.:; le fa.re.
duty to demand that the Netherlands should Ma delegation consid~re .que tous les membres ,~u
implement the resobtion without any modification Consd sont tenus d eXlger des Pays-Bas qUlls
or weakening of its terms. Tlle Indc.nesia111eaders eXeCLltcnt les dispositions contenues dans cette
b[wuld be grunted immediate and real freedom; r~soltltion sans arrangements ni demi-mestlres.
the Government of the RepUblic of Indonesia Les dirige~ts indonesiens ~oivent .W-e i;l1meuiuleshould be completely re-established in ]cgjakarta; ment et effcctivelt1ent remlS en liberte; le Gou~
vernement de la RerlUblique d'Indonesie doi: e.tre
th~ cessation of military operations should become
a. reality; and proper :onsider::J.tio~ ,~hOllld .be int<~gralement rHabli Djokjalcac<J.; 1". c~ssatlOn
gl-"en to the Daited NatIons ComllllsslOn, WhICh d"s hostililes doit etre redle: la COmnllSSlOn des
]\tatiol1s Unies ne doit pas etre tenue a I'eenrt et
should act in accordance with the resolution.
doit agir confoJomeme11t <lUX dispositions de la
resolution.

a

a

a

Only after these conditions have been fulfilled
COll)d the Scc"trity Council heed any st:ggestions
which, tht: parties concerned might wish te make.

Ce n'e5t qlle l(Jrsque toutes CC3 conditions
seront remplies que le Conseil de securite pDltrra
prctcr flttcn:ion :IllX proposilinns l}t1e les parties
interess6es presentel"Ont eventue11ement.

.Mr, HOOD (Amtralia): I shonk like to thank
the Presiuelit :01 allowing me to spear\: once
agab in tIllS dlSCllssio:1. I do so because, as is
apparent, the debate_ i~bf'r,innil1g to narrow itseE
down to a discussion of a particular proposal, or
two or three :-e1ated pl'":Jp)sals, 8:-td I imagine that
before very lo~g the Council will arrive to a
point wl:ere it wilt have to de:ide whether or not
to take some step in this rr.atter.

M. Hoon U\ustra:ie) (traduit de l'anglais):
.le remercie le President de me permettTe d'intervenir encore uce fois dans ccUe disct:ssi01~.
J'ai dem<.nde 'a Ja:-ole pnrce qu'il n",e semble qt1C
le d6bat commenc~ a se trouver limite ii. l'cJffimc:l
d'une cert:l:ne proposition, 011, meU0t1S, de deux
Ott lrci:; propositions cor.nexes; j'im:'tgine done
qlte le Conseil \'a bient6t arriver au tncment ou
il devra decider s'iI doit ou nen intervcnir en
cette matiere.

Before I say anything more, I should like to
express my ve7 deep agreement with tl-.e views
which tile President has jtlSt stated all behalf of
the delegation of Cuba; I think they <Ire enti:-ely
proper and are inJeed the enl y pro[)er views which
any member of the Securit'/ Council ::ould express
in rega:-cl tc tbe genlCral ~spects and the geJ1era!
implications of this '1uestion as :t now presents
itself to the CoUllC:t.

Je tie'ls a dire tout d'.1hord qlle je rar:age
absolurnent la maniere de voi:- que l~ President
vient d'exposer :Lt! nom de la de\l~g<J.ti(jn de Cuba;
je cmis qu'el1e est entieremen.t jt:stin.ee et que
c'est vraiment la sec1e opinion qu'] convienne
un membre dtt Conseil de se~urite de fcrn:uler
sur Jes aspects generaux de la question, tc:1e
qu'~l1e se prese:tte en et: llJOlllcnt au Conseil, et
sur l'ensemble de se3 consequences.

By th~ same t:>ken may I say that I have been
sl\rprised al the llTIcor.ccrned hshion in which
other members of the C~Ltnd :'.3.ve dealt with
the gltestio,'1 of maintaining :he Council's own
resolution. Sooe of the membe:s who haye
,c;po1<en were tbemse:ves :m:ong the spcnsors of
that resolution, and the Council is now invited by
them to conside~ in a periectly cool fashion. what
is tnntamount to the illva:idation of its own. reso~
h:tion, On that point, the representative of Egypt
had some very :lppropriate remuks to make at
the last meeting [4IBth] of tl:e Council.

De meme, je me pennets de dice que j'al ete
surpds pa~ la. desinyolture avec laqudle d'autres
mcmbres du Come:1 ant traite III ljuestion du
maintien Cl' la resolution adoptee par :e Ccnscil
lui-me1l1e. Certain~ des repres,~n:ants qui. nllt pris
la parole se trouvaient panni les autcms de cette
I-esolution, et cc sOnt eux qui, maintenant, invitent
le Consei1 a ellvisager avec une parlaite indifference l1ne meSUI"e qlli equinudl'ait a !'an:1ulation
de Cette resolution. Le representant de l'Egypte a
fait 11. cc sujet que1ques re1l1arques tort opportunes a laprecedente [418e-mfJ seance du Ccnseil.

As regards t'l/:': point now reached in the clis~
cltssio:l, I thinJ< that the Council sho·.lld act with
the vr;;ry greatest cure in respect of ~he proposal
made last week by the representatives (lE C<1nada
and China for ,~(lme kinr. of preJimir.ary meeting
or conference between the parties in Indonesia,

An POi:lt ell en est 12. discus5icn, j'estime que
le Consei' devrait 3gir :\Vec la pillS grande IJfl1dence
l'ega,d de la proposition soumi3(~, la
semaine demiere, par le:; repdisentants du Cana.da
et de la Chine, en vue d'une SOl"te de :-eunion oU
confermce pn~lif";1inaire des parties interessees,

Under this proposal, or under certair. i:1terpretations which have been given to :t, the Security
Council is beinj aske-rl tll do somethiug"-whether
by a formal resolution er an informal agreement
within itself is inun<lterial-wh:ch is definitely a
further step beyo'-ld the quite fo~mal adon wldch
it took by the adoption 0: its resolution of 28 January. In all gravity, therefore, thc qlte5tion must
he asked whether any action by the Coun:::il other
than tb<1L laid dowr. in the terms of t~,e January
resoldion is, at this point, either wise or necessary.

Aux tennes de cette propositio:l, 01.1 scion certaines interpretations q:\i en Ont ete dOllnees, le
Conseil de secllrite est invite
prendre - que
Cl' soit par l.tne rbolution forn:.elle 01.1 p::tr l1n
accord tacite entre ses mem:>res, peu importe une nuuvc1lc meSure qld s'eearte nettement de
la decision abso:ument fo:-melle que le Conseil a.
prise cn adop:ant sa resolution du 28 janvier. n
con'lient done de se, demander tres serieusement
s'il est op?ortun Oll necess<1ire que lE CO!1seil
prenne, an s:ade <1ctuel, d'autr~s n:esurcs qtle
celles qui SO:lt p:-evues dans sa resolution du
28 janyier.

First of all, it is dear that notr.jng that has
been s.aid in the course of the present debate and
nothing that has hl1.;Jpened ir, Indonesia since
~¥ anttary SllOUld lead the Security Counci] to
mnoify or weaken the te:-ms of the resolution.
The resolution was tile result ef long reflection
and discttssion both inside ;:nd o~tside he Council.
It took into account all that had happened sinre
the Renville Ag.reement [S/649, appendix Xl],
illdllding-anci this 10 somf' exten: was a concession on the part of the Cotmcil--the :actual
cons~qut'nces, on the spot, of the N etherIands
military <:lction of last December.

a

a

a

Tout d'abord, il est c]"ir ql1e den de Cl' (ui a

ete dit au coms de la prest:nle Ji::;cussion et rien
Ge cc qui s'est passe en Indonesie :1epu:s janvier
n'est de mltlu~ a obliger le COllseil dr :srcllt"ite
modiF.er OIl :l affaiblir Ies dispositions de la re~
~olution, Cet:e rp.,nlutior: est le fnrit de ll1ures
reflexiol1s et de longltcs di:scusslOns, tant all
COllseil qu'en dehors de lui. RUe tient comp~e de
tous les eyenements q'.li se sont produits depni s
l'Accorc dll Renville [5/649, O'JHl're Xl], et
notamment - eec!, u'..illell1's, :-epre:3entait jU3ql.t'n
un certain point ur.e conees5io:I de la part dtl
COllsei1 -- de b situation rle bit resllltant de
['action militaire entreprise par les Pays-Bas en
decembre dcrnier.

a

9

These condition.~ prevail at th'
1
in a morc aentl". form than th l~ d~dm:nt'JPer lapS
but tl
ey 1 In anuary
lCy art not,. as the representative of th~
Ne~herla?,ds has tned to persuade the COlt "I t
believe , m any wo. y d1 O
f f 'm nature ornCl,
crent
kmd0
fr?~ whnt ,they were two months a 0 That
nllhtarJo: tlC!l;:ll1. was designed to sup~r~ss the
~epttbhc-thIS 15 speaking frankly-and to give
t e Netl~erlan~s a free hand in framing the kind
of 5ett~elllent In Indonesia best suited to itself
I~ has In fact produced, however, only an impos~
Slble state of confusi.on, animosity and worse
~11 these elements were present in January and
It was bee,duse of them that the Council de~ided
that ~he tllne had c,ome to take a more positive
part Itself, through Its Commission in the course
of events in Indonesia and thus 'to forestall a
g'rave threat to the peace and security of a large
area o.f the world, At that. time, the Security
Coun~ll was led both to outlme according to its
own Judgment certain. stages of the process of
the transfer of soverell::nty in Indonesia and to
lay clown certain conditions which had to be met
before negotiations to that end cOltld be undertaken.

Cett~ si~,ttation subsiste, pe\1t-etre est-elle meme
plus ~lIgue qt;'en janvier. rn<li~ elle n'est pas,
COlllme le Teprcsentant des Pays-Bas a essaye cl'en
persuader le Consei1, essentiellement differente cle
ce, ,qu.'elle et;ait il y a de:.!x fiois, Cette action
m1l1talre etalt destinee
supprimer la Republique - pour parlel' franc - et a donner aux
~ays-B;s. toute latitude pour regler le statllt de
II.ndonesle de la nmniere qui leur convenait le
Imeux, En fait" elle n'a. ret1;si qu'a plonger le
~ays ,d,a~s un, desordre mtolerable, i provoquer
1 ~ostlhte, et plre encore, Tons Ces elements exista,le,nt, en jUli.vier, et c'est pourquoi le Conseil a
~~clde qtl~ ~e moment etait ,!e~u d'assumer, par
1 m,termedLalre . d~ sa Comffilss10n, un role pll1~
actl,f d~ns .les evcnements d'Indonesie et de prevemr amSl line grave menace contre la [mix t't
la sec~lrite dans nnevaste region dl.! mondc, A
cette epoque, le Conseil de securite a cte amene
a preciser comment il concevait c:ertallleS etapes
du transfert de la souverainete en Indollesie et a
cconcer certaines conditions qui devaient etre
rempties pour permettre d'e:ltreprendre les ne~
gociations en vue de cc transfert.

a

a

A present, on s'applique donner l'impression
que les drconstances se sont modifices, et on
ernet l'idee qu'il serait opportun que le Conseil uc
securite fasse un nOllvel inventaire de la Sitll~l­
tion, Sur quoi se fonele cette suggestion? Si nous
examinons la situation sans parti-pris, nous ne
trouvons rien qui la justifie, Sans doute, entre
temps, les Pays-Bas, qui avaient decide des le
debut de ne rien faire ponr se conformer aux prin·
eipales dispositions de la resollltion du Conseil,
ont presente une proposition temlant a rhmir tine
conference de la table ronde, en l'accompagnant
d'nne offre d'acceIerer le transfert de la souverainete, Toutefois, ceUe proposition comporte
deux elements curieux.
Tout d'abord, les Pays-Bas n'ont pas encore su
First, the Netherlands has not yet been able
ou o'ont paS encore vOlllu preciser ce qtt'ils enor willing to explain what is meant by the con- tendent par la condition qu'ils ont posee devant
dition, stated before the Security Coimcil, that le Conseil de secltrite et selon laquelle les rethe ontcome of such a conference would 11ave to sultats de cette conference devraient etre combe compatible with Netherlands responsibilities. patibles avec leurs
pl'Opl'eS resJlonsabilites, Cette
Such inability or unwillingness to clarify the
incapaeite de uonnc'J· dcs precisions, ou cette
position has created justifiable doubts whether mauvaise gra ce i le faire, ont fait naitre des
the Netherlands objective is consistent with the dontes asse! jllstili.es sur le point de savoir si
objective before the Seclnity Council.
l'objectif des Pay~-Bas est conforme it celui que
vise le COl15f.il de securite.
En second lieu, queUe preuve a-t-on C]u'U soit
Secondly, what evidence. is there that the pro- possible de donner Sltite a la proposition de
posal for a conference on the terms offered by reunir unf. conference dans les conditions offedes
the Netherlands can be put into effect? The par le~ Pays-Bas? Les dirige<lnts repllblicains ne
Republican leaders, as individual representatives vel1lent pas y participer, rn tjl1alite de reprcs~n­
of Republican territory, wilt not attend, Further
t;ltlts, a titre individnel, (lu territoirc republica lO •
more, quite manifestly the Federalists, after ~ome En outre, apres avoir hesite, rnan~festement p~n:
hesitation, have decided not to attend until at dant tin certain temps, les federah;tes ont deCide
least the prior conditions cal1ing for the re-estab- de ne pas prendre part, ~ la cOl:~er~nc.e, tot!t au
lishment of the RepUblican Government are rr.et. moins tant que les condltiOl'S prehml;talre~ v,lsant
le retablissement du gO\lvcrnement republtcam nc
seraient pas re1l'lplies,
Par consequent une conference de la table
In these circumstances, the prospect of a rotlOd ronde comme la , proposent les Pays- Bas, n ' a
table conference, as proposed by the Netherlands, aucttn~ chance d'aboutir. En realite, c'est ce qu'on
is 11On-existent, This was, ill fact, virtually a pour ainsi Eli,e, reconnu, la semaine derniere i
admitted at The Hagne itself last week.
La Haye,
Le Conseil de securite doit donc ecarter la
The Security Council should therefore dismiss proposi tion des Pays-Bas, en tant 9ue facteul" dans
the Netherlands proposal as an element in the la situt.tion aetuelle, tout au mOtnS pour le mopresent situation, at any rate for the time being,

An fl.ttempt is now made to give the immession
tl1at circl1~stances have changed and that it would
be e..>:pcc!lent for the Security Cotmcil to take
fresh ,lCCOllOt of the situation. What is the basis
of these suggestions? When we look at the
position honestly, we find there is none whatsoeyer. It is true that in the meantime the Netherlands, having quite deliber<ltely decided fmm the
O\~tsd to do nothing to comply with the main
stlp1.llations of the Council's resolution has come
forward with a proposal for a round'table conference, accompanied by an offer'to expedite the
transfer of sovereignty. There are, however two
curious features to this proposal.
'

N

10
and SllOUld take its stand on the validitv and
authody of its own resolution. After all, that
resolution itself expressly provides fOT nego~ia­
tiom leading to the transfe:- of sovereignty, in
whi:h Indonesian units, other th8n tlH~ Repubiic,
cou~d ?articipate in the same way as in a rotlnd
table conference. The Netiterlands attempt to
cotr.e forward with an alternative has iailed, as
it wa~ bou:ld to fail, because the Netherlands
refused to comply with what the Security Council
perceived to b(' the essential condi:ions prec:eding
any negotiations.

ment, et prencre position sur la v.alidit~ et l'uutorite de sa ;Jropre resolution. Apres totlt, la
resolution ellc-me.mc prevait expressement des
negodations devant aboutir au transfert de la
souverainete, negotiations auxquel:es des repr~­
sentants de l'Indone~ie autres que ceux de la
RepubIiqu~ pourraient participer de la. meme
maniere que s'il s'agissait d'une conference de la
table ronde. La tentttive d~ \Pays~B<l.s pour
proposer une autre solution a ec.houe, comrne
c'etait fatal, parce que ee pays a refuse de se
conformer a ce que le C:msei.1 de securite cellsiderait comme les condifom esse.:1tielles dcwmt
precedeI' toutes negociations.

This is not therefore a new situatio:1 out the
same sitlt~tion that the Council met and faced in
Janl1ary. From the failure of the Netherls.nds
to find a "'layout of the deadlo~k it had itself
created, from the military facts in Indonesi2.,
from the firm attitude of both Republicans and
Federa.lists iE Indonesia and from the point of
view of the authcrity of the .st-curity Council
and the Uni::.ed Nations, :t is clear that there
is no alternative, at present, to the effective
irr,plementation of the January :-esoltltion,
especially ill matters which are the essential -prere'J.nisites to the negofiations contem?la:ed in that
resuhtion. This conclusion Cllt1110t be evaded.

Le Conseil ne se trouve done pas devant une
situation differente de (elle qui existait en janvier,
Du fait que. les Pays-Bas n'unt pas rcussi a
ttUuver un rnoyen de sortie de l'impasse qu'i1s
ont eux-memes cn~ee, des faits d'ordre militaire
en Indone.sie, de la ferme. attitude des Rcpublicains et des f€dera1ist~s en Indonesie, il resll:te,
du pant de vue de I'autori:e du Conseil de securite
et de l'Organisation des Nations Vnies, qu'tl a'y
a pas autre chose a faire, a I'heure actueHe, que
d'appli<]uer eftee:iveme.llt la resolution de janvier,
notarrunen~ en cc q\ti concerne les conditions pr-calabJes aux r:egoeiations envisagees par cette
solution. C:ette: conclusion est ineluctable.

I submit that it is therefore i:1 6is light that
thc SeCllrity Council should regard the propQs;Jls
now being discussed for some preli:ninary meeting in Batavia. The representative of be Netherlands, .".t the last [118th] meeting of tl-,e Secllrity
Council, was very quick tc seize on a suggestion
that there should be S11(1 a prelim:na:-y COIIf~re:ll.:t to settle tile time and conditions for fle
r::,ul1d table conference originally pro:Josed. He
added that such a conference wou:d be without
f.Tejudice to the Security COltncil resolution.
':'hese are, however, two entirely contradictory
propositions, Any meeting between t'.1e Netherlands and t11e Repul.Jlicans, whl1,the oiject of
cisctlssil1g the time and cond.itions for a rotnd
table conference, would inevitably ;mrtake of the
nature of negotia~iol1s. It was precisely the pttr{KI,s€ of the Cou7Icii's resolvtion to ensure that
in any negotiations the Repul)jc WOl1lcl appear
cS an equal partne~ and with a restated administration, capita: and government We call look in
\-ain in th:'Netherlands stater;ler:t for any gt"arantee that tllis \\iould be the case. How then could
such a meeting, whether under the auspices of
the United Nations Commission or not, be said
to be without prejudice to the Council's resobtion?

J'estime que c'est done en tenant compte de ce
que je viens de d:re que le Conseil de securite
deyrait considerer les propositions en vue J'llJ~C
reunion preliminaire Eatavia que nOI1S eXalnl11011S en ce moment. A la clernihe {418c,iftc]
settnce du Conseil de securite, le representant des
Pays-Bas s'est immediatement declare en fa\'eur
d~ la proposition tcndant reu:1.ir l1ne conference
pn~liminaire en vue cle fixer la date et Les CO:1ditions deh conference de la t~ble ronde qtle SOl1
Gouvemelnf'nt aVCiit d'abord propose de convcquer.l! a ajoute que cette conference prelimillaire
ne porter<..it ?as atteiilte la resolution du Conse.i1
de sCcurite. Cependant, Ci~S deux propositions 30nt
absalulllent contradictoires. Tonte reunion des represen:ants des Pays-Bas e: de la RepubEqlle en
vue de cliscl1ter Iadnte et lp.E conditions d'une
conferenc.e de la table ranee aurait forcement le
caractere de negcdatiolls. Or, la resolutior. du
Conseil a Feciscl11Cllt pour but d'Misurer que,
dans toutes negoeiations, la Repub[iqu~ soit sur
un pied d'egalite, son ad1D:ni5tratio~, sa capitale
et son Gouvefnel1lent etant retablis. Nat:s chercherions en vain, dans la declaration des PaysBas, une garantie quelconque qu'il en ser~ ai?si..
Co:nmel1t peut-otJ dire aJc.:-s que cette ret"1:l[~1I1,
qu'elle ai: lieu sous les ausplces de la Commls~tOn
des Nations Unies at 110n, ne portera pas attemte,
a la resolution du Conseil r

Even in any carf'fnlly framed suggestion along
the lines of the Canadian-Chinese pr::lposal I
l"'1enticned earlier, there is an ul1vn.rrantable risk
of prejnclice ta the Cotlnci:'s resolution. It is
conceivable that st1ch a suggest;on, whether con*
veyed to the parties ar.d to the Commission
formally or illfonnal1y, could he confitled to
certain limited aspects of the implernen:at:on of
the Council's resolution; it is canceiviLbte that the
Cummission could be reql:ested to assist in hnngfug the p;trties together to discuss certain arrange,.
ments deriving from the implementation :Jf the
Council's _ l"esululion. But, I would. say; and 1
think the Cotmc.i~ would do well to.bear in mind,

Metl1e ur.e propositicn soigneusement can,<t:e,
dans le meme sees que. cellc du Cnnada et de In.
Chine a laquelle j'ai deja fait allusion, risqte, ce
que rien ne sallrait ;ustifier, de po:ter atteinte
la resolutio:l tilt COl15cil. Vne P;'oposition de c~t
ordre, qui serait transmisc f'.UX parties et a la
Commis:;:iol"., soit affic'lellement, so it officieu:;:ement pourrait, a la riglteur, cunc;erner sculement
ceTtains points de l'exeeution de la resolution du
Conseil; la Commissie.n pourrait par exell1ple
etre invi:ee a aider a reunir les deux: parties pour
discu:er cert1lines dispositions se rapportallt it
l'applicatiorc de la reosl\lticll (lll Conseil. Je tiens,
cependant, a d~darer - et j'estime que le Conseil

re-

a

a

a

a

11
ther e are risk
~nt e'7~ ibn suc h a step
ns called tlpo n to nm

s which the

.
.
de se t ellir
fera it 1bien
pou r avert! - qlle memc
•.• •
risques que le
pat•.
ues
e
port
,e l,mhahve com
eonellsell nes t nullement tenu oe cuuriL

b'
whi ch is ' or sho ul'u b
clan ger
e, 0 VIOUS to
h
the term s
ed
hras
1yp
a f 1S tla t Owe ver care ft11
be once
ht
mig
ting
mee
a
h
sl1c
o. ref~rence of
/ eas!l
ver
lead
ld
cou
dlSc uss; .ons h~d star ted they
ttaer soY
of
on
ussi
disc
a
f
-to
Jiy
1Tl
l too eas
-al
"1"
l11tion'
reso
's
ncil
Cou
the
of
out
mg
pnncI~ e <.n,s
som e c01l1promis~
tha t discussIOn wou ld lead to
of the Council's
ce
'udi
preJ
e
som
to
re,
and , th.e refo
course, be the
of
r es olut,l?n. .T~at y.roul~ notat, all but 't
ld ,_
n
ntlo
mte
l
ll1a
ut:
I wou ' d
Cou ncil s h'ong
'k W IC 11 woa 1d hav e to be' full y exam me
a flS
'
cl f
suc h prop osal was
an . 1111y wel ghe d befo re any
car ned Into effe ct,

evident po" ,
Un ~?ger qui est DU 'tdevrait etre
"
f
1.
nt
clans
tous rCSl
e m que, 51 sCllgneuseme
, de" "
ion
reun
telle
e
d'un
e
tach
la
ltee
que fu~ deltm
commence il~
l1ne f~lS que Id de.bats auraient
facilel~ent
trop
nt
eme
po.urralent tres . fac!l
questions
de
on
ussi
disc
la
a
dulre
c01;
ment~ -:Con sci] '
clu
n
ltttio
reso
la
de prm::lpe decoulant de
is, d~
prom
com
un
i
t
:irai
abou
~
lssio
ccUe dl~~l
n du
lutio
reso
la
nte
:>orte 9U 11 sera It part e attei
['abord
des
ete
pas
rait
n'au
telle
es,
~onsell: Cert
e devrait etre
1 mte~tl?': dll Conseil; mais le risqu l'on dOnnat
que
t
avan
pcse
bien
eX,.uru,ne: a fond et
stllte a sembl.able proposition,

hav e to ask itsel f
Sec ond ly, ,t~e Cou ncil wot tld
lead ers wou ld
can
ubli
Rep
the
.of,
wh<;t the pos lbon
is adm itted
It
,
be III suc h a -pr~hmmary mee ting indi vidu als conthe
ers,
lead
tha t the Rep nbl1 can
a mee ting or ente r
~erned, WOlt1cl not ;;tte nd suc h
e"en tativ es of any
repr
as
Into suc h con sult abo ns
Wo uld they be
als,
vidu
indi
as
btlt
t,
gov ern men
aps so, but
Perh
ress?
the re ~ntire1y free of dL1
who m they
ple
peo
the
1ld
wOl
mo re Imp orta nt,
esen ting
repr
be
ll1d
rep rese nt, or who m thcy ShO
Tha t
ss?
dltre
of
free
ng
acti
e
beli eve tha t they wer
my
in
1t,
whic
dan ger
se~l1:S to me to be a real
out
ght
brou
erly
?PlnlOl1,. has !10t yet ?ee n propal: the Rep nbli can
t111S pro pos
1ll the c11SCtlSS10n of
ld wel l be plac ed in a false
cou
ed
cern
con
len~e.rs
an invit<ltion to such a
ng
posl tlOn by acc epti
meeti11g.

se demander
En secon,d lieu, le.Sonseil devrait
s republi.
eant
q~elle ser,llt la pos~tlOn des dirig
ce genre,
de
"ire
minf
preli
cam s dans, line niulllo,n,
C'estins
blica
repu
s
eant
st
dmg
les
que
e. admls
eicip
pa;t
es,
esse
inter
s
a~?lre ,Ies ~ers;onmlite
cOnsultades
ient
gera
cnga
et
10n
reUll
la
r,atent a
ants d'un Goutions, non en qualite de rcpd sent
l. Seraient-i1s
idue
indiv
titre
a
s
vernement, mai
te? 11s le
rain
abs? lum ent libres de toute cont plus importion
ques
Itne
mais
,
sera lent peut-Hre
lation qu'ils
tante. se pose, celle ,~e savoit: si la popu
ter Ci'oira
esen
repr
t
alen
devr
s
representent ou qUll
ble-t-i\,
sem
a,
y
qu'ils ont agi en toute libel'te. II
aSsez
ete
pas
n'a
,
avis
ur: dan g;r. reel qui, a mon
cdte
de
mcn
l'exa
de
s
cour
au
ence
rolS en eVld
ins
hlica
repu
s
cant
dirig
prop osit ion: c'est que les
une
dans
tre
met
se
bien
tres
nt
rraie
interesses pou
itation :i ccUe
situation fausse en acceptant I'inv
reunion.

DUnc! IS y no mea

One 1
11'

resu lt of a meetAny agre eme nt arri ved at as a
wou ld bav e to
ing in whi ch they part icip ated lly to facilitate
ntua
eve
and
n
pre serv e thei r pos itio
Gov ernm ent ant]
the re-e stab lisb men t of the
ire the end orse requ
rse,
wou ld ulti mat ely, of cou
ion and of the
ulat
pop
can
ubli
Rep
men t of the
in Sum atra .
ent
ernm
pro visi ona l Rep ubli can Gov
be brou ght
uld
sho
y
bod
that
t.
it pro pos ed thn
wou ld be
t
wha
not,
mto thes e con sult atIO ns? If
ernm ent
Gov
ncy
rg-e
Eme
the
the rela tion betw een
lusion
conc
the
r
aite
and thes e Rep ubli can lead ers
ers
lead
can
ubli
Rep
the
ch
of som e agre eme nt in whi
ch wou ld
whi
ns
stio
qnc
are
se
Tho
t?
had take n par
full y.
hav e to be exa min ed mos t care

:rs

a

P

a 1aqneJle
Tou t accord conclu a une reunion der lenr
egar
sauv
ait
devr
part
pris
ils allr2.ient
le retablisseposition et faciliter ulterieurement
rellement
natu
rait
faud
il
nt;
eme
men t du Gou vem
ulation
pop
la
de
n
qu'i1 recueiUe aussi l'adhesio
proain
tblic
n!pt
nt
eme
vem
n~publicaine et du Gou
organisme
cet
que
ose
prop
On
.
atra
Sum
de
visoire
n'y pren ait pas
participe aux. c:onsu1tations, S'i1
entre le Gouorts
rapp
les
ient
sera
s
part , quel
dirigeants re1es
et
tc
vem ellle nt de saInt pllbl
accord auque1
d'an
n
lusio
conc
la
s
apre
publicains.
des questions
sont
Ce
cettx-ci aur<lient participe?
plus grande
la
avec
lner
fll1t
d'ex
qu'il conviendrait
atte ntio n.

chances pour
A tout prendre, il y a trop de
ibilities of
poss
y
man
too
are
debats proe
des
ther
lieu
all,
All in
proposition donne
and ultim ate cOn£l1- que cette
J,y
de1::
fina1ement,
et,
ons,
ussi
rds
reta
clisc
des
ted
e
trac
caus
pro
urit y longes, qu'elle
Sec
the
for
al
pos
a at~
pro
ectif
this
l'obj
in
a
e
t
conftlsion quan
sion of pur pos
it with out very une cert aine
pt
mine
acce
\'exa
to
rite
or
it
secu
de
into
eD
go
Cons
to
l
le
Cot mci
n tein dre pou r que
ctio
refle
such
that
ible
be
poss
may
est
It
II
mur e reflexion,
care fttl refl ecti on.
to have noth ing ou ]'accepte sans
ide
'ie
dec
de
to
de
deci
ncil
seil
Cou
COll
the
le
chi,
lead
wou ld
s avail' refle
prop osal outs ide que , apre
proposition
e
tout
de
1,
actue
e
stad
au
r,
to do, at this stag e, with any
esse
on. Aft er all, the desinter
e de sa resolution, Apres tout, la
the term s o£ its own reso luti
y dea r position qui sort du cadr
ectl
perf
a
seil en ce moment est parfaite~
Cou ncil stan ds now on
Con
its own position du
and
y
d i
orit
auth
OWn
its
con sist ent with
re et con forme a sa propre autorite
ns of any Uni ted men t clai
leg
r
isio
ecte
dec
resp
the
fnire
old
de
uph
mbe
to
inco
y
lui
dut
take n 1'obligation qui
been
e
hav
ns
isio
gtle)
ne
dec
orga
such
un
n
lierement prises par
Nat ion s bod y whe
t has been said, I decisions regu
tha
ce
g
de
hin
rien
,
Not
.
avis
mon
form
A
s.
per
pro
Unie
in
Nations
eve n does ill fact , conque des ne doit, ni peuH~tre meme ne petlt
sub mit , shml1d, or perh aps
a ete dit
qni
any
has
ncil
Cou
in de
car ry any con vict ion tha t the
c.onvaincrc que le Conseil ait beso de
e part ly ope n doo r nOllS
r sort ir
pou
erte
'ouv
entr
e
port
nee d to look aro und for som
une
arou nd for any - chercher
quelto this pres ent imp asse , to look
e actuelle, de chercher une solution
ntio ns of the l'impass
inte
inten~
1es
the
r
Hre
teve
.s~nt
wha
ptlis
ch,
que
whi
1b
que
thin g
ht be, could so conque qui,
cet ordr e,
aut hor s of suc h pro pos als mig
des auteur:> des propos1hons de
s
tion
as
ted
esen
repr
be,
ily
read
very
ld,
easi ly, and wou

a

I

12

a. com')rom:se witl: prir.ciples laid down by the
Councf1.

pocrrait si facilement etre - et Sf';rnit trffi rapidement - presentee COl~me un :ompromis avec les
principes emblb pa;' le Conseil,

The Council SIIOl"ld take heed of the bad res lilts
Le Conseil ::lc\'rait SOnger aux consequences dewhich would ensue not onlY in Indonesia but plorables qui s'ensuivraienl, lion seulemcnt cn
elsewhere if it pursues any cause which might '[ndomisie, mais ailleurs, s'i1 adoptait une ligne de
be de:;igned to ".:le helpful ill the nrst place, but wn!lvite qui, tout en etant destinee a fatilite>l' le...
which would, in fact, inev:tably be consirlered as chases, au debut, ne n1<lnqueralt pas, en fait,
<l. weakening of the attitude which the Ccuncil
d'etre consideree l'omrne un reIachement de l'2.tti~
llJ.S Hp to the prtsent consistently maintained.
tude qu'i1 n'a cesse d'observer jusc}.1'a present.
It i~ for the Netherlaad~ to .comply with the 11 faut que les Pays-Bas se conforment aUK con~
conditions :ad down by t11e Coun:iJ, a:lcl p:-inci- ditions enance.cs par le Conseil et dor:t les :)rincipally, at this. prf"~ent time, to rehlrn the Republican pales sont, pour le n:oment, !e retablissemcnt du
Govemtnetct to its p:-oper lo::ation at jogjakarta (jauvernetnent repub~icain la ou. il convicnt qu'il
and to provide t1'e facilities which the Nether- ~;Qjt, c'est-a.-dire
Djokjakarta, z:vec toutes les
lands was called on to provide uutler Lile Council's facilitcs que la resolution :hl Conseil les invite a.
,esolution for the. proper funcfor..ing of that lui donnel' pOllr lui permettre de s'acquitter effigovernment. Once it has been re-estab1ish~d, cac:enle"nt ne scs fcnctions. U:1e fois le Got:.vernethen it is, as the President himself has pointed ment republicain retabli, il lui :appartiendra,
out, for that gover~l1len:. acting as a properly comlDe le President llli-meme 1'<'. fait observe:-, de
CO:1stituted an( responsitle body, to decide and prendre des decisions en q~alite J'urgllue rcsperllaps to offer its own wggestiol1s as regards ponsable regulierement constitue., et peut.etre
fllrtl:er proposals t};<'>.t may be made ro, imple- de presenter ues suggC.stiotH .'iU sujct de tout/;'
menting t:le pl1rpose of the resoll1tion in respect autre proposition qui pOIJrrlO.it etre presentee an
of negoti<..tions on the ultimate 5ettlelncnt. Tha.t sujct de l'exec.'Jtion des dispositioll5 de 1[1 :-eSJ~
is t11e proper time for those c.ondit;ons to be ll1tion conCerna..'1t les negoeiations en vue du reg1e~
discu;;;;~d. They shoul.d be disC'ussed only with
ment definitif. C'est .it ee moment-la qu'il conthe responsible governme.:lt; in bet they could. be viendra de. discuter les conditions d:ms le;qllcJles
clisl:nssed witl, :lily satisf<.ction and vlib any les negociations <J11ront lieu. Non seulement e1les
prospect of d\lrability only with the responsible ne doi'\ient etre discnte.es qu'cvec le GouvcrnCl11cnt
government,
responsalJle, mais c'est en fait lmiquement p<tr Cl'.
moytm t!u't::l1es pOIU'!"011t l'etre d'1l11e mal1ie-e~atis­
faisante cOndllisa:"lt des resu:tats durables,
Le GouvemelDt:ut <les :-'aY3-Bas n'est-E pas en
Is it in {act not in tl:e power of the Netherlands
CO\'l'rnment, now ~.t this present time, to comply mesure, en ce moment meme, de Se conforrrer
with that part ot the CoUn::i]'s resolution? Have avec cettc d:sposi~ion de la r~solution du Conseil?
flete been any real argt.:ments acldllced to p,ove A-t-on apporle w Ccnsei1 des arguments VfTito t!le Council that it is impossible for the Nether- tab1!'.s demontrant c.t1c les P::tys-Bas ne pe'.1vent
lands to take steps to restore the Republican pas prendre 11'.5 mesures necessaires pDur retablir
administration in Jogjakarta at once: The only immediatement l'admini~tration repub1i::aine
real reason I have hearc: is that the Netherlands Djokjakarta? La seule rabull ve.ritable que j'aie
COl'S not want to do it Does the Security Council entendu donner est gce ~es Pays-Bas ne nul"-nt
Llccept that argument?
pas le faire. Le Conseil de sect:,rite ;<cc~pte-t-il eet
argument?

a

a

a

General ROMULC (Philippines): I intervene at
b("c~l1se I feel that we could, with
profit to the future course of the discussion, summarize the positions take.n by the parties to the
dispute, !'lS well as the O)lIunents and suggestions
tha: have been :-nade by the various delegations,
th;~ paiDt

The represent.1.tive of the Netherlands has informed the Security Council that his Govcrnment
coes not intend to :estore fle Republican Governr.Jent immediately nor to allow the Republican
leaders to retilrn to Jogjakarta. as provided in
the resolution of 2R Janllarf. He has tried to
persuade the Council that the Netherlands progra:nme of ir.dependence for Indonesia is identi~
cal with that of tl~e Ur:ited ~a:ion5, and he has
appealed to the Council to allow the Netherlands
Government to follow its own proeedme in
achieving this goal ratl:er than the method Olltlimd in the Council's re.<;n1ution. This substitute
procedure would take the form of the Nethel'"~
lands-sponsored round table conference at The
Hague.
The representative of the Republic of Indonesia lHiS pointed out [41Sth meeting] that the

paramount tn!'k before the Council continues to be
the implementation c£ the resolution of 28 Janu-

Le genenl ROMULO (Phitippiues) (tr:J,d'ltit dB
l'anglcis): ]'inte,viens 1naintenallt par:::e que
time qu'] serait utile, pour la suite Cf' nos deli-

res-

berations, de resumer la position prise par Ies
paxties au diffp,-enrl, ainsi que 1es observations et
propositions p:reser.tees par les divers~ delegalions.
Le represedant dl'S Pays-Bas a fait cor.naitre
aU Conseil de securire que son Gotlvernement ne
se propose, ni de retablir immediatemerH le Gouvernelhent republicain, ni de permeWe amt dirigeants republic:lins de rentrer a Djokjakarta
comme le prevoit la :esolution dlt 28 jw.... ier. n
a e5~ay~ de perscader le ConseiJ qtle le programme des Pays-Bas pour l'indc~ndance de
J'Indonesie HIlit idf:ntique a celu! de l'Orgnnisation des Nations U:1ies, et il a demande au Conseil
d'autoriser son GO:lverne.ment a suivre sa propre
methode pOllr atteindre ,eet objectif all lite:. de
su;vre ceHe qui est indiquee dans la. resolution du
Conse.il. La. methode ces Pays ·Has c:lI1siste it
rel1nir a ::"a Haye une conference de la table
runde sous \cs auspices des P::tys-Bas.
Le representant de la Republique d'[ndonesie
a fait observer [418eme' sc~nccJ que la tiklle
principale'du Consei1 continue d'etrc la mise en
oXt1vre de la res:::.hrtion du 28 jU:1vier. Il a decla:e

13

aIy. He h2.S 3t<:ted that :he Netherlands proposal
of a found tllble conference :It The Hague should
on no account be considered as a 5ujstitute for
tte Council's resolution, inasmuch as it is based
on the negation of the primary conditions laid
do"m in that resolution itseli. One of these pri~
n:ary condition:; is the imm~djate restcration of
the Rep'Jblican Government to full authority in
Jogjakarta. ITntil that Government is idly reestablished, i: cannot, according to the representative of the Republic of Indonesia, take part in
any formalllegotiatiolls :lor discharge its rC.'3poQsi-·

bili:ies tinder the resolution. Moreover, the repn:btntative of Indonesia reiter~_ted the willingness
on the part of the leaders et his Government to
hke pa:'t in the proposed negotations, provided
t~ey are held tinder United Nations ,,-t1spices am]
without prej'Jdice to the resolution of 28 January.

The great majority oi the speaker" n: previol1s
meetings :'ave expressed regret and anxiety over
the Nctherhncs failure to:1 give effect to the reso·
lution. This afternOOn the President made a
brilliant ani. able presentation of th:s case. His
statement was forthright, rectilinear and frank.
I am sure that all liberty-loving peoples are
grateful tu him and to the great Government he
:,eprese:1ts. Most delegations have reaffirn:ed their
sl1:?pnrt of the resolution and their cetermination
to see it implerr,ened. SOT:1e have declared that
theit· Governments will never countena:1ce any
policy which seeks to eliminate by military action
one of the parties to the dispute, t11at any settlemcnt on the political fut.erl' of lndonesia must be
reached '.I'i:b the Government of the Repllblic,
and that lherefDre the restoration of tlJis Government is 6e essential preliminary step towards the
kiJ.d of negotiations envisaged 1:y the Security
Coundl in its resolution or tne rotJ~d tr,hle COll~
ference at The Hague prcposed by the Netherlands.

The repre~er_tative of Norway this afternoon
eUl'pbasizec the poi:tt that in the cpi!1inn of his
dl'Jegation a good procedure would be to solve,
first of all, the preli:ninury problems as laid down
in paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Security Cocmcil
reschltion ccncerning the cease-5.re and the ree3tablishment d th~ Re~u1Jlican Government.
Only one spe<lker, as f::.r as I can recall-and
he spoke for a Membet- Slale that is represented
in the Uni:ed N a~ions CO[J.mission for lndonesia,
whose re{Xlrl nevert1Jell':';~ t:nc.nimously lays the
blame br the non-implerr.entation of the resoltltion upon the Netherlands-has suggested that the
Counci! should set aside its decisiull and acc~pt
the Ne:herh.nc1s counter,proposal without any
condi'.:ions whetcve:-.
From this bl'ief stt:TImary one can see that the
maju;ily uf tho~c wio htlve so far stntecl tl1l"ir
views sllpport the Indonesian contentio,. that the
restoration of the Republic to full authority in
Jogjakarta i3 a conJitim .sine qua. non to the holding of any conference uncler :he Untted Nations
auspices in ode:, to implemenl the resolution of
28 January.

que la proposition des Pa)'s-Bas tendant a :'eunir
11 La Haye tlne conierence de :a table ronde 'ne
devait sous at::cun pretexte etre consideree COlllH;C
rempla~ant 13 resc.Jution du Conseil, et<lr.t donne
l]u'eHe se Ionde sur la neg£tion meme des condi.tions primordiales enoncees dans cette resolution.
lint: de. ees cDnCitions est le retabEsserr.ent imme~
diat de Gouverneme::tt republicain daris tou:e son
autorlte
Djokjakarta. Le representant deliL
Repl1o:ique d'lndonesie Cl. cU:c1<ue que, tant que
ce Gouvernement ne sera pas entierement retabli,
il n~ pcurru prencre part 31. ne" negociati01:s
offic:el!es nt s'acquiter des respansabilitesqui lui
inco:nbent aux termes de la. resolution. En outrJ,
le representaot de l'Indonesie a affirme de nou:~
veal:. que les dirigeants de son Gotlvernement
etaient tout di:sp{lsts a p2.rt:cipcr aUx negociatioi-ll;
proposees, conc,ition qu'elles aient lieu sous
attspices des Nation;: Ur.ies et qu'elles ne roiteht
pas atteinte la resoktion dt: 28 :<lf1vier,
'.'
La gr:mde majorite cC's repnfsentants qui o~t
pris la parole aux seances precedenles ont expl'ill'~
les regrets e: les ir:qu.ie~udes s'.1scites p<:x .le hit
ql1e les E~<ys-1:las n'3va:er.t pas t:.xecut~ Its di",
positions de la resolu:ion dtl Conseil. Cet apres:"
midi, le I'rcsiden~ 111i-meme a exrnsr. hri:tamment
et avec maitrise la si:uatlon j il est alle droit all
btlt, parlant sans detOUr et avec prudence. Je sui~
certain que to:lS les pe:Iples e~ris de liberte lui
en sont reconnlissants, comme :Is le sent all Gouver:1e:nent ql1e It Pn~s.jdellt representc. Les de1{··
gations ont. pour la plupac, repete q1t'elle~
appuyaien: la l'es.-,Intion e: rta:iirme leur volonte
de la faire executer, Ce:,tnincs delCga:ions 0nt
declare qr.e leurs GouverneI'.le:1ts n'apptollveront
jamais une politiqne qui chcrche it Hiuillt:r par
une action militaire une des puties au differend;
e11es "nl ajoute cue le sort de l'Indonesiec:m point
de vue politique ne pent e:re regie 1.J.1I'avec le C011CaUl'':; dll Gouvernement ie la Republiqlle et que,
en ccnsequence,le n~tablissement de ee GotlYernement est la condit:on preJiminail'e essentielle qui
doit et~e remplie pOLlr ~uc les negoei-ltions envisagees par le COllseil de sect.ri:e dans sa resolu~ion pt:issent s'ouvrir ou pour <[11e la conference
de la tab:e ronde que les Pays-Bas proposwt de
convoquer i Li Haye pui:>se avoir iieu.
Le ~erresentant de la Norvege a insis:e eet
apres-midi sur le fait que sa delegation es:itne que
la oonne methode est de n::;ullclre C:'abo:-d les
pre1im:naires er,uTI1en:;s dans les pal'?gmrhes ;Jremier d 2 de la rescltl:ion du Comeil de seer.rite
concernant [a cessation des hostilit6s et le retabli<::sement du GOllvernement repub1icain.
Un orateur seuleme:nt, ;:i mes souvenirs sont
exaet-~ _ et c'est le representa:1.t d'ul1 Etat Membre
qui fait partie ce la Commission des Nations
Unies pour l'IlldDnesie dont le rapPo~l a cej.lendant, a l'tlnaninite, rerlclu 1e5 Pays-Bns responsabIes de hnexecution de la resobtion - a propose
que le Con~e.illaissede cOte Sl decision et aLc~p:e,
sans aucune condition, la contre-proposition des
Pays-Bas.
Ce bref resume mor.tre que la n:ajorite des
representants qui ont jusqu'a present expose leurs
vues appuie:lt la these de "bdonesie sdon 1aquelle le retabliss\Cment de la Republique dans
toute son autcrite a D'okja1<arta est l1ne condi·
t:on sine fj1Ut 'tOll de lu· reunion d't:.ne Gl11.ference
qtlelconque sous les au;pices ::les NatiGns Unies
en vue de la mise en cU'"re de la resolution du
28 janvier.

a

a
a

les

14
Now, we have before us a sUg"g"estion nrst
advanced by the representative of Canada and
later developed by the representative ot China to
retommeTlll to tl1e parties and to the Commmis_
sion for Indonesia the holding of a preliminary
cDnferf'l1ce. 'ihe representatives of both Indonesia. and the Nethe.rlands referred to the pro.
pose.c ~onference dl1img the last [418th] meeting,
ant 11 IS not clear whether they were referring to

the same thing.
It will be recaJled that the representative of the
United States in his statement last Thursd~y
{41o!lt lI~eetil~g] sa:d that it would be desirable if

the parties cotl1d COme to an agreement on the

terms and conditions for tbe holding of the pro~

posed conference <::t The Hagu.e, and that such
negotiations would be consistent with t1:e hasic
objectives of the COltneil's resolution. However
it ShO~lld be noted th<lt the United States repre~
sentatlve referred to the desirability of an agreement on the terms and condition", for the ho:ding
of the proposed l;onference at The HngllP, not
as tile first sle? but rather as one that would
follow an essenti.al, prelimir.ary step, namely, and
I quote Mt. AustIn s words ~ "the preliminary step
of ~he restoration of the Government of the
Republic to ]ogjakartu in accordance with t.he
provisions of the Secllrity Council's resolution in
order to remove an obstncle to"-and I u:1derscore these words-"further free negotiations
between the parties".
I stress the words "further free r.egotiations

between the partles" because those six word:,:>
carefUlly qualify 6e kind of conference e:1visagecl
by the representative of the United States, The
word "further" indicates that the conference
would follow the restoration of ~he Republic; the
word "free", that negotiations must be between
equals, and not, 2S the Soviet Union representative intinatcd ltl.St Friday, betwt'f'TI prisoners and
their w.ardens; anc the words "between the
parties" make certain that the Reptlb~ic of Indo~
nesia remains one: of the parties to the dispute
and that the Republican le.-...dets, if they do accept
tlIt iJlvitation, will go to The H agllf': as the duly
recognized representatives et :hat Government.
That is clear, crystal clear.

Nous nous trouvons aujourd'hui en face d'une
'proposition faite tout d'abord par le rtprtscntant
du Canada et que le representant de la Chine a
ensuite Mvdoppee: el1~ tend it reco:nmander aux
parties et it la Commission des Nations Unies
pot~r tlndonesie de tenir une con ference prehmmalre. Les representants ce J'Intlonesie et des
Pays-Bas on,t parte tous les deux, i la derniere
[118011le J seance, de la mn fe.renr.e envisagee,
mais 11 nfest pas sur qu'ils aient eu la meme
chose a i'esprit.
On se souvien: q:.1e le representant des Etatsyn,is a dit, .jeudi dem!er [416~me seance], qu'il
etalt souhaltable c.ue les parties se mettt:ut
cl'accord sur les conditions dans les::;:uelles la conference projcb~c pourrait se tenir a T~.. Have,
et que les negociations qui ~.tlraient lieu dz.ns· le
cadre de cette conference seraient conformes aux
buts essentiels de la resolution du ConseL Toutefois, il convient de remarquer qUe, clans l'csprit
du representant des Etats·l:'nis, une l'ntellte au
sujet des conditions dans lesquelles la conference
La Haye ne devait pas
projetee se tiendrait
constituer un point de depar~, mais, au contraire,
faire suite a une rnesure prelimimjre essentiellc,
a savoir - et je cite lcs paroles de M. Aust-.in"la mesure preJiminaire que constitue le re·
tahlissel1le::lt du Gouvernement de la Republique
a Djokjakarta conformement aux dispositions de
la resolution du Consei! de secllriM, rneSl1re grace
laquelle - je sot.lignc ccs mots - un obst'lde
la ~eprise de :legodations libres ent:"e les
partif'!; sf'.rait ecarte".

a

a
a

J'insiste sur les mots "la repr:se de negociations
Iibres entre [l'!'; parties" parce C]11'iIs definissent
par:aitement him le genre de conference aUl]uel
pensait le represer.tant des Etats-U:1is. Le mat
"reprise." montre. que la conference ne devrait
avoir Iiel: qu'apres le reta~li8sement de la Re·
publique; le :not "Jibr,·s" montre que les negoc:iatior.s doivent e-re menees sm un pied d'r,galite,
et non, ainsi que :1'. representant de l'URSS l'a
mots couverts velldredi de.r:lie:, CQmme
dit
entre des prisonniers et leurs gardiens; enfin J les
mots "entre les partieR" ronfirment que la Repuhlique d'Indonesie reste l'une des parties au
differend et que, si les dirigeants de la Republique acceptC:f,t nnvitatiotl qui kur a et': adrcsscc,
ils ircnt it La Haye en tant q'le representants
officicllcment reCOl1l1l1S de cC'. Gouvernement.
Voila qui es: clair comme le jour

a

r have gone to sOr.:te length to analyze the
original United States suggestion, becaMe it is
possible that it may have inspired thc nore con_
crete proposal that was later Pl1t torW3rd by
General McNaugl1ton of Canada. In the first
ps:"t of his statement last Friday [417th meeting j,
General McNaughton endorsed the idea of a
round table conference at The Hague, ar.d 1 quote
his own words: "provided arrange:ne:1ts are made
so that this conference takes place wi:h the agreement and co-operation of all the parties who are
directly concerned." T':1e Republican leaders have
rejected the invitation issued by the Netherlands
Governrner.t and so, incidentally, have the Federalist3, and fer the same reaSO:I, namely, the
refusal of :he Nether1<lnds Government to restore
the RepL1b:ic of Indonesia.

J'al analyse nS3ez longllement la suggestion
primitive des Etats-Unis, parce c.u'il est possible
que cette sl1ggestion &it inspire les propositions
plus concretes qu'a prese:ltees par la suite le
general McNaughton, representant du Canada.
Au debut de son intervention de verdrrrli df'rnier
[417eme shmet], le general McNaughton a repris
.1 son compte l'idee de la conference de la table
ronde a La Haye "a condition que des dispusitiens soient prises pour qce cette conierence ait
lieu avec l',,-ssenfmcnt ct le conCO'.1rs de toutp.s
les parties directemellt interessees", Les dirigl'ants de la Republiqtle ont reje:e )'invitation
lancee par le Gcuvernement des Pa)'s.Bas; les
federalistes en or.t d'aineurs ,fait autant, et pOllr
la meme raiso:I, ,( savoir, le ref'1s du Gouvernement des Pays~Bas de retabli~ la Republiqu.e
d'Indonesie

A 1it~le later in his statement, the Canadian
representative urged the Security Coundl to assist

Peu apn~s, au cours de la meme intervention,
le representan: du Canada a presse le Conseil de

15

a

the parties to enter upon cited negotiations, and
I quote his words again: "in par:ic:L:lar to remove
the olstacle which now apparently exists to the
participatior. of the Republican representatives in
these negotiations". What is that obs:acle? Mr.
At:stin h(ld prtvictlsly said [416111 meeting] that
is WrlS the rdusal of the Netherlands Government
to rescorc tIle :\.cpllblk of Indonesia immediately
in Jogjakar:a, and I have no daub: that General
McNc.l1ghton knew IYhen he spoke that this, indeed was the only obstacle that steod in the way
of f~~mal neg·:;Iti<ltions.

s~curite. d'aider les :Jades ouvrir des negocia~
~,lOns dlr.eCt~s e~, je, ci~e i nouveau ses paroles,
en ?artlcuh;r a ap.amr l'obstacle qui, a l'heurc
actuelle ':01peo:he apparem:nellt les representants
{~e l~, Repubhque ce ?artidper a ces negocia~
tlons . De' quel obstacle s'agit-il? M. Austin
a~ai~ de;:lare precedfmmen: [416hne seencl: 1qn'il
s aglssalt 4u r~f1~ du, qouvernement des Pays~
Bas de retabltr lrnrnedtatement la Republique
d'Indom§sie ~ ~jol<jalmrta; en prOncn<;ant ces
paroles, le general McNallghton s:l-vait, je n'en
doute pas, que lel est bier! le 5eul ot,st..1.de qui
s'oppose
I'ouverture de l1egociations officielles.

Since the ex:is:ence of this obstac:e has been
generally recognized, the logical procedlue would
have been to discuss the mean~ of removing it.
However, with all due respect, I must confess
that the methccl suggested hy General McNal1gh~
ton is rather that of making a detour around the
obstade, for, instead of insisting upon the restoration of the Republic of Indonesia, he proposed
that exploratory 'li'scl1ssions s:lodd he held in
order te reach agreement between tbe parties as
to the 6ne and cor.ditions under which the proposed conference at The Hague could be held.

P·..11sqlle tOllt le ~ncnd: reconnait en general
que cet obstacle eXlste, il aurait ete :ogique de
commencer par discuter 'ies moyens de le supprimer..To~tefo~s,.qu'il r.1e soit perm:s ce faire
cette obJectlO:l defe~ente, l:1 methode proposee par
le genera! McNaughton consis~e plu:ot a ~on~
tOllfuer l'obstac:e. En efiet, an lieu <ie reclarner
~e retablissement Ge :a Republique d'Indonesie,
I! propose ql1e des pourparlers prepara:oir.'.s aient
heu pour permettre aux parties de pll1'venir un
a.ccord Sllf la date it laqueHe la conference en~
vis<.gee pourrait se tenit· La Haye et sur les
cGndit!cms dam, lesquelles cette :;onference se
dhoulerait.

111 his sl1bseqt1en~ statement, the representative
oi Chir.a was careful to point out that such a
preliminary conference can ill no wise deal witl:
the principles embodied in pnragraphs 1 and 2 of
the resolution; that is to say, with the cease-fire
order and the restoration of the Repnblic. Those
principles, he declared, are settled, and the pro·
jXlsed preliminary conference can deal only with
fle procedure, the time-table, and the :llutual
responsibUties of the parties in regard to their
execution,

Prenant la parole apres le repn~.sen:ant du
Canada, le representant d('; la Chi:1.e a pris sain
de sodigner qu'une telle conference pn!:lillllnaire
ne saurait en auccne maniere :"emettre en ques~
lion les principes poses par [es parag:aphes pre~
mier et 2 de la resolution,
savoir l'ordre de
cesser le fell et le retablissemem de la Republique.
Ces principes, a-t-il declare, sont acqu:s, et la
conference preE1lli::Iaire envisagee ne pourrait que
traiter de la procedure et de la date de le'.1r applicalion, ainsi q:te de la responsaCilite respective
des parties ce sujet.
Etant donne que, depuis h·~, certalns represClltants ont paru raisonncr comme si les propo.~i~
tions du Canada et de lru Chbe concernant une
conference prelimilla1re etaient identiques, il me
semble important de rappeter le fond de cc.s deux
propositions. Si je lie me trompe, le general
McNaughton a propose UHe reun:on preparatoire
ou les parties rechercheraient les conditions dans
lesquelIes la ccnferer.ce de la table rcnde pourrait
se tenir La 3ave, tanuis que M. Tsiang, repre~
sentant de la Chine, a propose une conference
pretiminaire de~tinee a. as~urer I:I mise ~ e:xe~u~
lion des pa:ug-raphes premier et 2 de la resolution
dl1 28 jamier. Autrement dit, la proposition du
Canada reconnait qu'il " a Ul1 'JbstacJe savoir
que la Repllblique d'In~onesie n',. p~s e~~ retablie
~ et dIe dlerdle le contoUTner, lamhs que la
proposition de la er.inc tente d'aboder l'ollslaclc
de front pour 1'ecarrer.

a

Since certain stat:ements have since been made
on the assumption that the Ca:1adian and the
Chinese proposals for a p,eliminary conference
are identi:aL it seems to me impor.:ant to recall
thc suhstance of tbe two statements. Ger.eral
McNanghtoe, if I am not mistaken, had proposed
an exploratory meeting to discuss the terms and
conditions under which the round table conference
at The Hagl1c could be held, while Mc. Tsiang-,
the represen:ative of China, pro?osed a IJre:iminary conference to gllarantee the irnplementaticn
of paragraphs 1 and 2 of the resoll1:ion of
28 JaIlua~y. III o:hcr words, the Canndi!1.n proposal recognizes the existence of an obstacle-namely, the non-restoration of the Republic of
Indonesia-and tben seeks to avoid it: while the
Chinese }ropo~al tt·its m meet the ohstade ar,<1
get it out of the way.

It :s possible flat the conflicting nttitllde, of the
Netherlands and the Indonesian represent;ttives
towards the proposal for a preliminary confe~ellce
are due :0 this confusion of ideas. If tHs is so,
I wotld earnestly submit that before we proreed
any furt:ler it mig-ht be desirable to see either or
both propoEals in black 'led wh:te on pa?er.
j

It is ::lear that the Council must take some
CO:lcrete action. We trtlst th«t stlch action will be
Wholly consisent with its previous decisions. This
means, :n the view of my Govertment, that tl1e

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

Si les representants des Pays~Ba.s e,t~; l'I~do­
l1esie ont des points tie ~uc, opposes a 1 eg.~n1 de
la proposition tendant ~ reumr une con,lerence
preliminaire, i1 est po~sl~le 'l~~ ce sOlt. a C~US7
d'une equivoquc mr ce POI~t. ~ 11 en est blen amSl,
je crois eminemrnen: Suuh21tabl~ q~e les detl~ propositions nous soient con:mltmq~1~e5 ~n nOlr sur
blanc pour que nous puiss10ns les etudler avant J~
POll~sl1ivre plus avanL
Incl\scutablement, le Conseil doil. prendre une
decision precise. 1\OU5 espe~'ons ble~ que :ette
decision sera en concordance complete ave... les
decisiuns prccedentes. C'est pourqnoi mon Gou-

16
Council ought not to embark upon any method
or pro~JOsal wllicll, in effect, would nullify or
set asic.e the settled principles of tbe 28 JanUfll'r
resolution, as the President has so very aptly said
here touay.

v\::mement cstil11e goe le Conseil n" devl"f1it envisager aucl1ne methode hi examiner aucunc proposition qui ;:l1Jmient pour resultat d'an!luler ou de
laisser de cote les conditions f.xees par 1<: resolution du 28 .1anvier; C'l'st d'ailIeurs ce que le
President a si justement fait observer 2ujounl'hll!

meme.
The restoration of the Republic of Indonesia is
not at issue, and it is appa:"em that the Rcpublkan
leaders C3nnot enter llpon any negotiations to
determine whether or not the Republic f:hould be
restored. Nor ca1. they enter 'Jpon any negotiations to decide whether or not they should be
released and returned to Jogjakarta. That also
is a settled point. The cnly sort of preliminary
or exploratory cc,nference they c<.o enter UpOJ1 is
one ttat will discuss arrangements and facilities
for c;:,rryil1g- out these two dccislons.

Le n~tablissement de 1<:. Republique d'Indonesicn'est pa..:: en questio::l, et it e3t evident oue Ics dirigeants de la Reptlbliqt:c ne peuvent PU5 partici?ef
a des ne~ociations dont l'objet senit de determine,
si Ia Repl1)[ique doit etre retablie au :101I, pas
plus qu'a r!es nego:iatio.2s dent l'objet semit de
decider si, oui au :JOn, :Is doivent etre rer.lis eu
liberte et autorises i rentrer a Djokjakarta. Cela
aussi est une question r~gJee. Le seal genre de
confercnce prelimir,aire il laque1le ils puissent Var:icipcr uJrG.it pOUl" objet de discute:- les modalites.
cl'application de Cl'S denx decisions.

I feel constrained to statr- tht any ::.ttempt, no
matter :l>_ow well me<lnt, to C:igress from these
objectives would nullify the standing re:;olution
of the Sectlrity Council and wodd certainly not
enhance the prestige uf thc United Natio:as.

Je mt vois dil.ns l'obligation de db::hrer que, si,
mbne avec les mei:leures intenti:ms, en tentait rle
s'ecartel' de Cl'S nhjf:ctifs, on anl1ule:ait une re~
solution) du Conseil de securite qui est toujOUl'S
en viguenr. et on ne rehausserait certainement pas
le prestige de l'Orgnisation des Na:ions Unies.

] wish to thank the President again for the
privilege of this intervention.

Je lil:~IS a TCOlcrcicr a nouveatt If'. President de
m'avoir permis de [lrencre la parole.

Mr. van Ror;EK (Netherlands): It seems to
me that the present debate on the Indone:;lan
question has taken a con."trtctive turn which holds
(Jut hOleful prospects for a so:ution. Be:ore T
enter ir.to that aspect 01 the rrtatter, however, I
shoukl like to Tc;ply briefly to certain allegations
which have bee11 made in the Security CounciL

ROUEN (Pays-Bas) (t,.aduit de
: I1 m~ semhll?' q\le I;;. presente discussion sur la questioll indonesienne z ptis tlne tourntll'e constructive qt1i pennet d'esperer Q1:e 110·.15arrivcrons
une soluLon. Avant d'aoorder cet
asp~ct dll probleme, je \'otldrais cepe:1dJnl repondre br:eVe111Cnt n certaints allegatio113 qui ont
faites devant le Comeil de securite.
M.

VAN

I'Gj~g!a.i::)

a

ete

The representative of the Republic of Indonesia
has ma(lt: tll~ accusation that mem:if'rf: of the
Netheriands forces have committed excesses
against prls011ers. It is of co;.trse very difficult to
veri:y the correctness cf these ;:larticl1lar accusations. since they mention no specific place or time.
r can say this, h{)wever; several weeks ago
members of thE Netherlands Parliament drew the
attention of the Netherlands Government to thl"sf':
same aCCllsations. In reply, the Netherlands
Prime Minister :nfnrn1erl ?arliament that the
Goven:ment had immediately ordered an investigation and had instncted the military authorities
to take severe measures against any members of
O".lI" forces wllJ might be found Kdlty. I may
add that" thorough-g{)jng i:lvestigation made in
January concerning an earlier accusalion of a
similar natu~e proved :t to be tlnfOl.:nded.

Le representant de la RepuDlique d'Indonesie
.n aCCt1Se les mer;lbres des foxes neerl<wdaises
d'avoir commis des exces cuutn: de~ prisonnicrs_
11 est evidemment tres diftidle de verifier l'exactitude dt C~ 'lccl.lsatioll.", car le l·epresed:wt de la
Republiqce ne donne aucttne indict-tion pni:eise,
ni <jUDo-ut au li!'ll, r:i qu.:.nt a la date. ~e pellx
cependant dire qce, i1 y a quelques; semalncs, des
membl"es du Parlement neerlandais ent at:il"e l'attt;ntion du Gouveraelllent neerlandais sur ces
memes accllsatio:ls. Le P~emie~ ylhistre des
Pays-Bas a aIors infofme le Pulcmcnt que le
Gouvernement avait immediatement ordonne une
elHjUcte et qu'il ava:t conne l'ord~p aux a\ltDrites
militaires de prendre des mesures sevfxes c.ontr(!"
tout memhr(' de;; forces neerla:tdaises dont la
culpabilite serait ehblie . .Te puis ajOtlteT qtl'unc
enquete rainutieuse, effectuee en janvier l.a suite
d'accllsatiO!l;; analogues, avait prouve qu'elles
etaient sans !onc1err.ent.

I am surprised, how~ver, to hear such acctlsatiom from the side of the RepuJlic, since even
apa:t frolll the countless acts of unmentionable
cruelty and tcrr.)rism commrtte1 by R~pl1bli­
-cans 'who infiltrated behbd our :ines before the
police :letion, e_videl:ce which felt into our hands
after 19 January proves tba1 men of the Republican army perpet~ated excesses on a very large
scale. As an exehang-e of suc1, 3c\:u:;ai.iullS is
extremely distasteful t::l me, 1 sha11 mention only
one such ilJst<Jllce; during -the represssion of the
MUSED rfbe1"liol1, in the city of Madiun, 8,000
commun:st pri~nnI"T~, mostly men, but also women

POlJrt,lllt, je sui" sllrpris d'erJtendre de tellcs
aCCll<:.ntirm<:. de la part de la Republique, ::ar, sans
parler des actes inno:nbrables ee c:ruat:te et deterror:sme commis par les Republicaim ql1i
s'etaiellt in5Jtres a I'arrierc de :lOS lignes aV;,lnt
l'operation de p{)lice eft'ectuee par les Pays-Eas,;
les preuves qui sont tomMes entre nos mainS
depuis le 19 janvier, inCiquent que des membre;;
(le. l'Do-rme.e nfpublic:line on! r.otnmi;; ee multiples,
exces, Etant dorne qU'Ull echange de te:Je~ ncct]Batior.s. ~'est e.x:tremement desagreable, je me'
borneral a mentlOnn~r un seu] exemple. Au cours,
de la repression de la rbellion de 11: usso, clans la.

a

17
and cbildren, were massacred by the TNP-that
i5, the U.epuhlic<'ln Army-against express oraers
£rom Jogjakar:a,

villc de Madiun, 8.000 pri~r.niers C"Jr.lmunistes
- pour la plupart des hon:mes, mais egalement
des felllllles et des enfant" - ont ete ma.5ilacres
par la 11'1]1- c'est-a-dire I'armee reput,li.:::aine ~
rnalgre les on./res formcls de Djokjakar-ta.

Mr. Palar has based some of his objcctior.s to
the new N etherla:1ds proposE! on the provisions
which were reeen:ly introd:tced into tile Netherlands Comtitution i:l vrdeI' to rellder possj")le the
transfer of sovereignty to Irdonesia, <'.nd by Wh;l;h
pro:visio;l5 we are. obvicnsly bo:tnd.

\If, Palar a fonde certaines de ses :Jbjecuolls
contre la ~ouvelle proposition des Pays-Bas sur
les dispo.siti?ns C;l1i ont {:re n~cemment a?portees it
la Constttutlon des Pays-Ba3 afin de rer.dre possibk le tral1sfert de sotlvlOrait'ete it l'Indonesie, dis~
positions par lesquelles nnus sommes evicemment
lie::;.

In the first place, he claimed that these provisions did not en:body the result 0: previoCls consultations, and he challenged the Nether:ands
Governmen: te deny thk Furthermore, Mr.
PaIat asked me how the transfer of real and
reconciled with
complete ~ovet'f.ignty could
article 208, sub-sections 3 and 4 of the )1'etherlands Constitution. I shall be glad to meet Mr.
PaIat's challenge and answe:- his qlleshon, which
is not c.ifficult.

M. Pa[al" a pretcnGu, en premler ~iell, que ces.
dispositions ne tenaient aucun compte du resultat
des consultations precedentes, et :1 a detik le Gou~
verr.ement neel'landais de k cementir. De plus,
11. P.I:llar m'a denande. comment Ul: transfert
effectif et complet de souverainete ;lCunait etre
concilie ::lve<; les parngraphes 3 et 4 de l'artide
208 de la Constitution des P;;.ys-3as. Je wis
ltetueu]( de potlVoir rdever le den lance par
M. Falar et repondre, sans la n:.oindre dif-fiwlte,
a 5.:'1 question.

I must first of all point uul that the aim cf the
amelldmeuls to at'.r CO:lstitution was to render
possiJle :he cre;;tior: of a new legal framework
f.:"lr fle relationship jetween the N et1:erlands and
Indonesia. This was in acwrdance with arLicle 15
of the Linrgadjati Agreemen:,2 in which tiae
Netllerlanc.s Government undertook the oblig"ation
"to ad;ust the eonst-itutional international position
of the Kingdom of t:Ie Nethe:,l?nds to the new
;;it:.tation".

le d0is faire !'en:arquer, ell premier lieu, que le
hut des. 3mendements :Ipportes a notr:; Constitupermett:-e la crea'icn d'une nouvelle
tior. et!lit
base legale pour les relations entre les Pays-Di'.s
et ~'Indon~sie. Ceci emit ronfonne a I'article 15
de l'Accord de Linggadjati 2 , at:x tecms duqud
le COUyel-ner:lent 0e.s Pays-Bas ~ a.ssu:ne l'obliga~
hon "(:'adapter le statut cQllstibtio:lrel et international du Rcyau:ne des Pays-Basa la situation
1"ouvel1e".
L'artide de la Const~tt:.tiOJ: lllentionne par
M. Pa:ar. tel ql1:j\ a
amenee et qui, je le c:'ois,
est devenu l'article LOY, debute par le passage
suivant:
"Dam la prepara:ion et l'etablissement du
nouvel ordre legal, res principes u'lxql1e!s OIlt
abouti les consuttatiol:s mutuelles anterieures, tels
qu'ils sont detinis clans 1'~5 puragraphes snivants
de cel article., sewnt observes,"
Il ressort de ce passage que led it article
etablit ccrt!l-ins p,.iJ:("ire.~ qui doivent constitue, 1a
base du nouvel ordre legal, ptilldpes decodant de
com:ullatiou5 lnutuelles ;<ntr.rieures, En conse~
quenee, les paragraphes su:vants Cl" cet article
enumerent lts principcs qui ant
adopt~s en
commun par les Pays-Eas et par la Republiqne
d'Indonesie, aUK tenm:S des Accords de l.inggadjati et du Ren'l:ille.

ce

The article of the Constitution :'derred to by
:Mr. Palm, whitb I believe in lhe meantime to
have 'Jeen rentlmbered 2.09, as amende:i, opens
with the following sub-se::t:on:
"In t:1e prepill-atio'l <lnd eSlahH~lmlent 0: ,:he
new legal oreer, tl'.e result o£ p.st mu:ual consultation, as it is circumscribed in the io:lowing
clause of tUs articie, shall be observed.'"
It is clear from this begir:n:ng- that the article
lays down certain ;:Jrinciples which are to constltute the b:.nis of the rew legal order and whicll
resltlt from pas: mlrtuaJ car:sultations. Consequenily, the following sltb-sections o£ the article
enumerate the principles which hac! been agreed
upon by the Nethcdands and tbr: Repub:ic of
Indonesia in the Unggadjati and Rmm::te Agreements al:d adlH:red to hy the Federa1i.'it.'i in tlle
course of later conversations.
Stlb-sectio:l 30f the ar'tide, which WitS mentioned by Mr. Palar as :orming an obstacle to
a tn.nsfer of sovereign)', says exactly the same
thing as article 8 of the Linggadjati Agreement,
which was signed by the Republicans and which
reads:
"The King (Queen) of the Netherlands s.hall
be at the head of the NetIJerlands-Indcnesian
Union."
Likewise, sllb-section 4 of the amended article
209, to which ~Ir. Palar further ohjected, is a
pttre re?etition ill different words of article 7,
paragra?[13, article 10, paragrapn 1, at,d article 7,
I Tellgan: Nati~nt.l lndo'lts{a.
• See Political E'l/ent,s it!. the Republic [,1 Indonesia,'
Netherlands lnformatio:\ :aur~u, New YDrlo:,,{'~ge 34.

oe

etc

etc

Le paragraphe 3 de :et article, qt:i constitue,
selon M. PaIar, un obstacle a un tronsfert de
wuveraincte, dit exaetf':11ent la meme c.bose' que
le te..xte de l'article 8 de j'Accord de Linggldj<;ti,
qui a ele signe par ies Replrblicains et qui es:'
ttidige comHle suit:
"Le Roi (la Heine) ces P<:.ys~J"s sera a. la
(ele ne l'Union neerlando-indonesienne."
De ffitllle:, le: pal'ugrzphe 4 ,-le !'article 209, iel
amende et contre lequel M. Palar s'est
qu'il a
egalell1ent eieve, n'cst q\l'une repetd()o, en termes
differents, de ]'article 7. pa:agraphe ;), de l'article

ete

1

:l

Tell{/iJTfJ Nati~IlIJI 11ldonlsi.l,
Voir The PrJlitteai Jivmts ill till: Rt'f.llb/;: "I ht/lO-

ne-sia, publi! ~r le Bureat\ d'inforrnafon des Pays-&s

11 New-York, fa'ge 34,

18
paragraph 1, of the Linggac1jati Agreement. It
lays down the purp0!ies of the Netherlands-Indonesian UniolL, as ag,reed upon between the Kethr.r~
lands and the Republic, ard expressly subscribed
to by the Republic in the Linggadjati· Agreement.
I shall not take up the time of this Council in
reacing out all these provisions, but if ~my of
the representatives are interest~u, I shall be glad
to provide them with the text.

10, paragraphe premier, et de l'article 7, paragraphe premier de I'Accord ee Linggadjati. ee
texte enonce les buts de l'union entre le:> Pays-Bas
et l'Indonesie, tels qu'iLs ant ete elabores en C0111mnn par les Pays-Bas et par la R~[lubl:que, et
auxquels la Republique a expressement souscrit
aux termes de l'Accord de Linggadjati. le ne vais
pas abu:;cr du temps dont dispose :~ Conseil en
donnant lecture de tontes ces dispositior.s, mais
je serms henreux de f011rnir ee texte aux rep resentants qui seraient interesses a le consulter.

In connexion with this sub~sectiun 4 or
artkle 200, which I have just mentioned, I wish
only to clarify one partic:.llar expression for the
benefit of Mr. Palar and the members of the
Council who might have been disturbed by his
statement that this sub-section stipulates that. the
Union would guarantee jLlridical warrants. This
expressicn "juridical warrants", to which reference was repeatedly made by Mr. Palar, i~ a
somewhai illex<\ct and rather confllsing translatlO:1
of the Dutch word recht;;zekerheid, \vhich could
perhaps ·Jest be translate,~ by ':iuv!olability of.1i!:
and pro')ert)'" or by constitutIOnal secunty .
It mean.:; the essence of a State rt\led by law as
opposed to a police State. It signifies something
like the principle of the famous habe;J$ corpus act
in Anglo-Saxon law.

A propos de ce par:agt'aphe 4 de l'article 209
que je viens de mentionner, je voudrais seulement
preciser le sens d't:ne expression a l'intention de
:vI. Palar et des membres du Conseil qtli auraient
pu etre troubles par sa dedaration_ D'apres
M. Pahr, ce paragraphe stip1.l1erait que I'union
se porterait caution des garanties juridiques.
L'ex.pression "garanties juridiques", qui a He
mentior.nee plusiems fois par M. Palar, n'est pas
tout a fait exacte. Cette traduction du mot ne.erlandais rechtszekerheid prete a confusion; cettt:
expression devrait plut6t etre traduite par "inviolabilite de la person:le et de la propriete.", ou bien
par "secul"ite constitutionnelle". Elle se rapporte,
en substance, it un Etat vivant sous le regime de
la loi, et non sous un reg-ime policier. Le concept
est analogue a cellti que tradui: le fameux principe
de l'haoeas corpus dans le droit anglo-saxon_

•

Furthermore, the Federalists also agreed to
these different principles dming conversations
which took place between them and the Netherlands Government in September and October of
ta~f year. It is therefore pede:t!y correct to say,
as was done in the Ne:her1aads rroposal, that
the ame:J.ded article of our Constitution lays down
the result .md nothing but tbe result CIf past
mutual consultatior.s, and I do not see how the
Repl1blic can ?ossihly deny this. The very purp03e
of the reference made in the new Netherlands
proposal to the amended provisions of ottr Constitution was: therefore, to make clear that the
Netherlands :ntends in the coming conversatio:1s
te base. itsdf on the agrcewents already ~e:trhed,
and we presume that the Republic intends to do
likewise.

De rlllS. l~s federalk.es ont' egalement adhere
aces differents principes au cours des conversations qu'its ont eues avec le Gouycrner.Jent des
Pays-Bas en septembre et oetobre de I'annee
derniere. Il est donc parfaite:ncut exact de dire,
l:unlllle le fait la propoaition des Pays-::1as, Ilue
l'artic1e amende de notre Constitu:ion enonce le
l·esultat, et rien que le resultat, de consultations
lIlutue1les anterieures, ct je ne vois pas comment
la Republique potlrrait le nier. Le but de la reference faite, clans les nol1vt:lle~ Pl':.JpositlOI1S des
Pays-Bas, aux d:spositions amendees :le notre
Constitlltion, etait donc de preciser que les PaysBas ont l'intention de se fonder, au coms des
futures conversations, SUI" les accords prece.demment conc1us, et COllS presurr.ol1s que la Rept:blique a I'intention de hi:·e de meme.

I may finally mention that the preceding article

articles, states that a new legal order shall be
established on the basis of the outcome of past
and futltre ltutual cOnsdtation among the representatives of the popu1ations. This makes it all
tl-:e more cle~r that the :uture situation will have
to be the result oi n. freely accepted agreement"
betweer. equal and sovereign parties.

Je vOl1drais finalement medionner que \'artic1e
precedent de notre Constitution, qui est le premier
des nouveallX articles, stipule qn'un nOl1ve! ordre
legal sera etabli compte tenu des resc.ltats des
consul:ations mutuelles passe-es et a venir entre
les representants des populations. Ccb fa1t reswrtir plus cbir~ment enco~e que la situation
future: sera l'aboutisserr.ent d'un accord librement
conelu entre des parties egales et souveraines.

On another score Mr. Palar thought he was
likewise 'justified in questioning the real significance of the transfer by the Netherlands of
sovereignty to the United States of Ir.donesia.
He referred in this respect to a statement attributed by a British correspondent to Mr. Gieben.
Allow me le reassure Mr. Palar on this point
as well. The passages quoted by Mr. Falar are
from an article by Mr. Woodrow Wyatt pUblished
in London in the Ne1u Statesman and Natio1t of
5 March la.st. It C(]ntain_~ this correspondent's
impressions of the conversations between Mr.
Gieben and the Republican leaders at Bangka,
conversations at w'lich the correspondent had flot,
of course, been present. From what sources the
cont'..'iponder.tobtaincd his information is not

M. Palar s'est egalell\€nt c:u fonde a mettre en
doute, a un autre point cle vue. la signification
n~ene du transfer! aux Etats-Unis d'Indonesie de
la souverarnete exercee par les Pays-Bas. I1 a
mentionne a ce prapos une declnra~ion attribuee
M. Gieben par un cCirrespondant britannique.
Pt:rmeltez-t:Joi de ra.'lsurcr M. Pa!nr egalemcnt
sur Cl': point. Les passages cites par M. Palar
proviennent d'un article de M. Woodrow Wyatt
publie a Londres dam le New Staiesman ami
Nation du 5 mars dernier. Cd article fait etat
des impressions de ce correspondant au suje: des
conversations qui ont eu lieu a Banka entre
M. Gieben et les dirigellllts republicains, conversations auxqueUes ce correspondant n'avait natureI_
lr.ment pas assiste. On ignore de quelle source cc

0: om Consl:lution, which is the first of the new

a

19

know."!, but at any rate it does flot come irom his
own observation. The contents of the :trtirle it!';elf
show dearly that the account of what Mr. Gieben
was alleged to have said does not originate with
Mr, Gieben himself, it is the writer's own jnterpre~
tation, probably based on heresay. In addition,
the impression is created that the writer was
not familiar with the principles agreed to by both
parties in the Linggadjati alJd Renvillt AgreeI:le:lts pertaining to the Netherlands-Indonesian
00ioo, which I llave mentioned before.

correSpO}HiRnt a obtt'nl1 ces rcnseignements. mais J
en tOltt cas, i1 ne les a pas eus de premiere main.
Le contenu de ['article 1DOn~re netterneul que le
compte re:lclu de ce que M. Gieben a"_trait declan~,
n'a pas ele fourni par M. Giebcn lui-meme; il
s'agit d'une interpretation de l'auteur, interpretation ':ondee probablement Sllr oes rumc:urs. De
plus, 01'_ <i l'impression que l'auteur n'est pas 4ll
eournnt des printipes :tpprollVes pal" les dettx
parties aux tennes des Accords de Linggadjati
et 0U Renville relatifs
l'union entre les PaysBas et l'Indonesie, a::cords que j'ai deja mentionnes. ,

Mr. Palar also boasted of imaginary successes
and victD~ies by tbe gl1errmas. He mentioned only
one specIfic example of such successes, which,
however, is typical of these claims, He daimed

M. Falal' s'est egalcment "ante du succes et ces
"idoil"es imaginaires des partisans. 11 n'a mentionne qu'un exemple precis de ces succes, ex:t:~nple
qui est toutefois caracteristique de ces pretentious.
M. Palar a pretendu Ilue les lroup~.~ republicaines
avaient occupe temporaitement Djokjakarta la
fin du mois de fevricr et qu'elles s'efaient retirees
apres aYoir realise le but politique de cette
offensive,

that Republican troops temporarily occupied ]ogjakarta at the end of February, and withdrew
after they had achieved their political objective
in launching this a~tack.
V\'hat actus.lly happene,d was this: a: al~out

6 o'dock in the m::ll"ning of 1 March, }ogjakarta
was att:l.tked from three sides simultar.eCllsly by
grOU[)S of guerrillas. The attackers never got any
farther than the o~ltsk~ns of the city, where they
were repelled with hea,'y loss!:s. At 11 o'clock the
same morning, comple~e peace reigned once more
throughout [he city. The losses of our t~oops in
this Repl\u1ican "victory" were three soldiers and
tljrce policemen bller1,

In order to dispel an>::1 doubts abollt t:1e military
too should highly appreciate it if the
Sec:urity COlmcil WQuld nsl( the United Nations
Commi..,..-ion lor Indonesia to forwarC: the com~
plete reports d its military observers on the
military sitntion.
~it.uation, I

a

a

Voici ce qui ,'est passe r~el1ement: le ler matS,
vers 6 ht:ures du matin, Djokjflkf\rta a ete atta·
qtlee de trois cotes par des groupes de partisans.
Les ussaillants n/onr jamais depasse les faubomgs
de IQ. ville, et ils ont ete repousses aycc de loordes
pertes. A 11 heures du matin, uoe paix complete
regnait a nom:eau dans !oute la vilk, A ~a :!;uite
de cette "yietoire" republicaine, les pertes cl,;: 110S
troupes se sont elcYI:t:,:; a trois sold:lts et troi~
polieiers tues.
Afin de dissiper les doute~ qui pcuvcnt ehCOr~
exister au sujet de la situation militaire, je serais
reconna:ssant au Conscil de sec\.1rite d~ demander
a la Commission des Nations Unies pour 1'1ndollesic de lui ellVOYPT 1es rapports de ses observateurs militaires ee sujet.

a

Mr. Palar and some other speakers have laid
much empl1<~sis On a statement contained in
appendix II of the SllPP lell1entar.v report of tht:
United NatiQllS Comoission for Indonesia, to the
effect that the Contact Committee of the Federalists had in their conversations with the Republican
leaders come tD ucderstand the. necessity of restoring the Republican Government as a condition
sine qua non for its pllrticipation in fle round
table conference. I n1l1st point ont that this
statf'tl1ent is taken :rom appendix II et document
Sj1270jAcldl, which contains a Republican re;lOft of the conversations in question. I can therefor leave its contents to the responsibility of it"
Replttlican authors, <t5 long a~ it 11,1s found no
con[mnaUon from the Federalists themselves.

M. Palar et certains autresor<!t",nrs ont beau~
coup imiste sur Ime declaration c<:mtcnue it l'annexe II Ju rapport .~tlpplell1el1taire de la Commission des N auons Unies pour J'Indonesie, de-.
claration selon laQ11elle le Comite de liaison des
federaIistes aurait reconnu, i la suite de ses conversations avec les dirigeants repuhHcains, Cjlte le
retablissement dll GOllVel'llelllent republicain nevrait etre une conditioa .line qua nolla. sa pa:-tieipahon <'I.' la cunference de la taIlle ronde. le dois'
faire rema~que.r que eette declaration provient de
l'~nncxe 11 du document S/12701 Add.l, qui re~·
produi: un compte rendu republicain desdites
conversations. le pet1x done Jaissel' la responsabi11te de SOll content! it ses mlteur5 reJlllblic~illS
tant ~u'i! n'y n pas ell de confirmation de la part
des federalistes eux:-melIles.

I should like to draw attention, huwever. to one

Tt'" voudrais neanmoins attirer :'attention du
Co·nseil sm un aspect fr.appant de cc;; ucclaratiou3,
qui iont res50rtir une tend:.mce qui, cOnJtrle je l'ai
fait rerI1arquer prtCt?del1lment, se :r.lauHc:stf'. thez
pll1sieuTS rnelT.bres du Conseil. Cbaque £ois que
Ies feJeralistes approuvent le point de vue des
Pilys~Bas, leur opinion est rejetee comme celle
d'un groupe :11' fantoches, qui n'a, de ce fait,
atlCUne valeur. Mais, aussit6t que ces represent::lnts croient apercevoi-r des divergences entre le
point de vue des federaJistes et le notre, leur point
de vue est immediatement acclame comm~ la
preL1ve la plus sure gll~ l'attitude des P::lys-Bas
est indefendable. Je voudrais que ces represel1~
t:l.nts u<:ceptcnt entin la .~imple explication c.e ce
qlli leur apparait comme une contradiction inex-

striking aspect of these remarks. It is typical of

a tel1c.:~ncy which I 11aye noted bef{jre on the part
of several representatives at this table. 'Whenever the Feder;&~ls ::lgree with the Netherlands
point of view. their opinion is disca,ded as that
of puppe.ts, Wllich has no value whatsoever. As
soon, however, as these representatives think they
detect any signs of a FederaEst view which differs
from ours, it is imrne.diatdy loudly hniled as the
mo~t trustworthy eVIdence of how Wl'Ol:g tlle
Nelhi::rlar:ds atttudc is. I wish th"se representatives CD111d at last accept the simple and tnte
explan~ti(]n ef what to them appears to be an
-inexplicable inconsistency on the part of the
Federalists: that 6e Federalists are as eager

20
Jlil.liollil.lists as the Rcpuhlical1s, and 11avc the
same U1Il1 of speedy independence fOt Indor;esia,
bllt that their aim and methocl difff'ts in that
the.' do uot want an Indonesia dominated by a
Hepnblicat. minority.

plicable de :a part des Ter_er;[li~tf'_s: en effet les
federalistes ne sont pas mOllS nat~om.liEtes' que
les Republicains, et ils sont tmt aussi desireux
d'obtenir, aussi rapiderr.ent tlue possible, l'independance de l'Indoneste, l11ais lears buts et leurs
methodes sont differents de ceux dl::~ Repnblicuins, en ce sens qll'ils ne desirent pas que ['[udonesie soit dorninee par une min:Jrite republicaine.

7his brings me to a puint touched upon by thc
rer-re,sclltativc. o[ Chin.a in bs speech [417th
mrd1l19 L, wllH:h. was c?arac.t~rized by t]1e slime
COllstrttchve az:.d l111partl1ll. spmt that is always the
ha~lnlark of hIs :nterventlom. On that particular
po:nt, however, ] am afraid he misunderstood my
remarks. Mr. Tsiang said, if I remember cor~c(:tly, that, if the prestige of the Federalists
l'Voult1 suffer from the immeciate r(!storation of
t]l~ Republic in Jl)gja~4rta, that pre.~tigc apparently depended upCln :Ketherlands military power
al1d W~$ therEfore very we~.k indeed and did not
cc,nstitnte a Rood argument aga.inst t11e restoration
01 the Republic. That was not what I meant to
SClY, and I shall therefore try to make the intention
of my remark on that point somewhat clearer
si~lce, to my mind, this question is fU;Hjalllental.

Cela m'amene ~_ ~arle:' d'un point clont le
represcntol1I: de h Chine a parJe dans son
dernier discOllrs 1417hne se(lnce) avec l'esprit
constntctif et ioparfal qui est la marque cDmtante de ses interventions. J'estime toutefois que,
dans ce cas particuJierj r a m<:tl interp:·ct~ nIes
observations. Sattf errettr. M. Tsiz.ng a declare
que, :;i le prestige de5 federalistes cevait souffrir
du retablis5erue:rt irr:mediat de la Republique 11.
Djokjakart:l., il fallait apparemmentadmeltre ql".e
ce prestige dependa.it de la p;"Jissance milhire des
Pays~Bas; qu·it etait par conseq:1cnt bien fr,ible
et qu'on n'y pOl1vait troUver un argumenl :;o1idc
contre le retahlissemcnt de la Repubjque. Ce n'est
pas la cc qae j ·ai -voLllu di:-e , aussi \'ilis- je €ssayt'r
de m'expliquer, cette question Hant, a. mon avis,
fonda:ncntn.le.

As I pointed out before in the Council, the
d:sputc with the Republic is not one abDut the
kclependencc of Indonesia, which we llUv€
solemnly agreed b grant. but about the qltestion
of the form ,uHl Jeade:-slJl[) u~der which tlo.e new
State will become inclepenclcat. That is of trencndOl1s importance for 1h~ future :tie of t1]e
re\\! country. The Republicans are in reality
striving fer a unitarian State nnder their domination; we and the Federalists are striving for
~. federation of Wfl1Ch the Republic would he a
component State--no uocbt an important onc,
but on a basis of eql1ality with the other com,:JD:1ellt States, That is ",-hy tht: htP.tim period
has always been an imp<::rtant isslle, became it
",.,::IS in many respects decisive for the form and
~eadership under which the Unit(!d ,states of
fndonesia would become hdependent. If the new
State had been set free without an uverall interim
administration leaving be~n established for the
whole of 111GOliesia, the Republic, whkh wa<;
tr)riog- to exercise the rights of a soverei?p State
and which had the tremendous advantage of
possessing :Jnruly but extensive anc aggressive
armed forces, would have llUd little diffiwlty in
soon imposing its rule over all otl1er part;; of
Indonesia, That would have meant the domination of an armed minority over the majDrity of
Indonesia.

Camrne j'ai ccja eu :'occasion :le le. <;ignaler all
CO::lseil, le differend qui nOllS oppose a la Repllblique c:!'Indonesil' r.'n pr.s pO~lr otjet l'iI:depen~
dance de l'Indones:e, que nOllS nous sommes
~alcnnellement engages
accorder, mais la question de savoir sous queUe forme et sou:; ljl1dle
direction le nOL;vel Etat eoit devenil· indepenclant.
C'est la. U:l point d'une importance encnnE pOtU'
I·avenir rh llOltVeaU pays_ Le yeritable but que
les Republicains s'efforce.nt d'::I:reindre, c'est la
creaLon d'un Ent unique qlli serait SO'.lS lwr
dominatim, tandis [ju'avec les fedchaFstes n011S
nOllS effon.;ons d'abolltit·
une federation dont la
Repeblique. constituerait un des Etats - Etat
import"nt, sans doule, mr.is place slIr un pied
d'egalite avec les autr!!s Etats federes. Voiia pourquoi la periode le transition n. toujOl1l·s e:e un
facteur d'import.mce; elle doit, en effet, etre (1ecisivc a rr.aints egA:rns en ce qui concerne la forme
et la direc:ion SOLlS 1esqueJes les Etats-Unis
d'Tndonesie deviendraint incle-xndants. Si l'on
avait accorde l'ir.cte;lendance au- nouvel Etat sans
qu'une administration pro,,·isoire ger:erale efrt ete
cn~ee paer I'enscrnble de l'Indoncsic, l~ Republi_
que, qui chercbah it exercer Ies droits d'un Etat
souverair. et qt'li avah l'enol'mf"_ avantage de
posseder des iOtces armees, indis:iplinees eertes,
mais importa"tr_~ et agressives, aura:t pu sans
grande peine imposer rapic1ement sa 101 i tOtltes
les autres parties de l'Indo:l.esie. Une minorite
arroee at:rait ainsi domine la majorite de l'Im1onesie.

By om poli:::e acti(ll1 the nilitary and extremist
elelllents which in practice cantToI:I::U Lhe Repub'
lic have been eliminated a~ an or[;;nized force.
This has upened up <L pC.9sibility which woulrland in om idea sh0l1ld, hy prefel'ence-have been
brollght about in a peac.eful way, hy the participation of the Republic il1 a::l. overall Governrn.ent
of Indonesia, participa.tion not as a sovereign
State, bl:t as one of the component parls of a
sovereign State. Thus the aim of the interim
period, namely, to make ct:rtaill that tl'e Rep11blic
would be incorporated in the United States of
Indonesia, anu not the other w~y trlllnd. has nOW

Notre operation de police a elimine, en tant que
fortes or@nisees, le3 elblents mi.litaires extremistes attxquels la Republique etait prat:quement
asservie. EHe a cree une po~sibilite qt:i aurait pu
(solntion preferable, a notre avi:;) l'.ailrc cl'unc
evolution pacifi:jue si la Repub~jque ava:f par-.
ticipe a :a CI·e<l.tiull cl'un g0tlvernenlent ayant pOll·
voir sur bllte l'Indonesie, et cel<l, non pas en
qualitC d'Etat SOtlvE'l'll.in, mds en tam que partie
constitlt:iv~ c'un Etat souve:ain. Ainsi, le but qu.e
1:1 r~hiode
tre-osition devait permettre c1'atteinc1re, c'est-a-dire garantir qlle ce sera~t la
Rer,lUhliquc qui serait :ncorpon~e aux Etats-Unis

a

a

ce

21
been achieved. This is what n:.akes it passible
for the Netherlands Governme:1t to prClposlO at the
r-resent moment a procedure whi:::h wot1ld practi~
caIly elilUinEt~ the interim period and thus
accelerate cor.siderably the transfer of sovereignty.
After tbt transfer :t will he for the Illdone-sinn
Government ar.d the Indwesian j.Jup\.llatior., in
their elections, to decide about th.e restoration of
the Republic a.'i a. component StatE'.

d'Indonesle, et non l'inverse, es: maintenant at·
teint. C'est Ji ce ~ui peftllet au Gouvernement
des Pays-Has de proposer a l'hellre actllclle une
procedure qt.:i mettm pn.tiquement fin a la periode de tramitiull el aCc.c:6rcn: ainsi consider~ hlemelIt le transfert de 50uverainete. Ce transfert
accompli, i1 appa~tienr'.r:J. <J:l GOllvernement et
la population de I'lnclcnesie de decider, par leurs
eleetiol1S, du retablissel11ent de la RepllDlique en
tant qu'Etat federe.

If, on (1e oher hmd, the Re?ubli:::an Government were to be reinstated as sllch in .Togjakarta
be:ore the t,ansfer of sovereignty lo an overall
administration, and the Rep11blic were to reconstitute its armed forces, the Rep~blic wQnld again
be given a great aC:vantage over the l'ederalists,
and the d:lIlgrr would bf revived that tne Republic, either pushed or supported by its armed
forces, w:)u:d from the outset impose its hegemony on the whole of Indonesia. It Was for
th[s reason that I said that many Federalists
wou~d CO~I~ider <l restomtion of thr Rf'I:ublic in
Je.gjahrta now as a be:raya: of their cause.
That does not mean tha: they depe:J.d on the
Netherlands or tre Ne:therlar.c1s ..rmed :orces
for their prestige or authcrity, bllt that they,
who co-operated with us to achieve that form of
ir.dependence which tlley desire, could justly
reproa;;h us that, by restoring thf' Republic at
this moment, we had gravely harmed their

Si, au contrairc, le GOllvernement republicain
devait etre. reinvesti de son autorite a Djakjakarta
avant le tra~si~rt de la sOlrverainete a lll1e administration ccntr6lallt l'ensemble de l'Indonesie,
et que la Republique dut recanstituer ses forc.es
armees, la Republique se trouve~ait a nouycau, de
ce fait, iortement avantagee par rapport <lux feJe.
raListes, et I'on risC]uera.~t une his de plus ne la
voir, soit seus l~ pressi:m de ses fcrces armees,
soit :.Jvec Jellr appui. imposer des l'abord SOll
hegemonie it tO~lte l'IDdonesie. Voila pourquoi
j'ai dit que beaucoup de federalistes considerer"ient une reslaul<Itio:1 de :a Republigue ~
Djokjakarta
l'heure actuelle cOJnme une tra!lison de reur t.:.all:;e. Ce:a ne veut pas di:,l". {]lI'ils
comptent sur les Pn.ys-Has at:. Stlr les forces neerIandniscs pour sOlltf'nir leLr prestige OLl lettr
<lutorite, mais apres <lvoir coJ1ahore avec IlOUS
pOllr atteinnre la forr.le d'in::lepeudance (jll'ils
appellent de Jeurs vceux, Jls pourraicnt a j L:.ste
titre nous reprod.er d'avoi~, en retablissant la
RCp11bJiQue en ce mJll!elll, porte un grave prcjudice a :eurs inten~:ts.

p:,,:ition.

a

a

some length :)ecatse it tuuthes :he heart of the
matter anc eXFlains that the Netherlands Government cCl1Id only n1~ke its offer of accelerated
independer:ce because the aggressive ;'.lld destru:::tive influer:ce& i:l }ogjakarta have for the moment
lleen eliminated. It also makes :t clear thilt that
offer can be maintaineo only ii. we cail. be 7easonably certain that th:::se inAllences remain eleJnlnated.

Tai en ban de m'etodre assez ]onguc11ent sur
Cl'. -point, pa.rce qu'il tOLlcne at c~ur de la q:lestion et exp1iq:.le que, si le GCll'Venlmcnt C:es ~ay:­
Bas ,L ptl fai:e offrir d'avar.ce: la date de l'mdependance clt: l']ndones',e, :::.'e51 lm;queme~t parc.~
que les influences agresslves et destruchves Cpt
regnnient i DjokjakaTta sont, pour le momer.t,
annihilees. Il e:t ressort egale:nent que les PaysBas ne peuvent maintenir cettl'; offre quc; s'Js
Ont la quasi~ce=titttde que les iIlf1u~necs en ques~
tiOll ne reCOmT:lencero::tt pas i s'exercer.

The explanation I have given also provide;; the
answer to a qcestion which f:a::> been put by the
United States representative, who asked why we
thought il would create chaos if wr re.ir:stated the
Rept;blican Governnent in power now, and not if
'we tr,msferred sovereiRntv about twelve weeks
from now. The <l:J.swer is tnis: Restoration of the
Republic now me<lT.s the transfer of [XlWer O'ver
a certain part of Java to the Republican Government, wi6 all the consequences I have mentioned,
Transfer of sovereignty over Indcnesia a few
months from now wo;.J1d mean handiJlg aver
authority over the whole of Indonesia to an overall Indonesian federal government in wl:ich
Republic<:.n leaders ,vould rep:esent about onethird j this means that they WOllIJ havc an influential voice, but wGt\!d not be able to impose their
will 0:1 the wbole of Indonegill. That is the
fundamental difference;

Les ex:olications Glle je v:ens de fourn!r repondent e'gaJeme::Jt
ur.e question du representant des Etats-Unis qui a dernar,de pourqlloi nous
pensions qtt'on fomet1tl'.rait le desordre en retablissant actuetlement It: GOl1yemelnent repunli·
c,:dn, mais. Qu'on l'evlterait en procedtlnt au t~a~5­
fert r.l~ souvcrainete dans Ctll':lque douze semames.
La reponse est t<.: suivante : n~tablir la Repllolique
maintenant signifiera~t re:1d~e le Gol1vernement
republicain maitre d'une certaine p~r~ie: d<: Ja.v a ,
avec totltes les consequences que J at mdl<Juees.
D'autre part, prodder au transfert de ,la .so~ve­
rainete sur l'Indonesie dan.s ouelqt.:.es mOlS stgnlfierait remettre l'alltorite sur ·I'ensemble de l'Indo·
nesi:,: 11n gouvernrr.cnt iec1tral indo.nesien•.cont
Ies chefs reptthli:::ains formeraient enVlTOllle bers;
ils exerceraient aillsi une idhlence tres seus:Lle,
S;Jns toutefois ponvoir imposer leu, volonte a
l'ememb:e ele 1'lncor.esie. Voila la dIfference 1011·
damenta:e entre les deux sitllaticns.

That does not al:er tr.e fact that we still believe
that a lcnger interim periuC:, d:; for~sccn in our
original time-table, would hr:ve created better
guarantees for ;;In orderly trlln,~;tion to, and a
stahle sittlation in, the new United StJtes of
Indonesia.

Nous n'en contim.:ons pas moins penser que,
prolong-eant la periode de transition, :::omme
l'envisageait no:re plan initial, or. ellt ga:-anti plus
surement que la transi:io:l s'effecbaai: clans
l'orure et abautir8il a J'organiS:l.tioT1 ~t::Jble des
noUVeatlx Etats-l.Tnis d'Indonesie.

r thot:gl:t 't well to dwell upon this point at

a

a

a

.. 0.

22
The represen~ative of the Philippines

has,

:.unong&t other thmg-s, accused the N eflerlands the

other day [116tll meeting] of circumventing
ignoring or violating by double-talk the recom~
mend at ions of the Secllrity Council. The repre~e[ltntivc of the USSR h<ls tried to sUrpass him in
insulting language [418fh 11Ie~ti1jg]. I shall limit
myself to expressing the hope that these g,ent1e~
ment will take an example :rom the dig;nified re~
strain! whieh always chnracterizes the sta:ements
of my opponent at this table, Mr. Pahr.
I now come to the posit;ve conclusions which
Ctln be drawn from the curtent debate. 1 need
not go into that aspect too elaborately. since it
Seems to me that a common pattern has emerged
fiO~ the stlltements of most members of the
Council.
On the one h<lnd, they have stateu that there

is fundamental unity of purpose between the
Council, the Ndhedands ana the Republic of
Indonesia; tb:<t t)lere is agreement on be basis
011 which an Il,donesian Government could be
c.onstituted; and that a rotlnU table conference at
TIle Hague of the intere5ted par:ies and the
United Nations Commission for Indonesia would
be': an appropriate means of furt1:lering the common purposes.
On t11e other hand, there remains O:le main
obstacle, which is that the Republican leaders
insist, as a pre1imllflry condition, 011 the restoration of the R<>puillican Government in Jogjakarta,
wi1ercflS the Netherlwds fears the consequences
of sllch restoration at this moment. A way Ollt
of this impasse has been ;nt1icate(~ by the constrl1ctive stR.tements made last Friday [417th
meeting J by the distinglli.;;heu representatives at
Canadn and China, who were supported by several
other representatives. TIle helpful spirit in which
tl~ey put forward their sugg'estior;s deserves, 1
thllk, not only the high appreciation of all parties
concerned, but also their co-operation b putting
them into effect. \Ve realize that the implementatinn of their sugge,'itions will require concessions
from both parties. Nevertheless, in the interest
of reaching, an agreement, my Government is, as
I announced on Monday 1418t1~ meeting], willing
to accept the Canadian proposal for a preliminary
conference with the termS of refer~nce and with
ile objective formulated by Geneml McNaughton
tr.c preceding Friday.
This means-and may I once again quote his
words-that ".. it would seem useful.. that
tIle services of ou:- Commission [the United
Nations Commissio1t for !ndU1lCS'ia I should appropriately be sought in accordance with the statns
or that Commission as defined by the Security
Cound's reso111tion of 28 J alluary 1949 to assist
in reaching an agreeme!lt udween the parties as
to the time and conditions llOder which the prop:lsed conference at The Hague could be held"
and that consequently, :md I quote again: " . . .
these exploratory discus::;iolls tl1:der the rLuspic,;s
of the United Nations CommiSSIon for Indonesl:'1.
would be without prejud:ce to the resolutio:1s o~
the Secmity COlltlcil and to the rights, claims or
positions of the fJarti<::s",
It seems to me that in accepting- this proposal
the Neth,>rlands is r.1aking- a substantial contribu-

Le representant des rhilippines, a. l'autre jour
les P;:l.ys-Ea~, entre
autres choses, de tourner, d'ignorer de propos
deJ-ibere ou d'enfreindre subrepticeme.r1t 1e5 re~
cQmmandations du Comeil de securite. Quant au
representant de l'URSS, ;1 .<l'~st efforce [418em-6
seanceJ de rmche,ir encore sur ces injurieuses
exprimer l'espoir
accusations. Je me bornerai
que ces messieurs vOlldront bien prendre exemple
sur la dlgnite et la retenue qui caracterisent toujours les interventions de M. Pa1ar. man adversaire cette table.
[416J~JJC S.lQ.1:C(" 1, :l.r.ctt.'le

a

a

J'en arrive mai:ttenant aux conclusions positives que 1'on petl! tinr uu dtlJat en cours, Je
n'ai nul besoin de m'y arreter trop longtemps.
car il me semble que. dans :eurs dec1",rations, la
plupart c:es membres du Comeil ont developpe un
theme commun.
D'une part, ils cnt declare qu'i! y a identite sur
le fond entre 1es vues du Conseil, des Pays-Bas
et de' la Repllhli'l\le d'Indonesie; Que tout le
rnonde est d'accord quant a'.lX principcs .S1.:r lesquels do:t reposer la creation d'un Gouvernement
pOltr l'Indonesie; enfil1, qu''.me conference de la
table rOllele qui se ~irnnrait La Haye et lnguelle
prendraient part les parties interessees, ainsi que
la Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Indonesie, serait de nature it servir les -buts cornmuns)
D"<lutl'e part, il l<::ste U:l obstacle capital, i
savoircne les chefs republicains posent comme
conditio'., preliminaire
lenr acceptation le retablisscl:-Jent <lu Gouvemement republicain
Djokjakarta, alors qu~ l~s Pays-Bas c~aignent les
consequences qu'aurait Ull tel retaolisselllent, :;'il
avait lieu
l'heure actuelle. Au cours de leurs
exposes construetifs de vendredi derniel' [417eme
sec-lice J, les represenlants du Canada et de la
Chine ant indiquE un moyen de sortir de cette
impasse; plusienrs autres representants les oat
appuyes. A mon avis, l'esp:it de conciliation qui
pn~sidait
leurs suggestions lTItritc, non set1lemeat qne lcs parties en cat.:se l'appre:ient haltte~
ment, mais aussi qu'elles collaborent la mise en
CEUvre de ces sugges~ions. Nous neus rendons
cOl11pte que eette mise. en auvre exigera des con~
cessions de deux parties. Neanmoins, en vue
d'abOllt'r it un accord, mon Gonvemelllent, comme
je I'ai anl10nce IU::Idi [418blt6 seMtct?], est dispose
a. acceJ;:ter la propositiulI du Canada :cndnnt :i la
rettnion d'une conference preliminaire qui aurait
pour mandat et poUr but le manc1;:.t et le but
indigues hmdi demier par le general McNaughton.
Cela signifie - et on me pennettra de dter
une fois de plus les propres paroles dq genera.l
McNaughton - que "... il parait utile ... de re~
tour;r atl:lc services de notre Commission [la
CDmmissiun des Natif'1l.f Unie! pour !'l1~diJnesjeJ,
confor:nement au r61~ qui a ete assigne ceIle-ci
par la resolution du C'mseil de securite en datt du
28 janvicr 1949, pOUl" aider les parties se mettrc
d'accord sur la date :l. laquelle la CO:llerence que
1'on er.visflge de tenir La Haye pom'rait avoir
lieu et 1es conditions clans lesquelles eHe pourrait
se tenir". Cela signifie encore ~ et je cite
nOl1ve<::u: "... que ces discl1ssions [Jrepa:atoircs,
sous les auspices de la Commission des Nations
Unies potU l'Indonesie ne modifieraient en rien
le.<l resolutions do.! COllseil de securite et les droits,
revencications et positions des parties".
Il me sernble que, en acceptant ~tte proposition, les Pays-Bas contribuent largement aux:

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

23
rion to the effort-to open up the way out of the
present impasse indicated to us by tne repre~~nla~
Ives of C<mada and China. To those who expressed dU:.Ibt Oil this score, ] hope it constitutes
a convincing proof of our desi,e to achieve as
tapicl~y :'I~ possible a neg-otiated set:lement of [he
problem.

efforts faits pour sortir de !'impasse a<:ti1elle en
suivant In voie que nous ant monhee les representants. du Canada et de la Chine. J'espere que
:CtlX Cl111 ont dO\1te de notre sinceritb verro::lt la
une preuve convaincante de notre desir d'aboutir
le plus rapidement possible a une solution du
probleme Far voie de. negodations.

I m'ay lI.nn that, for Stdl a preliminary conference to be successfu:, each r:ar1y may expect
the other to understand and meet its reasonable
desires ar.d preoccupaliolls. I e.an assure thf
Security Council and the Republic iha: we, or.
011r side, are prepflrf'r1 to do so and to try, to'
gether wib tne Republican representa:ives, to fine
a way which w,ou]d give satisfaction 10 their
'desires whilst at the same liille avoiding the
dangers we fear. This will, however, require
co-operation from hoth parr if',;. 1, tnerefcre, regret
all the more having to conclude from Mr. Palar's
Matement on Monday [418t1r me~tingJ that the
Republic is not willing to accept the Cana~ian
proposal.

Tajouterai que, pour que ce:te conference pre~
liminaire soit coutonncc de succes chacune· des
parties en cause doit pOllvo~r compter que l'autre
fera pretlve de comprehensiD:l a l'egard de ses
desirs et preoccllpation.s, dans la mesure Oll Us
sont r.aisonnables, et sera dL;posee it faire des
concessions. Je puis garantir au Conseil de sela Republique que, ?our llotre part,
curiM et
:1CUS sommes prets
le faire et essayer, conJ01l1tement avec les representants de la Republi~
que, de trouyer un moyen de danner satisfactiOll
leurs desirs, tout en evitflut les dangcr3 que.
nOllS craignons. Rien ne peut se fnire, toutefois, '
sans la eoiIaboration des deux parties; i'rli done
condure de l'expose
d'autant plus de regrets
que M. Falar a fait lundi (418ctne seanceJ que
la Repnblique, de SO:l cote, n'est pas Llisposee a
accepte:- la proposition canadienne.

Mr. Palar mentioned two reasons why the
Republic;; could not accept the Canadian suggestion. The lirst is contained in the following Sen~
tenees, which r shall read from the verbatim
tec(rrd:

M, Palar a. donne, de ee retus, deux raisons.
La premiere ressort du passage du compte ~etldu
stenographique oont ie vais douner lecture =

HI W:J'1t to stress ·.vith the greatest possible
emphasis tbat the letter of !"':esident SoekanlO,
referred to by the representative of China ar:d
llsed as ~ ba~i~ fOI their views by sevt>rlll other
representatives, was based on the dadication
lJy Mr. KOl'ts, 'lS r n:en:io:Jec befere, a5 to the
meaning of the sovereigdy which is to be t:ans~

a

a

a

a

a

"J e voudrais particulierement insister sur le
fait qt:0. la letlre du president Soe[.:arno, mentionnee par le represen ta:lt de la Chine et sur
laquelle certains autres represel1tants ont fonde
leurs a.rguments, se rappoliait :lU-X edaircissf'._
ments foun1is p,,: :M, Koets all sujet 01\ sens
donner atl ti';:t11sft>rt de souverainete.

a

~erred.

"President Soekarno's agreement, in priu:iple
....,ith the p'wpose of the round t.. He confe:,ence
was based solely on the c:arification of the
purposes of this conference as stpplied by
Mr. Koets But the Chai:man or the Netherlands delegation in Indonesia has stated tha: Mr.
Keets' cla.rification, as understODd by President
Soe1<a.rno, is not comp1ele. Tberefore, President
Soekarno's sta.tement no longer holds tnle since
t.he fot'ndation for his stateIT_en~-the l(oets'
c1arifica:ion-has been officially invalidated by the
Netherlancs".

"I.'<lcr()ul donne flilr le president Soekarno au
principe de la conference de la table .onde se
fondait lmiquement sur les cxplications donnees
par M. Keets quant I'objet de cette conference.
Cependan t, le president de la delegation neerlan~
clnise en Indonesi~ a declare. que ces explicalions
de M. Koets n'e:aient pas completes. Par consequent, la declaration du president Soekarno n'est
plus valable, puisque les explic1i.tioll5 de M, Koets,
Sllr lesquetes elle Hait rondee, ant He officielle~
ment inva1idees par le. H ollandais."

Later 0:1. Mr. Palar said, and I quote again
from n·.e verbatim record:

a nouveau un passage du compte rendu sh~no·

"I feeloblig-ed to point out that the assumptions or. which the Canadian resoJu:ion appears lo
be based, are not valid, beCause they are foundee
all the rnisL<l:{en impression that the a.ims of the
Nethrlands Government, as set forth in its pro~
posa!s of 26 February [5/1270, appendis D1,
are identical with the aims'of the Security Council.
and the Republic of Indonesia. This was made
clear when the Chairman of the Neth~rh"ds
delegation in Indonesia infor:ned the Commission
that the rl::trification of Mr. Koets, as understood
by our leaders in Bangka, cc-unot be regarded as
ali official clarification of the Netherlands
position".
I emphasileo cd OUT last meeting that there can
be no doubt that the transfer of sovereignty will

a

Un pell plus mrd, M. Palar a dit -

et je cite

gr~pHfJ.\le :

"Je suis clans t'obligation de faire observer que
lee donnees snr lesCl.uelles la resolution dl1 Canada
semble se fonder n'ont pas de va1eur, car e1ies
sont deduites de l'impt'ession fausse que les objeetifs <lt1 Gouvernement ne~rlandais, exposes clan;
la proposition qu'it a faite le 26 fevrier (5/1270,
mmC.n: DJ, 50nt les memes flue c'eux du CDnseil
de securite et de la Republique d'IndoDesie. La
difference est devenue .eviCentc longue le President de la celegation neerlandaise en Indom~sie
a fait savoir la Comm:ssion que les explications
de M. Kocts, a:ns: g·.l'e.lles avaielll ete comprises
par nos dirigeants Banka, ne peuvent etre considerees comme deii.nissant offieiellement la posi~
tion des Pays-Bas."
J'ai souligne,
notre denl.ere seance, que le
tramfert reel, c.omplet et sans condition de la.

a

a

a

24
be re:ll, complete and ltn<;omlitiorml. It remains
fOL :ne to rcdllce to it~ true proportions what Mr.
Palar has called the "invalidation" of certain
clnr:Jlc,ltions of the ;{c6erlallds proposal given
to PresiL1ent Soek:l.rno by Mr. Koets.
Wklt impPcll~d, as is evident fLnm :he reports
of the United Nations Commission for Indonesia,
is tbj,~: on 26 Fclml,lry, M:-. Sockal"tlo rec:eiveC:
tl'c offici,,1 invitation tD the round table conference,
The pllrpD.Scs and rletails of the proposal of wbit:h
this l'nn~erp.nce was to be the focal point were,
in reply to C}'\1cstions, elabcrated and elucidated
ill. thrc:e memoranda, which wen". gi"e-Jl to 1\1r.
Soekrul1o. These menor<J.l1cla are added as
appendix E to docllluent 5(1270, and in that
document take up no :ess than five pages. In
:tddition, numeroLls conversations touk pldce: abol1t
this plan, hetween the Republican .1c3"iers on the
one hand, ,wc] Nethcdands officinls, the United
Nations COlmnission for Tndnnesin and the Federalists 011 the other hine:, I: is, therefore, :mpossible to prctelltl tb'lt Mr. SOCllmmo. when he -wratF
his lctter or 4 March, was relying for h:s
."'r.o\Vledge of the p:lrposc of this plr.n solely on
an oral explanation given :tim Ly Mr. Kvets on

28 l?dmliJ.ry.

sOUVerainete ne Satlrnit fain~ le rnu:nJrc dou:~. 11
a ramener a £e£ prop:>rtions e:..actes Cl':
que M. Falar a appe1e "1'invalidation" d~ cer~
taiues explications que M. Koets a dom:ees au
President Soekarno au sujet de la propositio:J. des
Pays-nas.

lhe reste

Vl"lki ce q'Ji ~'est passe, comme l'etabFssent
les rappolts de ',a Commission des Nations Unies
pOUT I'Indontsie: le 26 H~vrit'r, M. Sceka~no a.
resu l'inv:tation off.cie!1e a patticiper i la conference cle la table l'ende. Lcs buts et 1<03 details de
la propo;ition, dont cctte con{erence devait
former l'element essentiel, {.'Dt ete exposes Gans
tl'OlS netnorandutns, rediges en rerOl::se a certaines
questions, qui ont ete remis a M. Soelcarno. Ces
me.lTIcrandum>: font l'objet de 1'annexe E all docUmer.t 5/1270 et ne prennent pas mains de cioq
pag::::;. En outre, dc nomGreuse.., c:onverS'l.tions nnt
ell lieu a cc slljet, entre les dirigea~ts republic<O.ins, cl'une p<:.rt et, J',.u~re part, des fOllctionnaires m~erlcndais, :a Commission des Nations
Unies pour l'bdonesie et les federallstes. 11 est,
pal" cr.meql1ellt, impossihle de pl·hendre que
M. Soekc.rno, lorqu'il ecrivait SD. let~rc du 4 oars,
ne disposait, potlr se faire une idee des blltS vises
pal" le ?Ian, que d'tme explication donnee de vi-ve
v;)ix p;:r M. Katt:; le 28 fevrier.

,"Yith r~gTlrcl to the o:ai explanation, it is !ntcrl';sting to 1101'1". that, at the express request af the
Repnhlic:\.n leaders, it was 2g:eed to give no
plllMcity t{) t1w COrlvcrJ;:ttion of which it formed
a part. i:'-fcvcrthcless, :he. Repl~bIi<:a:1 delegntion
::t1[Xl.reJltly gave tile United Nations Coml't1i9..~ion
for Indonesia n Ierort 011 it ill. which tlley unik.tcrallv Sl1l11mariJ;e(/ the cxplall<llioll givcn ~}'
Mr. Koets. Mr, Koets did l10t consider this
resume <t corred and conplete record of whit
he said, 1'111<1 the U:lited Nations Commission for
Il1llonesia was accordingly informed that the
Netllerl::tnd:!:i did not c:>r.sider this Republican
summary an official da:ification of t:1e Netherlal:ds position. This is ob.,imlsly a p~rfeclly
llonnal thing- to do if, after a conversation Jetwee!l
two pa11ie$, one of the two summarizes, OIl hIs
own <lcconnt and withollt cD:lstlltation, what the
other party has said. Certair.ly the fac~ that O!1r
Gov~T111i1ellt does not want to bl". bOUl~d by a
ll11ilateral and inco1n?lete Republican sl1lmnary
of what a Netherlalllls official said cannot constitnte a valid re.nson for rejecting such a p;oposa! as that of the Can"dian re:Jreseulativc, wh.le~
<It pres(]nt offer:; the only chance of opening
1:etntiations alld setting ottt an the road to settle:nent.

Ell ce qui concerne c;ette explication orale, il est
interessant c.e notel' cue, a la demande expl'csse
<:lu chef repuli!iL:<.lill. il <wait ch; COnVelll1 de ne
doune!" auctme pJblicite a la conversation an COUts
de laqudle ladi:e explication d.vail ete fournic.
Malgri' r.e:a, la delegation republicaine semlJle en
avoir donne la Commission des Nations Unies
POLlI' l'IncJanesie un conlpte rendu resull1al1t nnilateralenlent l'e;q:lication connee .'Jar M. Koets.
Or, de ra,,;:; de ce dcrnier, cc resllme. n'P."ait pas
{Ill cOll1?te rend1.1 exact et complet de Le (F'U
lwait dit.e: la Commissioll rJes Nations Vnles
pour l'Indonesie 'C.
avisee, en ccnse'-]uellce, que
les Pays-Bas ne eonsideraient pas ce resume
donne pa~ It'~ RepllbliC<1ins comme Ull exposce
officie~ de la t\ese des Pays~Ba". C'est li, de tonte
evidel:ce, unc initiative p:u"faitenwTlt nonnale lorsque, apres une conversation entre deux parties~
I'une cl'elles re3!1flle de SOl1 prDpre chef ce que
l'autre pc..rtie 3 dit, sans consllltatio:l prblable.
Le rait que notre Gouvernement l-efllS~ Je se teni,
ponr f>ngitgE; p<.r un resume lm'tlateral et incomplet, donne par les Republicains, des explic.ations
d'un fonction:laire npt'rlandais ne sauraient, certes.
cOllsftue: une raison vaIatle pour rejeter ltnC'
p:opCe:lition CClllmc ccllc du represent~1I1t du
Canaoo, qui oure actudlenJent :a seule chance
d'ellg::ger des neg'ociations et u(: sache:uinet" verso
une solution.

The .!.ccond reason addt:.cecl by Mr. ?alar is contained ill the following words of his:

Lil.de.cx:eroe raison mise en avant par M, Palar
est contenue dans le passag-e don: je vais donner
l~cture mainten~lnt :

"It is evident that the Netherlands C0l1stit11tion as <1.tTIf'nded at the sa.me time when we were
neg~tiatillg with the Netherlands reprc~enlativcs
OIl LIlis question, does not allow tbe Nether~and,.
to tran~[cr complete and unconditional sovereignty
to the :Inited States of Indonesia."

"11 est evident que la Constitlltior. de ee pays,
r:ui a efe amendee au moment meme 011 nOllS·
~ellions des negociations avec les ::e:wesentants
ceerlandais sur ce sujet, ne permet pas" aux Pays·
Bas de transiCrer, il:tegl'a1e:ment et sans conditions, h: scuverainete aux Etats~Unis d'Indollesie. "
]'ai deja expliqlle en. det:l.il, et je crois avoir
prouve, que les amendemcnts q:ti 011: ete introtluit:; dallS la constitution ,deS Pays- Bas ;) la fin
de 1"annee demihe ne contiennent r:en de plus·
que les principesde l'union neerlando-indo-·

r have [[Iready explair::ed at lengtb, <!:nd I trust
I have proved, tiHlt the amenchnents mtroduced
into the Netllcrlands Constitlltion at the .en~ of
last ye2r contain aotlling more than the pnnclples
of the Netherhlnds-Indonesian Union which were

a

cre

2.;

.agreed upon and laid down in H.e Linggadjati
Agreement signed by the Republic at tte time.
T inrthermore pointed ant that, in a.dditiull, lht:~e
articles ef OUr COllstitution ~tipttlate ttat the new
order shall be established "'on the basis of the
·ottcome of past ttlld futtre mutual cO:l5uJation".
This should be sufficient, I believe, to refute Mr.
Pnlar's second argument.
All this proves abundantly that the two reasons
,advanced by Mr. Palar ate VCt·y weak excuses
for not accepting the Canac1i,tI1 proposal. The
real re<l.son for tha.t refll5al must, I fear, l:e
S01Ig-ht in a very different part of his speech.
That real reason is perhaps to be fotlnd in tle
following sentences which I quote from the verbatim record: "There is nc· dot,bt now :hat our
gLler:-ilks, ;:\~!'\isted by the po?ulation, are able
to exhaust the Dntch militarily", ar.cl "We are
'givir:g a solenm warning to :he Dutch, th<.t if they
continue witl, their present policy, politically and
militarily, our guerrillas will solve. the Indonesian
'question."

T;le tragic: pan aboll: concessions is :hat they
are so easily misinterp:etedas being a sign of
wea,cness. 'Ne accept the Ca,:adian proposal beCal\5C wc re<lJ;ze that .':Ome so'\1ticm of the Indonesian question mltSt be rea:hrd, and reached
soon, and because we wan':. to Come to an agree·
ment with the Republic, s:nce no setde:nent can
be c<lnied iuto effect without endless lo~s ()f life
and property if a part of tIle ?opulatioll does not
agree to it ,Bl1t the Republic wOtlld be very mt:ch
mistaken if it thougbt that this w]lingness on Ollr
part to negotiate a settlement arose from weakness, militarily or otherwise, It wO'Jlc1 be tragic
if, on the basis of that misconception, the Republic were now to close the Joor 011 the Jossibi:ity
of negotiations, for the price of that fll.tal error
would be ;:laid, in the fi:-st place, by tile pop·.,lation
of Indonesia in the form of months ef delay and
continiJf'o uncertainty, and by :he g-,tlerrillas in
the form of a heavy toll of liie. I s:ncerely hope,
therefore, that the Republic will reconsider its
atUuce i:J the light of the eKplanations which I
have given at the last meetine and :=.t the Meetin~
today"

I1~Siel111e. q.tli ont fait l'objet de l'Acco:"d de
Ltngg.<.dJatl, aCCOrd que la Republiql1e a ::;ign~
l'cpoquc. J'ai eg:l.lcment sigllale que ces nn11VC-al1x
article, de llotre Constitution stipu;aient que le
n'ouvel ordre serait et:tbli "compte tenu des
slll:ats des consult;ctiolls passees et it venir". I1
me semble que cela ll~vrait ::;u!Tlre pOUr rduter le
seconD argUMent de M, P<:lar.

a

:-e-

Tot:t cela prouve surabonc1amnoent que les del1x
raisons avancee, par 7Vr. Palm sont ee bes :aihles
excuses p01lr rejeter la pl'Oposdon dl' Canada.
le crains <[LZ'il ne f<-iUe ccercher la veritab!e
raison de ce reftlS dalls 11:"l tout autre passage du
diECOur:; de M. Palar. Cette veritable T~ison .<;p
trouve pettt-etre dans les passages ciu compte
rcneltl stenolfraollique que je vais citer: "Il est
desormais certain que nos groupes de partisms,
aiues de la poplllation. ::;0:11 tapi:lbles J'epui5cr les
ressotlrces J:lilitaires des Hol1andais", et: "NClllS
prevenons cependa:tt solennel1ement les Pays-3as
qt1e, s'ils 1l1aintiennent la politique qu'ils sl\ivent
actueIlement dans les domaines politiques et ruiEtaire. ce sonl nos partisans qui n~gleront la. question indonesien:le."
Ce qu'il y a de tragique clans le; concf'ssl()n$,
c'est qu'il est si facile de les interpreter comme
des siglles ee faiblesse. Si nous tLcceptons la proposifon du Canada" c'est pat"ce que nOlls reconnaissons qll'il fau: aboutir it um: solution de la
question indor.esienne e: y abl)utir ':>ier.tOt, et
parce que nOli., souha.ito:1s nom ll'ettre d'acc-ord
uvec la Rellublique, uant donne qu'al;cufc reglement ne s<l,ufait enUer en Vigtlc:lr :;am J-Krlt
enor~e de vies et de biens, si Lme partie de I;;.
population ne ]'<lp?rol1ve p"£'. Mais b ~erubliQuc
allTait grand t'lrt de croire que, si nOtls :iorr.l1le&
disposes
negocier en vue d'un reglement, ;:'est
en ralson d'une faiblesse d'orclre militaire 0\1
autre. :1 serait t'ragique que, partant de cette
errC:'Jr d'apprec\ation, 1~ Repl1bliqtte fermat
maintellant la porte nux possibilites ie negoc.iation". Les c.onsequences de ceUe eueur fata.!e
retomberaient en tout p:-emier lie'\:. sur la popuh:.tion de l'Indol1t:~ie, qui c0l1n:11trait des mois de
retard et d'incertit1l8e :Jro~ongee; elles retcmb~­
mient ans'ii sur les pa~tjsans, qL:i s'Jbirate:tt de
lomdes perte3 en vies hllmalnes. J'espere dOllc
sincerement qlle 1.1 Republiqnc voutlra hicn "rcv~njr
sur sa dec~siO:t, en tenant compte des exp1JcatlO:ts
que j'ai clonnees a la demUre seance et 11. la
se::tn(';~ d'a:'ljO"Jrd'bui.

a

(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
((rmlSlated fram RlIssim;): Evet'}
time :he Indonesian question is di~cussed in the
Security Council, we become spect<ltors of a farce
played by a number of delegations representing
the colonial Power,~. Thanks to the efforts oi
these delegations, the Secllrity Cour;dl always
reaches the same inpasse in the Indonesian
Question, and plays tr.e part, not of an impartitll
obervel-, but of U SC:-CCll to hide the aggression
of the Netherlands Governmcr.t in Indonesia.

M. TARASS~:NKO (Union des Republiques so·
ciallstes sovietiqueS;- (tradll';t du russ!1): Chaq.ue
fois que la quc3tion i:'ldonesienne ':ient ea. diScussion devant le Conseil de secuflte, on no'l1S
fait assister it ut:te comedie que jouent au sein
Conseil les deJeg<ltions qui re:lresentent les PUlSsances colon~ak;. Par suite de:; efforts deployes
par ces delegations, le Conseil de securite ~st incapable de faire aUCl1n progres' dans la solu(LCn de
la question indonesien:1e et l!git cOlTlme 5'il e:ait
un oLservateur det:tche, all Hle-mc comne s'il
vOlllait m1.sQl1er l'agression commise en Imlonesie
pa: le. GOllVernement des Pa.rs-Bas.

Under pressure of W::JrlC public opimon, the
so-called majority in the Security Council :rom
ti;lle to time passes resolutions calling upon the
l\ctherluncls Government to limit the scale of its
agg-ressiclII, or at least to sOtten and modernize it
a little, so as to bring :t into line with tle new couditions of ot,r time ir.stead of following the

S01:S la pre~~iol1 dc l'opinion p\lbli111e J?c~~iale,
cettx qu: p:etendent constituer la l11aJOn~e au
Conseil adQptent, ce temps e:1 temps, line reso]u:
lion invitant le Gouverncment des Pays-Bas a
restreindre l'ampleur de SOll agressi0D: Oll, tou,t
au moins
I'adotlclr
la 11l0derL1ser e: a
l'adapter ;ux exigence~ de l'epoque, au lieu de

Mr,

TARASENRO

Ri'Pllhlid

?u

a

a

26
colo:1ial practices of the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries.

SU1VX, les methodes coloniales pratiquees au
XVlIeme ou au XVlIIeme siecle.

Bllt ~11f' Neth<>rlan(ls Government ignores even
thcs:: pIOUS and (from the point of v:ew of the
Netllerlands aggressor) harmless wishes of the
Secmit)' Council, 2nd acts as it :finds most
profitable to itself. The Netherlands Government
b~lJaves in this way because it i:3 confident that it
w~ll llavc: protectors in the Se~llrity Council who
wdl not allow any 'larm to COme to it, their
interests <Ire the san-.e, and consequently'in the
last resort they are i::l.terestcd in wppressing- the
movements of the Indonesian people in its
struggle for independence. If for derr.agogic
reasons the3e protectors are sometimes forced
more or les3 to condemn the methods by which
!he Net1erl,:lnlls Government carries ant its policy
In IndcnesJa, everybody knows, and particubrly
the Netherlands Government itsel:'. that such con~
tlemnations are merely of a formal and hypocrHical nature,

Mais, si respeetu~l1ses et si. inoffensives pJur
les Pays-Bas que SOlent les recomm<l.ndations dlt
Conseil de securite, le Gouvernement nferlandais
n:en tieut nul c;omjJte et ne fait que ce qu'il veut,
SI le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas amt 'ainsi c'est
"cl" :1Y0lT'", au sein (l1l Cnn~eil
,,",
qu "l
1 est SU1'
de securi:e, des protecteurs qui le garcleront de :out
~al, qui ont avcc ltti des interets communs et qui
hennent, en fin de compte a voir etouffer la lutte
po~:'" l'independar-ce que' mene le peuple indoneslen. Si, Vour des :aisolls de demagogie, ces
protecteurs ,sont parfois ccntraints de porter, en
paroles, des jugements plu~ ou mQins severes sur
les methodes et la pD1itique adoptees par le GouvernelT1ent des Pays-Bas, en lndonesie, il o'eo
reste pas mains - et le Gouvernement neerlandais le sait n".ieux que quiconque - qu'iJ s'agit la
de jl1gements de pure forme et d'essence hypocrite,

This tragj~eomecly has lJeen playeJ in the
Security Council for several years. The adoption
and snbsequent fate of the Security Colmcil resolution of 28 January 1949, and the events which
fo:loweu its adoptioG, are merely all act in the
farce which is being played. TI~e last report of
the United Nations Commission for Indonesia,
dated 1 March 1949, removes all doubts on that
score, :f in3eed anyone had ever had ::my.

'rellc cst la uagi-comedie qui ;it: cleroule ckpuis
plusieurs annees au Conseil de securite, L'adoption de la resolution du Conseil de stwrite en
date dLl 28 j:mvier 1949, le son qui a ete reserve
it cette resolution et les evenements surveOllS
dermis ne sont q'"le le derouleoent normal de la
cor.tedie qu'on nous joue, Le dernier rapport de
la Commission des Nations Unies, en clate du
ler m.ars 1949, fait tomber tons leg doutes a cet
egard, si quiconque e:t pO\1vait n(}ut'fir encore.

As can be seen from the C~mmission's last
report, the Netherlallds Governn~ent is disregarding at ,the Security Council's recommendations,
and a,~iUg as though there had never been any
Secur:ty Cou\1cil decisions at all. The cf,.ll made
in the Security Council resolution for the release
of the nrrestecI kaeers of the Ir,donesian Republic. as also the demand far the immediate ce.:;sation of all military operations against t11e KepLlblic
by the Netherlands Government, is as a voice
crying in the wilderness, The Mme fate has befallen the Sec:urity Council requirement regarding
bc town and district of Jogjakarta_

Il resSOrt en eHet du dernier :'"apport de la Com~
misslon que le Goltve~neme\lt neerlandll.i!> ne tient
ll.l1cnn compte des recommanda:iol1s du ConseiI de
securite. Ce GOUVl'I'neltlf"nt fait fi c:.es reC01l1man~
da:ions du Conseil et agit C:Otnme si celui-ci
n't:vait adopte altcune resobtioll. Lorsque le
Ccnseil de securite demande la mise en liberre des
dirigeants de la Republique d'Indonesie, lotsqu'il
invite de GuuvernCr:tcnt des Pays-Bas a hire
cesser immtdiatO'mert ses or::erat:ons militaird
contre la Republique, sa resolution reste vox
clttfflmfiis in deserto. Les recommandations du'
Consei: relatives it la ville et a la region de
Djokjakarta ont subi le meme sort.

In :he face of ex:sting events :n Illdonegja, eVEn
the members of the United Nations Commission
are compeI1erl to ;;Jrlmit that the situation in that
country i~ steadily deteriorating, and thereby in~
creasing the threat to world stability. In other
words, continued Netherlnnds aggression in lndor:esia has brought about a serious threat tc the
maintenance u[ peace and security throughout
the world, Tlle Netherlands Governmer.t is now
engaged in preparing :or the next farce, tn the
form of a "round table conference", which is to
be held at 111e Hague. Its object will be to
<ittempt to mislead naive people by convindng
them that the conference wiT: consist of talks
between :he two pal,ties on equal terms. This
.attempt is so cruee, and the doak so thin, that
even the Unitf'd Nations Commission, with all its
sympathy for the Netherlands aggressor, was
compelled to admit in its report, that the whole
situa:ion was contrary to the Security Council'"
resoLttioll,
Nevertheless it is surprising that the Uniled
Nations Commiss:on did not refuse the Netherlands Goverument's invitation to attend the round
table conference at The Hague and asked the
Secuity Crmncil for instmctions-as though it

Devant les evenements qui se deroulent actuellement en Indonesie, les membres de la Commission
des Nations Unies sont ellx-memes contraints de
reconnaitre que la situation clan.!:; ce pays ne fait
qu'empirer et mettre plus enCOre en danger la
stabilite du monde. Autrement dit, l'agression
ininterrompue it laquelle se li.vrent les Pays-Basen
Indonesie a cree une menace gravecotltre la paix
ella securitf dt.:: monde entier, Le GOuvememenl
neerla~dais est en train de preparer tine nouve11e
farce sous les especes d'une "conference de la
table roncie" qUI doi: se reuuir a. La Haye afin de
tcnter d'induire en erreur les esprits naBs et de
les convai:lcre que, a la conference, les deux
parties converseront sur un pied d'egalite. Ce:te
manceuvre presente un caractere si grossier, elle
est tellement cousu de fil blanc, que meme la
Commission des Nations Unies, qui poul'!ant fa-'
vorise I'agresseur neerlandais, a ete contrainte
C'admettre, dans son rapport, que tout cela est
contraire a la resolution du Con!>eil de secnrite.
Il est donc fort etonnant que la Commission des
Natic,ns Unie~ n'ait pas refuse l'offre~ue lui
faisait le Gouvernement neerlandais de prendre
part a la conference de la table roude a. La Haye
et air demnnde des imtructions all Consell de

27
were not ciear that the Securitv Council can have
nothing to eln with the round table conference
stlggested by the Netherlands Government and as
thoug,h it were not perfectly obvious to the United
Naliuns Commission that its participHtion in the
rOtmd table conference wOllkl be of direct assistance to the Netherlands Government in its attempt
to mislead world pub:ic opinion and deceive the
Indonesian people.
IL was no accident that tbe Netherlands representative stated at an ear:ier Security Council
meeting [416th meeting] that mltch wot:1d depend
on the United Nations ComIl1i~sion's reply, re
garding its participation in the round table conferf>nce. The Netherlands re8resentative lets it
be understood, crudely and frankly enough, tllat
his Government needs the further services of tte
United Nations Commission to cover its next
attempts to strangle the Indonesian Rept1blic.

The rJoint of the matter is not that the task of
the round table conference is to devise ~rr;lnge­
ments for an accelerated transfer of sovereignty
over Indonesia to an Indonesian Federal GoYernment whicl'l wj]] be flllly representalivt: of the
whole of Indonesia, as General McNanghton has
unhesitatingly stated [417th meeting]. The crux
bf fie matter is that the Netherlands Governmer,t,
in agreement with some delegations in the
Sec'-1iity Council, is seeking an appl'opnate way to
destroy the Indonesian Republic and restore the
old order in Indonesia. T1Je:-e is no dO"lbt thnt
the Canadian and Chinese representatives clearly
uJ]dersta~d and see all this, although they are
trying to convince the Security Council of the
harmlessness and desirab:Iity of tile sllgr.esteu
round table conference.
The Netherlands Government's statements concer:1ing the establi;;llment of the so-called United
States of Indonesia cannot be treated seriously.
Such statements are a deception. A~tempts are
being made tc find a ncw fonn to ju;;ti-fy the
Nether1::U1ds' colonial domination ove:- the Indonesian people. It is trying to set Up a puppet
.'3tate with a puppet govermneI:t having iIl1t:lOry
sovereignty and illusory power. The Netherlands
Government is therefore prepared to speed up
the creation of the Unite.d States of Indonesia
and to create it in the shortest possible time.
Tlw.t is whv the Netherlands (,()vF.rt1ment is so
afraid of the restoration of the Indonesian Republic, as the existence ~f the Republic wonld
p1~ce seriOl:S difficnlties ill the way of the creation
of ;:lUppet Cnited States of Indone,;ia. That is
the reason for the Netherlands Governme:'lt's
reservation on armed assistance for the United
States cf Indonesia. The Nethelancls Government is sure that tl1f~ puppet government will agree
to the inclllsion er tile cla:.Ise on armed assistance,
In the light of these facts, one can only regret
that last December the Security COL1ncil, under
pressure from the United Kin[dcm <lr.cl the
Unitf'n State;; of America, reiected the Ukrainian
delegation's resolirtion [5/1158] on. the immediate
withdrawal of Nether1anus troops from the territory of the Indonesian R~pllblic~a proposal
which wottld have helped towards a positive
solution oi the Indol:esian question !lOW before
tbe Security Council.

a

sccurite, c:omme s'il n'etait pas clair que le Comc:i1
ne s2.urait avoil" rien de commun avec la conference de la fau1e rondl; oue tnonte le Gouveroement des Pays·Bas, conl1ne :;'iln'etait pas evident
pour la Commission des Nations Unies que, en
participant cetce Ccnference, eIle ferait le jeu
du Gotlvernement neerlandais et l'aiderait
tromper l'opininn fluhliqL:e mondkle et le peuple
indonesien,

a

a

a

Ce n'est pas par hasard que, une seance precedente (416hxe seance] du Canseil de securite,
le representant des Pa)'s-Bas a dedare que beJ.ucoup d!1:penrlrait rle la reponse que ferait la Com
miss:on des Nations Unies
l'egnrd de sa parla conference de la table ronde. 11
ticipation
donne U t:nLenclre, cl<: fa,,::m M~ez franche et
brutale, que le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas a.ura
encore besoin des services de la Commission des
Nations Unies qui doit I'aider a ma>iquer k5 te\1~
tatives qu'il s'apprete
bire pour etouffer la
Repl1bliqne- d'lnc1onesie.
p

a

a

a

Il ne s'agit pas ici de savoir si le but de c:ette
conference de la table roude est de chercher Et.
faire rapidement ]'nccord sur la question du transfert de la sotlverainete sur l'Indonesie it un gou~
vcrncm~nt federal indonkien representant absolurnent toute l'Indonesie, ainsi que le general
McNaughton n'J pas hesite le declarer [417hno!
seance]. 'Void a quoi se resume l'afhire: le Gouverne.ment des Pays~Ba.s, de concert avec certains
membres d11 Conseil de secll r ite, cberche la meilleure fa<;on d'etouffer la Republique d'Indollbsie
et de retailir en Indonesie le regime ancien. Tout
eeln, sans dontf' ~l1Clln, les representants de la
Chine et du Gmada le VOlent et le comprennent
fort him. 11 n'en essaient pas moins de convaincre
le Conseil ue securite que rette conrefmee de la
table mnde est padaitement inoffensive et acceptable.
On ne saurait prendre au serleux des deC:arations du Gouvernement des Pays-Bas concernant
la creation de ces Etats-Unis d'Indone,'lir.. Tous
ces discoLlrs ne sont que tromperie. On s'eflorce
simplement de trouver une fa<;on nouvelle de diasin1l1ler la domination olonialc des Pays-Ba.; sur
le peuple d'Indonesie. 11 s'agit de cn§er un Etat
fantothf' d0te d'une sGllverainete Lliusolre, d'Ull
pouvoir il1usoire. Voila pourql\oi le GDtwernelTIent des Pays-Bas est dispose a reduirc le delai
Jaw,; leguel scraient erees CP;; Rats-Unis d'fndonesie, ales creer le plus rapidement possible.
Voila pourqtlOi le GOtlvernement des Pays-Bas
craint tant le retaLlisseruent de la Republiqlle
d'Indonesie, car l'existcnce de I::. Republiq~e rcndrait fort diffici1e la creation des Ettlts~UIl1S fantoches d'Indoncsie. Voila pourquoi le Guuvel'nement des Pays-Bas introduit la clause d'assist:mce
militairc aUK Etats-Uni;; d'Indonesie. 11 est, en
effet, persl1ade qlle l'accord de l'Etat. fantoche a
l'inc1usion de cette clause 111i est UCqUlS d',rvan;:e.

a

A la ll1miere de ces faits, il convient d'txprimer
Ull extreme l'egret ([Lte le Conseil de securite, sous

la pI'ession deS delegations atl ROY<ll1me Vni et
p

des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, ait refuse, en decembre demier, d'adopter la proposicion de la Republi:
que socialiste sovielique d'Ulm.ine [S/1153j qU1
tcndait
iaire evacuer immediatement le territoire de la Republique d'Indonesie par ;(;5 forceS
J,l'mees neerlan<laises et qui aurait contribt.:e it la
solution s:lJi.~iaisante du probleme indonesien dom
le Conseil est ac:tuellement saisi,

a

28
Experience has shown that the present situation i~ due not only to resolutions ado{:ted by the
Secllrlty Council, ))\1t also to the Security Council's
relnctance to pot an end to the Netherlands Government's ffihotage ever. of half-hearted and
toothless resolutions. This situation proves that
the discussion of the Indonesian question in the
Security Council, through the efforts of the United
States, United Kingdom and other delegations,
bas in effect been turned into a mockery not only
of the people of Indonesia hut of the Security
Council itself.

The Ukrainian delegation is opposed to the
proposal that the United Nations Commission for
Indonesia should participate in the round table
conference and also to the Chinese representative's pt"Opcsal that it shcukl participate in a pre~
liminary cenIerem:e of the United Nations on
Indonesia.

Comme l'a demantre la pratique, le tour qu'ont
pris les evenements ne depend pas seulement des
nfsolutions adoptees par le Conseil de securite,
mais al1ss! de la rnauvaise grace de Cl' dernier
lorsqn'il s'agit de mettre fin au sabotage exerce
paT le Gouvenement des Pays-Bas l'egard des
resolutions du Conseil qui ne sont pOU'rtant que
des demi-mcs:lres anodines. Le resu1tat en est
qLle, par suite oes effort... deplnyes flar des delegations tenes que celles des Etats-Unii d'Amerique, du Royaume-Uni et d'autres encore, l'examen
de la question indanesienne en Conseil de securite.
tend, en fin de compte, ridiculiser aussi bien le
penple d'Indcncsie que le Conseil de sccurite
Jui-mene.
La delegation de la Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine s'oppose la proposition qui vise
faire participer la Commission des Nations
Unics la coderence de la table ronde, de meme
qu'a la proposition du representant de la Chine
relative une conference preliminaire et it la paTticipati:m de la Commission des Nations Unies
pour l'Indonesie cette conference.

a

a

a

a

a
a

a

Le

(traduit

de

l' espagnol) :

The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
In view of the late hour and the fact that there
are two speakers on our list, I think we should
adjourn and meet again at 3 p.m. on Monday
next. I de not know whether the members of
the Council and the representatives who have been
invited to attend would have sufficient time to
cons'.llt between themselves and with their GGvernments. If there are no objections, :hat will be
our procedure.

Etant donnt gu'il est deja tard et qu'il y a eneor~
deux orateurs inscrits, je erai;; qa'il serait preferable de lever la seance pOUf nous reunir
notlveau lundi prochain a 15 heures. J'ignore si
les me:nbres -:lu Conscil et les representants invites auront le temps de se consulter et de se
mettre en rap?ort avec If'l1rS GOllvernements. S'il
n'y a pas d'objections, je considererai que les
membr('s du COllseil sout cl'accord.

The 'meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

La seance est levee d 18 h. 10.

PRiSrDENT

a
