A/56/PV.99

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-sixth session

99th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 22 May 2002, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Han Seung-soo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Republic of Korea)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Hussein
(Ethiopia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of
the expenses of the United Nations
(A/56/780/Add.5)
The Acting President: I should like to draw the
attention of the General Assembly to document
A/56/780/Add.5. In the letter contained in that
document, the Secretary-General informs the President
of the General Assembly that, since the issuance of his
communications contained in documents A/56/780 and
addenda 1 to 4, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has made the necessary payment to reduce its arrears
below the amount specified in Article 19 of the
Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in this
document?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 17 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/626/Add.1)
The Acting President: In paragraph 5 of the
report of the Fifth Committee contained in document
A/56/626/Add.1, the Fifth Committee recommends that
the General Assembly appoint Mr. Kenshiro Akimoto
of Japan a member of the Committee on Contributions
for a term of office beginning on 22 May 2002 and
ending on 31 December 2003.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint the person recommended by the Fifth
Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 17.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-39378 (E)

*0239378*

A/56/PV.99

Agenda item 8 (continued)

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 46.

Adoption of the agenda and organization of work
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 3rd plenary meeting on 19 September 2001, the
General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (a) of
agenda item 98 to the Second Committee. Members
will also recall that the sub-item remains open for
consideration during the fifty-sixth session.
As mentioned in the footnote to document
A/56/L.78, under agenda items 46 and 98 (a), in order
for the General Assembly to take action expeditiously
on the draft resolution, the Assembly will have to
decide to consider the sub-item directly in plenary
meeting.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
consider sub-item (a) of agenda item 98 directly in
plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I further take it that
the Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 98?
As I see
accordingly.

no

objection,

we

shall

proceed

Agenda items 46 and 98 (continued)
The situation in East Timor during its transition to
independence
Environment and sustainable development
(a) Implementation of Agenda 21 and the
Programme for the Further Implementation
of Agenda 21
Draft resolution (A/56/L.78)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/56/L.78, entitled
“Participation of East Timor in the World Summit on
Sustainable Development and its preparatory process”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.78?
Draft resolution A/56/L.78 was adopted
(resolution 56/283).

2

The Assembly has concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 98.
Agenda item 89 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/56/551/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) in paragraph 10 of its report.
I request the Rapporteur of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) to
introduce the report of the Fourth Committee.
Mr. Maitland (South Africa), Rapporteur of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee): It is an honour for me to present
to the General Assembly document A/56/551/Add.l,
which contains the report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (the Fourth Committee)
covering a comprehensive review of the whole
question of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects, under item 89 of the Assembly’s agenda.
As those present may recall, my previous
appearance before this body, on 10 December last, was
for the purpose of introducing all the other reports of
the Fourth Committee on agenda items 85 through 94,
as well as items 12 and 18. Those reports, contained in
documents A/56/547 to A/56/557, included the texts of
draft resolutions and decisions recommended to the
General Assembly for adoption. With the presentation
today of A/56/551/Add.l, which recommends the draft
resolution on item 89 to the General Assembly by the
Fourth Committee, the reporting obligations of the
Fourth Committee for and to this session are fulfilled.
In its operative paragraphs, the draft resolution
proposed by the Fourth Committee in A/56/551/Add.1
welcomes the report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations; endorses the proposals,
recommendations and conclusions contained in that
report; urges Member States to take all necessary steps

A/56/PV.99

to implement them; reiterates the conditions under
which personnel-contributing countries may become
members of the Special Committee; decides that the
Special Committee shall continue its efforts; and
requests it to submit a report on its work to the General
Assembly at its fifty-seventh session.
In the course of its 20th to 22nd meetings, held
during the first part of the fifty-sixth session of the
General Assembly, and in its resumed session on 26
April 2002, the Fourth Committee examined agenda
item 89 from a number of different perspectives. These
began with a comprehensive introductory statement by
the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations and a general debate under this item. They
continued with an informal interactive meeting
covering the comprehensive review of the whole
question of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects. They also included informal interactive
discussions in the Committee with the UnderSecretary-General and other senior officials of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
Subsequently, in April 2002, the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee again took up this
agenda item to examine the report of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and to approve
a draft resolution endorsing it. Today, those labours
result in the report that those present see before them,
which I now have the honour to present to the General
Assembly for its approval.
In so doing, I would be remiss were I to fail to
acknowledge those whose efforts have been
particularly vital in bringing it to fruition: the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee, its Bureau
and those delegations that coordinated the draft
resolutions adopted by it; the Chairman of the Fourth
Committee, Ambassador Hasmy Agam of Malaysia and
Vice-Chairpersons Ms. Anna-Maija Korpi of Finland,
Mrs. Alexandrina Rusu of Romania and Mr. Cristián
Streeter of Chile. I should also like to express
appreciation to the Under-Secretary-General of the
Department of General Assembly Affairs and
Conference Services, Mr. Chen Jian; the Secretary of
the Committee, Ms. Lesley Wilkinson, and her very
competent team from the Secretariat.
The document before us is a testament to the
diligence and dedication that each and all of them have
brought to this endeavour. With that in mind, it is my
particular pleasure to submit to the General Assembly

for its consideration and adoption the recommendations
of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
contained in document A/56/551/Add.1, covering a
comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) which is before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I remind members
that, under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General
Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee), unless
notified otherwise in advance.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/225 B).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 89?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 3.25 p.m.

3
