NO COVER
(1)

NO COVER
(2)

RESOLUTIONS
adopted by the General Assembly
during its

TWENTY-SEVENTH SESSION

19 September -

19 December 1972

GENERAL ASSEMBLY

OFFICIAL RECORDS : TWENTY-SEVENTH SESSION
SUPPLEMENT No. 30 (A/S730)

UNITED NATIONS
New York, 1973

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
The arabic and roman numerals identifying each resolution indicate, respectively, the number of the resolution and the number of the session at which it was
adopted.
The resolutions of the General Assembly are numbered in the order of their
adoption. A check list of the resolutions adopted by the Assembly during its
twenty-seventh session and an index, by agenda item, of the resolutions and of
other action taken by the Assembly can be found at the end of the present volume.
Also appearing at the end of the volume are a Ust of organs whose composition
is given in the volumes of resolutions and a list of conventions and declarations
the texts of which are reproduced in those volumes.

CONTENTS
Page

Allocation of agenda items

v

Appointment of the Credentials Committee
_

xii
xii

Election of five non-permanent members of the Security Council

xii

Election of nine members of the Economic and Social Council .

xiii

Election of five members of the International Court of Justice ...

xiii

Election of fifteen members of the Industrial Development Board

xiv

Composition of the General Committee .

.

Resolutions adopted hy the General Assembly
during its twenty-seventh session

[2904 (XXVII) - 3049 (XXVII)]
Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee . . . . . . . . . .

11

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee . .

23

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee . . . . . . . .

33

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

61

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

75

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee . . . . . . . . . .

91

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

113

Composition of organs

121
123
125
132

Conventions and declarations

_

Index of resolutions and decisions ......_
Check list of resolutions and decisions .... .

ill

.

ALLOCATION OF AGENDA ITEMS 1
Plenary meetinge
1. Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation of Indonesia
(item 1).
2. Minute of silent prayer or meditation (item 2).
3. Credentials of representatives to the twenty-seventh session of the General
Assembly (item 3) :
(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee;
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee.
4. Election of the President (item 4).
5. Constitution of the Main Committees and election of officers (item 5).
6. Election of the Vice-Presidents (item 6).
7. Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the
Charter of the United Nations (item 7).
8. Adoption of the agenda (item 8).
9. General debate (item 9).

to. Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization (item 10).
11. Report of the Security Council (item 11).
12. Report of the Economic and Social Council [chapters I, II, XX and XXI
(section A) J (item 12).
13. Report of the International Court of Justice (item 14).
14. Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency (item 15).
15. Election of five non-permanent members of the Security Council (item 16).
16. Election of nine members of the Economic and Social Council (item 17).
17. Election of five members of the International Court of Justice (item 18).
18. Election of fifteen members of the Industrial Development Board (item 19).
19. Co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity (item 20).
20. The situation in the MidJJe East (item 21).
21. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Ind\)pendence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples: report of the Special CommIttee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (item 22).2
22. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (item 43):3
(c) Confirmation of the appointment of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
23. United Nations Industrial Development Organization (item 44):4
(c) Confirmation of the appointment of the Executive Director of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization.
1 Unless otherwise indicated, all the items formed part of the agenda recommended by
the General Committee in its first report (A/8800/Rev.l and Corr.2) and adopted by the
General Assembly at its 2035th to 2037th plenary meetings, on 22 and 23 September 1972. At
the 2037th meeting, the Assembly adopted the recommendations of the General Committee
on the allocation of agenda items. For the numerical list of agenda items, see "Index of resolutions and decisions", page 125.
2 See also "Fourth Committee", item 11.
3 For subitems (a) and (b), see below "Second Committee", item 2.
4 For subitems (a) and (b), see below "Second Committee", item 3.

v

24. Question of Namibia (item 64):1\
(e) Appointment of the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia.

25. Admission of new Members to the United Nations (item 23).
26. Strengthening of the role of the United Nations with regard to the maintenance
and consolidation of international peace and security, the development of
co-operation among all nations and the promotion of the rules of international
law in relations between States (item 24).

27. Non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the
use of nuclear weapons (item 25).

Fir8t Committee
(POLITICAL AND SECURITY QUESTIONS, INCLUDING THE REGULATION
OF ARMAMENTS)

1. Implementation of the results of the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon
States: report of the International Atomic Energy Agency (item 27).6
2. International co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space: report of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (item 28).
3. Preparation of an international treaty concerning the Moon: report of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (item 29).
4. General and complete disarmament (item 30):6
(a) Report of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament;
(b) Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency;
(c) Report of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolution 2852
(XXVI), paragraph 5. 7
5. Chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons: report of the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament (item 31).
6. Urgent need for suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests (item 32):
(a) Report of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament;
(b) Report of the Secretary-General.
7. Implementation of General Assembly resolution 2830 (XXVI) concerning
the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of TIatelolco):
report of the Secretary-General (item 33).
8. Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace: report of the SecretaryGeneral (item 34).
9. Implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security: report of the Secretary-General (item 35).
10. Reservation exclusively for peaceful purposes of the sea-bed and the ocean
floor, and the subsoil thereof, underlying the high seas beyond the limits of
present national jurisdiction and use of their resources in the interests of mankind, and convening of a conference on the law of the sea: report of Ute
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond
the Limits of National Jurisdiction (item 36).
11. World Disarmament Conference: report of the Secretary-General (item 26).
1\ For subitems (a) to (d), see below "Fourth Committee", item 3.
6 At its 2037th plenary meeting, on 23 September 1972, the General Assembly decided,
on the recommendation of the General Committee, as set forth in its first report (A/88001
Rev.1 and Corr.2, para. 20 (b», that the relevant paragraphs of the annual report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (A/8774) should be drawn to the attention of the First
Committee in connexion with its consideration of items 27 and 30.
7 At its 2037th plenary meeting, on 23 September 1972, the General Assembly decided,
on the recommendation of the General Committee, as set forth in its first report (A/88001
Rev.1 and Corr.2, para. 21), that the report on napalm and other incendiary weapons, to be
submitted by the Secretary-General under paragraph 5 of Assembly resolution 2852 (XXVI).
should be referred to the First Committee in connexion with its consideration of item 30.
See also "Sixth Committee", item 8 (a).

vi

12. Preparation of an international convention on principles governing the use
by States of artificial earth satellites for direct television broadcasting
(item 37).
Speeial Political Committee

1. Policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa (item 38):
(tI) Reports of the Special Committee on Apartheid;
(b) Reports of the Secretary-GeneraL

2. Effects of atomic radiation: report of the United Nations Scientific Committee
on the Effects of Atomic Radiation (item 39).
3. United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (item 40):
(a) Report of the Commissioner-General;
(b) Report of the Working Group on the Hnancing of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East;
(c) Report of ,the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine;
(d) Reports of the Secretary-General.
4. Comprehensive review of the whole question of peace-keeping operations in
all their aspects: report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations
(item 41).
5. Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories (item 42).

Second Committee
(ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL QUESTIONS)

1. Report of the Economic and Social Council [chapters III to XI, XlI (sections
A to G) and XVII to XIX] (item 12).H
2. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (item 43): 9
(a) Report of the Conference on its third session;
(b) Report of the Trade and Development Board.
3. United Nations Industrial Development Organization (item 44): 10
(a) Report of the Industrial Development Board;
(b) Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Co-operation between the United
Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization.
4. United Nations Institute for Training and Research: report of the Executive
Director (item 45).
5. Operational activities for development: reports of the Governing Council of
the United Nations Development Programme (item 46):
(a) United Nations Development Programme;
(b) United Nations Capital Development Fund;
(c) Technical co-operation activities undertaken by the Secretary-General;
(d) United Nations Volunteers programme.
8 At its 2037th plenary meeting, on 23 September 1972, the General Assembly decided,
on the recommendation of the General Committee, as set forth in its first report (A/88001
Rev.l and Corr.2, para. 20 (c) ), that: (a) chapter III (General discussion of international
economic and social policy) might be of interest to the First and Third Committees: (b)
chapter IV (Review and appraisal of the Second United Nations Development Decade) might
be of interest to the Third Committee; (c) chapter V (Mass poverty and unemployment)
might be of interest to the Third Committee; (d) chapter VI (Regional co-operation) might
be of interest to the Third and Fifth Committees; (e) chapter XI, section A (Report of the
Population Commission), might be of interest to the Third Committee; (f) in chapter XU,
section D (Promotion of the co-operative movement during the Second United Nations Development Decade), section E (Land reform) and section F (Housing, building and planning) might be of interest to the Third Committee; and (g) chapter XIX, section A (Review
of the Council's co-ordinating machinery, methods of work and procedures) might be of
interest to the Fifth Committee. For chapters XVII, XVIII and XIX, section B, see also
"Third Committee". item I, and "Fifth Committee", item 15; for chapter XIX, section A
'
see also "Third Committee", item 1.
9 For subitem (c), see above "Plenary meetings", item 22.
10 For subitem (c), see above "Plenary meetings", item 23.

vii

6. United Nations Conference on the Human Environment: report of the Secretary-General (item 47).
7. Question of the establishment of an international university (item 48).
Third Committee
(SOCiAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL QUESTIONS)

1. Report of the Economic and Social Council [chapters XII (section H), XIII
to XV and XVII to XIX] (item 12).11
2. Human rights in armed conflicts (item 49): 12
(b) Protection of journalists engaged in dangerous missions in areas of armed
conflict: report of the Secretary-General.
3. Elimination of all forms of racial discrimination (item 50):
(a) Reports of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolutions
2784 (XXVI) and 2785 (XXVI);
(b) Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
(c) Status of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination: report of the Secretary-General;
(d) Draft convention on the suppression and punishment of the crime of
apartheid.

4. Importance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination and of the &peedy granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights (item 51).
5. Principles of international co-operation in the detection, arrest, extradition
and punishment of persons guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity
(item 52).
6. Crime prevention and control (item 53).
7. Youth, its education in the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, its problems and needs, and its active participation in national development and international co-operation (item 54):
(a) Channels of communication with youth and international youth organizations: report of the Secretary-General;
(b) Implement'ation of the Declaration on the Promotion among Youth of
the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding between Peoples.
8. Status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights: report
of the Secretary-General (item 55).
9. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (item 56):
(a) Report of the High Commissioner;
(b) Question of the continuation of the Office of the High Commissioner.
10. Freedom of information (item 57):
(a) Draft Declaration on Freedom of Information;
(b) Draft Convention on Freedom of Information.
11. Human rights and scientific and technological developments: report of the
Secretary-General (item 58).
11 At its 2037th plenary meeting, on 23 September 1972, the General Assembly decided,
on the recommendation of the General Committee, as set forth in its first report (A/8800/
Rev.l and Corr.2, para. 20 (d), that: (a) in chapter XIV, section A.6 (Participation of women
in organizations in the United Nations system) might be of interest to the Fifth Committee
and sections B.3 (Elimination of all forms of racial discrimination) and B.4 (Question of
slavery and the slave trade in all their practices and manifestations, including the slavery-like
practices of apartheid and colonialism) might be of interest to the Special Political Committee:
(b) chapter XV, section C (Disaster relief co-ordination) and section D (Measures to be
taken following the natural disaster in the Philippines), might be of interest to the Fifth
Committee; and (c) chapter XIX, section A (Review of the Council's co-ordinating machinery, methods of work and procedures), might be of interest to the Fifth Committee. For
chapters XVII, XVIII and XIX, section B, see also "Second Committee", item 1, and "Fifth
Committee", item 15; for chapter XIX, s~cljon A, see also "Second Committee", item 1.
12 For subitem (a), see below "Sixth Committee", item 8.
viii

12. Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance (item 59):
(a) Draft Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Religious Intolerance;
( b) Draft International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief.
13. Programme for the observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights (item 60).
14. Assistance in cases of natural disaster and other disaster situations: report
of the Secretary-General (item 61).
15. United Nations Conference for a world convention on adoption law (item 62).

Fourth Committee
(QUESTIONS RELATING TO TRUST AND NON-SELF-GOVERNING TERRITORIES)

1. Report of the Trusteeship Council (item 13).
2. Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article
73 e of the Charter of the United Nations (item 63):
(a) Report of the Secretary-General;
(b) Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.
3. Question of Namibia (item 64): 13
(a) Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples;
(b) Report of the United Nations Council for Namibia;
(c) Question of the enlargement of the United Nations Council for Namibia:
report of the Secretary-General;
(d) United Nations Fund for Namibia: report of the Secretary-General.
4. Question of Territories under Portuguese administration (item 65):
(a) Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples;
(b) Report of the Secretary-General.
5. Question of Southern Rhodesia (item 66);
(a) Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples;
(b) Report of the Secretary-General.
6. Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Territories under Portuguese domination and in all other Territories under colonial
domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination ,in southern Africa: report of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementat'ion of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (item 67).
7. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international
institutions associated with the United Nations (item 68):
(a) Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples;
(b) Reports of the Secretary-General.
8. Report of the Economic and Social Council [chapter XVI] (item 12).
13 For subitem (e), see above "Plenary meetings", item 24.

ix

9. United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa:
report of the Secretary-General (item 69).
10. Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories: report of the Secretary-General (item 70).
11. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples: report of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples [chapters relating to specific
Territories] (item 22).14
Fifth Committee
(ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY QUESTIONS)

1. Financial reports and accounts for the year 1971 and reports of the Board of
Auditors (item 71):
(a) United Nations;
(b) United Nations Development Programme;
(c) United Nations Children's Fund;
(d) United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near Eas.t;
(e) United Nations Institute for Training and Research;
(f) Voluntary funds administered by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.
2. Supplementary estimates for the financial year 1972 (item 72).
3. Budget estimates for the financial year 1973 (item 73).
4. Planning estimate for the financial year 1974 (item 74).
5. Pattern of conferences: report of the Secretary-General (item 75).
6. Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of subsidiary organs of the
General Assembly (item 76):
(a) Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
(b) Committee on Contributions;
(c) Board of Auditors;
(d) Investments Committee: confirmation of the appointments made by the
Secretary-General;
(e) United Nations Administrative Tribunal;
(f) United Nations Staff Pension Committee. 11i
7. Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations: report of the Committee on Contributions (item 77).
8. Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations with the
specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency: reports of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
(item 78).
9. Joint Inspection Unit (item 79):
(a) Reports of the Joint Inspection Unit;
(b) Question of the continuation of the Joint Inspection Unit: report of the
Secretary-General.
] O. Publications and documentation of the United Nations (item 80):
(a) Report of the Secretary-General;16
(b) Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions.
14 See also "Plenary meetings", item 21.
15 At

its 2081st plenary meeting, on 9 November 1972, the General Assembly decided,
on the recommendation of the Secretary-General (A/8876), to include this question in the
agenda as <uhitem (t).
16 At its 2037th plenary meeting, on 23 September 1972, the General Assembly decided
on the recommendation ,)f the General Committee, as set forth in its first report (A/8800i
Rev.1 and Corr.2, para. 20 (e», to refer to the Sixth Committee, for prior consideration,
the part of the report of the Secretary-General on recurrent publications (A/88S1, paras. 6-23)
which de~1t with pl1hE'·,!!ons in the legal field.
x

11. Personnel questions (item 81):
(a) Composition of the Secretariat: report of the Secretary-General;
(b) Other personnel questions: report of the Secretary-GeneraL
12. Report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board (item 82).
13. United Nations salary system: report of the Special Committee for the Review
of the United Nations Salary System (item 83).
14. United Nations International School: report of the Secretary-General
(item 84).
15. Report of the Economic and Social Council [chapters XVII, XVIII, XIX
(section B) and XXI (sections Band C)J (item 12),17
16. Amendment to rule 160 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly (item 93),18
Sixth Committee
(LEGAL QUESTIONS)

1. Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its twenty-fourth
session (item 85).

2. Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on
the work of its fifth session (item 86).
3. Representation of States in their relations with international organizations
(item 87).
4. Report of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression
(item 88).

S. Need to consider suggestions regarding the review of the Charter of the
United Nations: report of the Secretary-General (item 89).
6. Review of the role of the International Court of Justice (item 90).
7. Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country (item 91).
8. Human rights in armed conflicts (item 49) ;19
(a) Respect for human rights in armed conflicts: report of the SecretaryGeneral under General Assembly resolutions 2852 (XXVI), paragraph
8, and 2853 (XXVI) .20
9. Measures to prevent international terrorism which endangers or takes innocent
human lives or jeopardizes fundamental freedoms, and study of the underlying
causes of those forms of terrorism and acts of violence which lie in misery,
frustration, grievance and despair and which cause some people to sacrifice
human lives, including their own, in an attempt to effect radical changes
(item 92).21
17 For chapters XVII, XVIII and XIX, section B, see also "Second Committee", item 1,
and "Third Committee", item l.
18 At its 2070th plenary meeting, on 20 October 1972, the General Assembly decided,
on the recommendation of the General Committee, as set forth in its third report (A/8800/
Rev.lIAdd.2), to include this item in the agenda and to allocate it to the Fifth Committee.
19 For subitem (b), see above 'Third Committee", item 2.
20 See also "First Committee", item 4 (c).
21 At its 2037th plenary meeting, on 23 September 1972, the General Assembly adopted
the wording of this item on the recommendation of the General Committee (A/8800/Rev.l
and Corr.2, para. 18) as amended by documents A/L.672 and A/L.673.

xi

APPOINTMENT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITrEE
(Item 3 (a»

In accordance with rule 28 of its rules of procedure, the General Assembly
appointed the Credentials Committee.
The Committee was constituted as follows: BELGIUM, CHINA, COSTA RICA,
JAPAN, SENEGAL, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED REPUBLIC OF
TANZANIA, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and URUGUAY.

2032nd plenary meeting
19 September 1972

COMPOSITION OF THE GENERAL COMMITrEE
(Items 4, 5 and 6)

The General Committee of the General Assembly for the twenty-seventh session was constituted as follows:
President of the General Assembly:
Mr. Stanislaw TREPCZYNSKI (Poland).
2032nd plenary meeting
19 September 1972

Vice-presidents of the General Assembly:
The representatives of the following Member States: CHINA, COLOMBIA,
CYPRUS, ETHIOPIA, FRANCE, HAITI, ICELAND, LIBYAN ARAB REPUBLIC, MAURITANIA, NEW ZEALAND, PARAGUAY, PHILIPPINES, RWANDA, SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
2034th plenary meeting
20 September 1972
Chairmen of the Main Committees of the General Assembly:
First Committee: Mr. Radha Krishna RAMPHUL (Mauritius);
Special Political Committee: Mr. Hady TOuRE (Guinea);
Second Committee: Mr. Bruce RANKIN (Canada);
Third Committee: Mr. Carlos GIAMBRUNO (Uruguay);
Fourth Committee: Mr. Zdenek CERNiK (Czechoslovakia);
Fifth Committee: Mr. Motoo OGISO (Japan);
Sixth Committee: Mr. Eric Suv (Belgium).
2034th plenary meeting22
20 September 1972

ELECTION OF FIVE NON·PERMANENT MEMBERS OF THE
SECURITY COUNCIL
(Item 16)

The General Assembly elected five non-permanent members to the Security
Council to fiU the vacancies occurring on the expiration of the terms of office of
ARGENTINA, BELGIUM, ITALY, JAPAN and SoMALIA.
22 At that meeting the President of the General Assembly announced the results of the
elections held by the Committees.

xii

The following Member States were elected: AUSTRALIA, AUSTRIA, INDONESIA,
KENYA and PERU.
2070th plenmy meeting
20 October 1972

•

•

•

As a result of the above election, the composition of the Security Council for 1973 will
be as follows: AUSTllALIA,·· AUSTRIA,·· CHINA, FRANCE, GUINEA.· INDIA,· INDONESIA,··
KENYA••• PANAMA,. PERU." SUDAN,. UNION OF SoVIET SOCIAUST REPUBLICS. UNITBD KINoDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTIIEllN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and YUGOSLAVIA.·

• Term of office expires on 31 December 1973.
.. Term of office expires on 31 December 1974.

ELECTION OF NINE MEMBERS OF THE ECONOMIC
AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
(Item 17)

The General Assembly elected nine members to the Economic and Social
Council to fill ,the vacancies ooourring on the expiration of the terms of office of
BRAZIL, FRANCE, GHANA, GREECE, ITALY, KENYA, PERU, SRI LANKA and TuNISIA.
The following Member States were elected: ALGERIA, BRAZIL, FRANCE, MALI,
MONGOLIA, NETHERLANDS, SPAIN, TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO and UGANDA.

2076th plenary meeting
31 October 1972

•

•

•

As a result of the above election, the composition of the Economic and Social Council
for 1973 will be as follows: ALGERIA... • BOLIVIA.·· BRAZIL,·" BURUNDJ,** CHILB,··

HAm.·

CHINA,•• FINLAND.·· FRANCE.···
HUNGARY.· JAPAN.·· LEBANON.· MADAGASC&R,·
MALAYSIA,.
MONGOLIA,··· NETIIERLANDS,··· NEW ZEALAND,· NIGER,·
SPAIN.... TluNIDAD AND TOBAGO.··· UGANDA,. . • UNION OF SoVIET SocIAUST REPUBLICS,•• UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTIIEllN IRELAND.·· UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA. and ZAIRE.·

MALI.···

POLAND.··

• Term of office expires on 31 December 1973.
•• Term of office expires on 31 December 1974.
••• Term of office expires on 31 December 1975.

ELECTION OF FIVE MEMBERS OF THE
INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
(Item 18)

The General Assembly and the Security Council, voting independently, elected
five members to the International Court of Justice to fill the vacancies occurring
on the expiration of the terms of office oftlhe following judges:
Sir Muhammad ZAFRULLA KHAN (Pakistan);
Sir Gerald FITZMAURICE (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland);
Mr. Luis PADILLA NERVO (Mexico);
Mr. Isaac FORSTER (Senegal);
Mr. Andre GROS (France).
The following members were elected:
Mr. Isaac FORSTER (Senegal);
Mr. Andre GROS (France);
Mr. NAGENDRA SINGH (India);
xiii

Mr. Jose Marla RUDA (Argentina);
Sir Humphrey WALDOCK (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland).
2075th plenary meeting
30 October 1972

•

•

•

As a result of the above election, the International Court of Justice will be composed
of the following members: Mr. Fouad AMMOUN (Lebanon),· Mr. Cesar BBNGZON (Philippines},. Mr. Sture PEmN (Sweden),· Mr. Manfred UCHS (Poland),· Mr. Charles D.
ONYBAMA (Nigeria),· Mr. Hardy C. DILLARD (United States of America),·· Mr. Louis
IGNACIO-PINTO (Dahomey),·. Mr. Federico DB CASTRO (Spain),·· Mr. P. D. MOllozov
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).·· Mr. Eduardo JIMENEZ DB AREcmGA (Uruguay),··
Mr. Isaac FORSTER (Senegal) ... • Mr. Andre GIlOS (France),·" Mr. NAGENDRA SINGH
(India),··. Mr. Jose Maria RUOA (Argentina)··· and Sir Humphrey WALDOClt (United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) ...•
• Term of office expires on 5 February 1976.
.. Term of office expires on 5 February 1979.
••• Term of office expires on 5 February 1982.

ELECTION OF FIFTEEN MEMBERS OF THE
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BOARD
(Item 19)

The General Assembly, in pursuance of section II, paragraphs 3 to 5, of its
resolution 2152 (XXI) of 17 November 1966 and its Tesolution 2954 (XXVII)
of 11 December 1972, elected fifteen members to the Industrial Development
Board to 611 the vacancies occurring on the expiration of the terms of office of
GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF, GHANA, HUNGARY, IRAN, the IVORY COAST,
MALI, MEXICO, NORWAY, PAKISTAN, the PHILIPPINES, SPAIN, TuRKEY, the UNITED
KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, URUGUAY and VENEZUELA.
The following States were elected: CHINA, FINLAND, GERMANY, FEDERAL
REpUBLIC OF, GREECE, IRAN, LmERIA, MEXICO, NIGERIA, ROMANIA, RWANDA,
SPAIN, SRI LANKA, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT ,BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,
URUGUAY and VENEZUELA.
2106th plenary meeting
11 December 1972

•

•

•

As a result of the above election, the composition of the Industrial Development Board
for 1973 will be as follows: ALGERIA,· ARGENTINA,· AUSTllIA,· BELGIUM,. BRAZIL,•• SUI.GAllIA,· CIDNA.··· COSTA RICA,· CUBA.·· CzEcHosLGVAnA,.· DBNMAlllt,.. EGYPT,. FINLAND,••• FRANCE,·· GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF,••• GREECE,··. INDIA,•• INDoNESIA,.
IRAN,··· ITALY,· JAPAN,·· KENYA,. KUWAIT,·· LmBlUA,··· LmYAN ARAB REpUBLlC,••
MADAQASCAll.· MALAYSIA,·· MEXICO,··· NIlTHERLANDS,·. NIGEllIA,··· PEllU,•• RoMANIA••••
RwANDA,··· SENEGAL,· SPAIN,··· SRI LANEA,··· SWEDEN,· SWITZBllLAND,. '1HAn.AND,••
UNION OF SovIBT SOCIALIST REPUBLICS,· UNITED KINGDOM OF GllEo\T BllITAIN AND NOIl11JE1lN
IllI!LAND,··· UNrrBD STATES OF AMERICA,·· UPPER VOLTA,·· URUGUAY••• and VENEZUE.LA.···

• Term of office expires on 31 December 1973•
•• Term of office expires on 31 December 1974•
••• Term of office expires on 31 December 1975.

xiv

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A MAIN COMMITfEE

CONTENTS
Datt Df
adoPtion

Pail'

2907 (XXVII)

Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency (A/L.681/
Rev.!)
...........

15

31 October 1972

2

2908 (XXVII)

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (A/L.677 and Add. 1)

22

2 November 1972

2

2909 (XXVII)

Dissemination of information on decolonization (A/L.678 and
Add.l and 2)

22

2 November 1972

3

2910 (XXVII)

International Conference of Experts for the Support of Victims
of Colonialism and Apartheid in Southern Africa (A/L.679
and Add.I-3)
.........................

22

2 November 1972

4

2911 (XXVII)

Week of Solidarity with the Colonial Peoples of Southern Africa
and Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde Fighting for Freedom,
Independence and Equal Rights (A/L.680 and Add.I-3)

22

2 November 1972

4

Strengthening of the role of the United Nations with regard to
the maintenance and consolidation of international peace and
security, the development of co-operation among all nations
and the promotion of the rules of international law in relations
between States (A/L.684 and Add.I-4)

24

27 November 1972

5

2936 (XXVII)

Non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons (A/L.676/Rev.l and
Rev.1/Add.1 and 2)

25

29 November 1972

5

2937 (XXVII)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly at its 2093rd plenary
meeting (A/L.683 and Add.l) .....

23

29 November 1972

6

2938 (XXVII)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly at its 2093rd plenary
meeting (A/L.685 and Add.I)

23

29 November 1972

6

2948 (XXVII)

Credentials of representatives to the twenty-seventh session of
the General Assembly (A/8921, A/L.687)

3

8 December 1972

6

2949 (XXVII)

The situation in the Middle East (A/L.686/Rev.1 and Rev.lI
Add.I)

21

8 December 1972

6

2954 (XXVII)

Revision of the lists of States eligible for membership in the
........
Industrial Development Board (A/PV.2106) ....

44

11 December 1972

7

2962 (XXVII)

Co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization
of African Unity (A/L.690)

20

13 December 1971

8

2991 (XXVII)

Report of the Security Council (A/L.692)

11

15 December 1972

8

Other decisions
Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Charter
of the United Nations

7

23 September 1972

9

Adoption of the agenda

8

22 September 1972
23 September 1972

9
9

2925 (XXVII)

Report of the Secretary-General on the wcrk of the Organization

10

13 December 1972

9

Report of the Economic and Social Council

12

18 December 1972

10

Report of the International Court of Justice

14

I3 December 1972

10

Appointments to fill vacancies in the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples

22

8 December 1972
18 December 1972

10
10

Confirmation of the appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
.
Conference on Trade and Development

43 (c)

19 December 1972

10

Confirmation of the appoinlment of the Executive Director of the United Nations
Industrial Develu!Jment Org;.r,i:2tion

44 (c)

II De(:ember 1972

10

Appointment of the United Nation' C'Jmmissioner for Namibia

64 (e)

18 December 1972

to

2

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Senion

2907 (XXVll). Report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency to the General Assembly for
the year -1971/1972,1
Aware that the statement of the Director-General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 31 October
19722 provides information on the main developments
in the Agency's activities since the report was published,
1. Takes note of the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency;
2. Observes with appreciation that there has been
a substantial increase in the technical co-operation
activities of the International Atomic Energy Agency
and in the number of large-scale projects that the
Agency is executing for the United Nations Development Programme;
3. Commends the International Atomic Energy
Agency for the progress it has made in meeting its safeguards responsibilities and in negotiating agreements for
the application of safeguards with non-nuclear-weapon
States;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Director-Oeneral of the 'International Atomic
Energy Agency the records of the twenty-seventh session of the General Assembly relating to the Agency's
activities.
2077th plenary meeting
31 Ootober 1972
2908 (XXVII). Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples

The GenertJl Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and the programme of action for the full
implementation of the Declaration, contained in its
resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
Recalling all its previous resolutions concerning the
implementation of the Declaration, in particular resolution 2878 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
Deeply concerned that twelve years after the adoption of the Declaration many Territories are still under
colonial and alien domination and ,that millions of
oppressed persons live under conditions of ruthless and
blatant colonialist and racialist repression,
Deeply deploring the continued refusal of the colonial
Powers, especially Portugal and South Africa, to implement the Declaration and other relevant resolutions on
decolonization, particularly those relating to the Territories under Portuguese domination, Namibia and
Southern Rhodesia,
Strongly deploring the policies of those States which,
in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the Security
1 International Atomic Energy Agency, Annual Report,
1 July 1971-30 June 1972 (Vienna, July 1972); transmitted to
the members of the General Assembly by a note of the SecretarY-General (A/8774).
2 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyseventh Session, Pleruuy Meetings, 2076th meeting.

Council, the General Assembly and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, continue to
co-operate with the Governments of Portugal and South
Africa and with the illegal racist minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia,
Deeply disturbed at the intransigent attitude of certain administering Powers which, despite the repeated
appeals addressed to them by the General Assembly
and the Special Committee, persist in their refusal to
co-operate with the Special Committee in the discharge
of the mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly,
Reaffirming its view that racial discrimination in colonial Territories can be eradicated fully and with the
greatest speed by the faithful and complete implementation of the Declaration,
Noting with satisfaction the proposed arrangements
relating to the participation in the work of the Special
Committee of representatives of the national liberation
movements and leaders of Angola, Mozambique, Guinea
(Bissau) and Cape Verde, Namibia and Southern
Rhodesia,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of the dispatch in June 1972 of the
United Nations Visiting Mission to Niue, at the invitation of the Government of New Zealand, and of the
participation of the Special Committee in the United
Nations Visiting Mission to observe the elections to the
Third House of Assembly of Papua New Guinea in
February 1972, at the invitation of the Government of
Australia, and noting with deep regret the negative
attitude of certain administering Powers which continue
to ignore lhe repeated appeals made by the General
Assembly and the Special Committee concerning the
sending of United Nations visiting missions to the Territories under their administration,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2621
(XXV) and all other resolutions on decolonization,
and calls upon the administering Powers, in accordance
with those resolutions, to take all the necessary steps
to enable the dependent peoples of the Territories concerned to exercise fully and without further delay their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence;
2. Notes with satisfaction the work accomplished
by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, including in particular its successful series of
meetings held in Africa in April 1972, and expresses
its appreciation to the Special Committee for its efforts
to secure the complete and effective implementation of
the Declaration;
3. Approves the report of the Special Committee
covering its work during 1972,8 including the programme of work envisaged for 1973;
4. Urges all States, in particular the administering
Powers, and the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to give effect
to the recommendations contained in the report of the
Special Committee for the speedy implementation of
the Declaration and the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations;
8 Ibid.,

Twenty-stventh Session, Supplement No. 23 (AI

8723/Rev.1).

RelolndoDl adopted without Nf. . .ce to • Mala CommIttee

5. Reaffirms that the continuation of colonialism in
all its forms and manifestations-including racism,
apartheid and activities of foreign economic and other
interests which exploit colonial peoples, as well as the
waging of colonial wars to suppress the national liber-ation movements of the colonial Territories in Africais incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to CoIonial Countries and Peoples and poses a threat to
international peace and security;
6. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of the colonial peoples and peoples under alien
domination to exercise their right to self-determination
and independence by all the necessary means at their
disposal, and notes with satisfaction the progress made
by the national liberation movements of the colonial
Territories, particularly in Africa, both through their
struggle and through reconstruction programmes, towards the national independence of their countries;
7. Condemns the policies, pursued by certain colonial Powers in the Territories under their domination,
of imposing non-representative regimes and arbitrary
constitutions, strengthening the position of foreign economic and other interests, misleading world public
opinion and encouraging the systematic influx of foreign immigrants while evicting, displacing and transferring the indigenous inhabitants to other areas, and
calls upon those Powers to desist forthwith from such
policies;
8. Urges all States and the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
to provide moral and material assistance to all peoples
struggling for their freedom and independence in the
colonial Territories and to those living under alien
domination-in particular to the national liberation
movements of the Territories in Africa-in consultation, as appropriate, with the Organization of African
Unity;
9. Requests all States, directly and through their
action in the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, to withhold
or continue to withhold assistance of any kind from the
Governments of Portugal and South Africa and from
the illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia
until they renounce their policy of colonial domination
and racial discrimination;
10. Calls upon the colonial Powers to withdraw
immediately and unconditionally their milita,ry bases
and installations from colonial Territories and to refrain from establishing new ones;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV)
and 2621 (XXV) in all Territories which have not
attained independence and, in particular, to formulate
specific proposals for the elimination of the remaining
manifestations of colonialism and report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session;
12. Requests the Special Committee to make concrete suggestions which could assist the Security Council
in considering appropriate measures under the Charter
with regard to developments in colonial Territories that
are likely to threaten international peace and security,
and recommends that the Council take such suggestions
fully into consideration;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the compliance of Member States with the

3

Declaration and with other relevant resolutions on decolonization, particularly those relating to the Territories
under Portuguese domination, Namibia and Southern
Rhodesia;
14. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
pay particular attention to the small Territories and to
recommend to the General Assembly the most appropriate methods and also the steps to be taken to enable
the populations of those Territories to exercise fully
and without further delay their right to self-determination and independence;
15. Calls upon the administering Powers to cooperate with the Special Committee in the discharge of its mandate and, in particular, to participate
in the work of the Committee relating to the Territories
under their administration;
16. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned
to co-operate fully with the Special Committee by permitting the access of visiting missions to the colonial
Territories in order to secure first-hand information concerning the Territories and to ascertain the wishes and
aspirations of the inhabitants of those Territories under
their administration;
17. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
enlist the support of national and international organizations having a special interest in the field of decolonization in the achievement of the objectives of the Declaration and in the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, and in particular to assist
the Economic and Social Council in the study envisaged
in Council resolution 1651 (LI) of 29 October 1971;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the facilities and personnel
necessary for the implementation of the present resolutian as well as the various resolutions on decolonization adopted by the General Assembly and the Special
Committee.
2078th plenary meeting
2 November 1972
~909

(XXVII). Di8!!emination of information
on decolonization

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the question of publicity for the work of the United
Nations in the field of decolonization,·
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the fun implementation of the Declaration,
RecalUng further its resolution 2879 (XXVI) of 20
December 1971 concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization,
Conscious of the urgent need to arouse world public
opinion with a view to assisting effectively the peoples
of the colonial Territories to achieve self-detelmination, freedom and independence and, in particular, to
intensify widespread and continuous dissemination of
• Ibid., chap. I, paras. 87-98, and chap. m.

4

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

information on the struggle for liberation being waged
by the peoples in the colonial Territories in Africa
guided by their national liberation movements,
Taking into account the suggestions of the Special
Committee as well as the views of the Office of Public
Information on the implementation of these suggestions, as reflected in the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee,
Recognizing the importance of publicity as an instrument for furthering the ,aims and purposes of the
Declaration and the need for the Office of Public Information to intensify its efforts to acquaint world
public opinion with all aspects of the problems of decolonization,
Bearing in mind the important role being played in
the widespread dissemination of relevant information
by a number of non-governmental organizations having
a special interest in the field of decolonization,
Noting with satisfaction the arrangements made by
the Special Committee with a view to assisting the Office
of Public Information in the implementation of the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Special
Committee relating to the dissemination of information
on decolonization,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the question of publicity for the work of the
United Nations in the field of decolonization;
2. Reaffirms the vital importance of urgently effecting the widest possible dissemination of information on
the evils and dangers of colonialism, in particular the
continuing struggle for liberation being waged by the
peoples in the colonial Territories in Africa, as well as
the efforts being made by the international community
to assist in the elimination of the remaining vestiges of
colonialism in all its forms;
3. Requests the Secretary-General. having regard to
the suggestions of the Special Committee, to continue
to take concrete measures through all the media at his
disposal, including publications, radio and television,
to give widespread and continuous publicity to the
work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, to the situation in the colonial Territories and
to the continuing struggle for liberation being waged
by the colonial peoples and, inter alia:
(a) To intensify the activities of all information
centres, particularly those located in Western Europe,
and also to establish additional information centres
where appropriate, especially in southern Africa;
(b) To maintain a close working relationship with
the Organization of African Unity by holding periodic
consultations and a systematic exchange of the relevant
information with that organization;
(c) To enlist, from the non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council and from those non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of
decolonization, support in the dissemination of the
relevant information;
Cd) To continue to publish, in consultation with the
Special Committee, selected issues of the periodical
Objective: Justice and the bulletin "United Nations and
Southern Africa" in other languages besides English
and French;

4. Requests Member States, in particular the administering Powers, to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in the discharge of the tasks entrusted to
him under paragraph 3 above;
5. Invites all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council, as well
as other non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of decolonization, to undertake
or intensify, in co-operation with the Secretary-General
and within their respective spheres of competence, the
large-scale dissemination of the information referred to
in paragraph 2 above;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Special Committee, to collect and prepare on
a continuous basis, for redissemination by the Office of
Public Information, basic material, studies and articles
relating to various aspects of the problems of decolonization;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Special Committee on the implementation of the
present resolution;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the effective dissemination of
information on decolonization and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.
2078th plenary meeting
2 November 1972

2910 (XXVII). International Conference of Experts for the Support of Victims of Colonialism and Apartheid in Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2505 (XXIV) of 20 November 1969, in which it expressed the firm intention
of the United Nations, acting in co-operation with the
Organization of African Unity, to intensify its efforts
to find a solution to the present grave situation in
southern Africa,
Taking into account the proposal of the Organization of African Unity to convene an international conference against colonialism and apartheid,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Organization of African Unity, to organize
at Oslo in 1973 an International Conference of Experts
for the Support of Victims of Colonialism and A partheid in Southern Africa and authorizes him to provide
the necessary staff and services for the Conference:
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
organization and results of the Conference.
2078th plenary meeting
2 November 1972

2911 (XXVII).

Week of SolidaJ'i1y with the
Colonial Peoples of Southern Africa and
Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde Fighting
for Freedom, Indcpcnrlenct' and Equal
Right!!

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Inde··
pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

._-----------

Noting with satisfaction the progress towards national independence and freedom made by the national
liberation movements in the colonial Territories of
southern Africa and in Guinea (Bissau) and Cape
Verde both through their struggle and through reconstruction programmes,
Conscious of the need of the peoples and the national liberation movements of those Territories for
assistance and support in their struggle to achieve freedom and independence,
1. Appeals to the Governments and the peoples of
the world to hold annually a Week of Solidarity with the
Colonial Peoples of Southern Africa and Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde Fighting for Freedom, Independence and Equal Rights and proposes that the Week
should begin on 25 May, Africa Liberation Day;
2. Recommends that, on the occasion of the Week,
meetings should be held, appropriate materials should
be published in the press and broadcast on radio and
television and public campaigns should be conducted
with a view to obtaining contributions to the Assistance
Fund for the Struggle against Colonialism and Apartheid established by the Organization of African Unity.
2078th plenary meeting
2 November 1972
2925 (XXVII). Strengthening of the role of the
United Nations with regard to the maintenance and consolidation of international
peace and security, the development of cooperation among all nations and the promotion of the rules of international law in
relations between States

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Strengthening
of the role of the United Nations with regard to the
maintenance and consolidation of international peace
and security, tbe development of co-operation among
all nations and the promotion of the rules of international law in relations between States",
Aware that the United Nations is duty bound to act
persistently for the observance in relations between all
States of the principles of refraining from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, the settlement of international disputes by peaceful means, non-interference
in domestic affairs, the sovereign equality of all States,
the equal. rights and self-determination of peoples, and
co-operatlOn between States,
Convinced of the need to bring about further improvements in the activities of the United Nations and
its organs, taking into account the new realities of the
world, thus making the United Nations an efficient
forum of the international community as a whole,
capable of ensuring the participation of all States in
the solution of the problems facing mankind,
1. Recognizes that it is imperative that the Organization should become a more effective instrument in
safeguarding and strengthening the independence and
sovereignty of all States, as weI! as the inalienable
right of every people to decide its own fate without
any outside interference, and that it should take firm
action, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations,for the prevention and suppression of acts of
aggression or any other acts which may jeopardize
international peace and security;

5

----------~-

2. Expresses the conviction that it is necessary to
strengthen the role of the United Nations so that it
may bring an increased contribution to the settlement
of international issues in the interest of all peoples and
of general peace and security;
3. Urges all Member States to fulfil their obligations under the Charter and, in accordance with its
provisions, to implement the resolutions of United
Nations organs;
4. Strongly appeals to all Member States to take
full advantage of the framework and means provided
by the United Nations for the solution of international
issues of common interest and to contribute to the
identification of ways and means of bringing about the
strengthening of the capacity for action and an increase
in the effectiveness of the Organization for the attainment of the ideals of peace, freedom and progress of
peoples;
5. Invites Member States to communicate to the
Secretary-General, not later than 30 June 1973, their
views and suggestions on the ways and means of contributing to the strengthening of the role of the United
Nations in international life, including proposals for
enhancing the effectiveness of the decisions and resolutions adopted by United Nations organs;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report on the basis of the views and suggestions received
under paragraph 5 above, and of the debates on this
item, and to submit that report to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Strengthening of the role of the United Nations with regard to
the maintenance and consolidation of international
peace and security, the development of co-operation
among all nations and the promotion of the rules of
international law in relations between States".
2090th plenary meeting
27 November 1972
2936 (XXVII). Non-use of force in international
relations and permanent prohibition of the
use of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Noting that renunciation of the use or threat of force
as proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations
and reaffirmed in the Declaration on the Strengthening
of International Security, contained in General Assembly resolution 2734 (XXV) of 16 December 1970,
and the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, contained in Assembly resolution 2625
(XXV) of 24 October 1970, is an obligation that all
States should respect,
Noting with concern that tbe use of force in various
forms is still occurring in violation of the Charter,
Bearing in mind that the threat of the use of nuclear
weapons continues to exist,
Guided by the desire of all peoples to eliminate war
and above all to prevent a nuclear disaster,
Reaffirming, in accordance with Article 51 of the
Charter, the inalienable right of States to self-defence
against armed attack,

6

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

Mindful of the principle of the inadmissibility of
acquisition of territory by force and the inherent right
of States to recover SUCD territories by all the means
at their disposal,
Reaffirming its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of colonial peoples for their freedom by all
appropriate means at their disposal,
Recalling the Declaration on the Prohibition of the
Use of Nuclear and Thermonuclear Weapons, contained in General Assembly resolution 1653 (XVI)
of 24 November 1961,
Recalling further its resolution 2160 (XXI) of 30
November 1966 on the strict observance of the prohibition of the threat or use of force in international
relations, and of the right of peoples to self-determination,
Believing that renunciation of the use or threat
of force and prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons
should be fully observed as a law of international life,
1. Solemnly declares, on behalf of the States Members of the Organization, their renunciation of the
use or threat of force in all its forms and manifestations in international relations, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, and the permanent
prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons;
2. Recommends that the Security Council should
take, as soon as possible, appropriate measures for the
full impleIIlentation of the present declaration of the
General Assembly.
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972
2937 (XXVII). Resolution adopted by the Gen.
eral Assembly at its 2093rd plenary meet·
ing5

The General Assembly,
Having noted the application of the People's Republic of Bangladesh for admission to membership in the
United Nations,6
Having also noted the special report of the Security
Council in this regard,T
Reaffirming the principle of universality of membership of the United Nations in accordance with the
Charter,
Considering that the People's Republic of Bangladesh is eligible for membership in the United Nations,
Expresses the desire that the People's Republic of
Bangladesh will be admitted to membership in the
United Nations at an early date.
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972
Ii Resolutions 2937
(XXVII) and 2938 (XXVII) were
adopted simultaneously by the General Assembly without
debate and without a vote following a statement by the President of the Assembly which appears in the verbatim record
of the 2093rd plenary meeting (see Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh Session, Plenary Meetings,
2093rd meeting, paras. 153-157).
6 A/8754. For the printed text of this document, see Official
Records of the Security Council, Twenty-seventh Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1972, document
S/10759.
T Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Annexes, agenda item 23, document A/8776.

2938 (XXVII). Resolution adopted by the General Assembly at its 2093rd plenul·y meeting 3

The General Assembly,
Having in mind the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and Security Council
resolution 307 (1971) of 21 December 1971,
Having noted with satisfaction the steps taken so
far to facilitate the restoration of conditions of normalcy
in the South Asian subcontinent, notably the Simla
Agreement,
Mindful of the fact that the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 1949 8 require the release and repatriation of
prisoners of war without delay after the cessation of
active hostilities,
Considering that the solution of all outstanding problems, including the return of military and civilian personnel to their respective countries, is important for
the establishment of a climate of peace and tranquillity
in the area,
Expressing the hope that all parties will refrain from
any act which could jeopardize the prospects of settlement and render more difficult eventual reconciliation,
Expresses the desire that the parties concerned make
all possible efforts, in a spirit of co-operation and mutual respect, to reach a fair settlement of the issues
that are still pending, and calls for the return of the
prisoners of war in accordance with the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the relevant provisions of Security Council resolution 307 (1971).
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972
2948 (XXVII). Credentials of representatives to
the twenty-seventh session of the General
Assembly

The General Assembly
Approves the report of the Credentials Committee,'
except with regard to the credentials of the representatives of South Africa.
2104th plenary meeting
8 December 1972
2949 (XXVII). The situation in the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "The situation
in the Middle East",
Having received the report of the Se~retary-General
of 15 September 1972 on the activities of his Special
Representative to the Middle East,10
8 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
'Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/8921.
10 A/8815. For the printed text of this document, see Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-seventh Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1972, document
S/10792.

7

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reaffirming that Security Council resolution 242
(1967) of 22 November 1967 must be implemented
in all its parts,
Deeply perturbed that Security Council resolution
242 (1967) and General Assembly resolution 2799
(XXVI) of 13 December 1971 have not been implemented and, consequently, the envisaged just and
lasting peace in the Middle East has not been achieved,
Reiterating its grave concern at the continuation
of the Israeli occupation of Arab territories since 5
June 1967,
Reaffirming that the territory of a State shall not
be the object of occupation or acquisition by another
State resulting from the threat or use of force,
Affirming that changes in the physical character or
demographic composition of occupied territories are
contrary to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, as well as to the provisions of
the relevant applicable international conventions,
Convinced that the grave situation prevailing in the
Middle East constitutes a serious threat to international peace and security,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the United Nations to restore peace and security in the Middle East
in the immediate future,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 2799 (XXVI);
2. Deplores the non-compliance by Israel with
General Assembly resolution 2799 (XXVI), which in
particular called upon Israel to respond favourably to
the peace initiative of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to the Middle East;
3. Expresses its full support for the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative;
4. Declares once more that the acquisition of territories by force is inadmissible and that, consequently,
territories thus occupied must be restored;
5. Reaffirms that the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East should include the application of both the following principles:
(a) Withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from territories occupied in the recent conflict;
(b) Termination of all claims or states of belligerency and respect for and acknowledgement of the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of every State in the area and its right to live
in peace within secure and recognized boundaries free
from threats or acts of force;
6. Invites Israel to declare publicly its adherence
to the principle of non-annexation of territories through
the use of force;
7. Declares that changes carried out by Israel in
the occupied Arab territories in contravention of the
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 11 are null and
void, and calls upon Israel to rescind forthwith all such
measures and to desist from all policies and practices
affecting the physical character or demographic composition of the occupied Arab territories;
8. Calls upon all States not to recognize any such
changes and measures carried out by Israel in the occupied Arab territories and invites them to avoid actions, including actions in the field of aid, that could
constitute recognition of that occupation;
11 United

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.

9. Recognizes that respect for the rights of the
Palestinians is an indispensable element in the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East;
10. Requests the Security Council, in consultation
with the Secretary-General and his Special Representative, to take all appropriate steps with a view to the
full and speedy implementation of Security Counell
resolution 242 (1967), taking into account all the
relevant resolutions and documents of the United Nations in this connexion;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report to
the Security Council and the General Assembly on
the progress made by him and his Special Representative in the implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and of the present resolution;
12. Decide.s to transmit the present resolution to
the Security Council for its appropriate action and requests the Council to keep the General Assembly informed.
2105th plenary meeting
8 December 1972
2954 (XXVU). Revision of the lists of States
eligible for membership in the Industrial
Development Board

The General Assembly,
Recallin[! section II, paragraph 4, of its resolution
2152 (XXI) of 17 November 1966 on the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization,
Decides to include Bangladesh in list A of the
annex to its resolution 2152 (XXI).12
2106th plenary meeting
11 December 1972

•

•

•

As a result of the above resolution, the lists of States eligible
for membership i" the Industrial Development Board will
be as follows:
A.

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION II, PARAGRAPH 4 (a),
OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY RESOLUTION 2152 (XXI)

Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Botswana
Burma
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
China
Congo
Dahomey
Democratic Yemen
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Ethiopia
Fiji

Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
brael
Ivory Coast
Jordan
Kenya
Khmer Republic
Kuwait
Laos
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libyan Arab Republic

12 For the other changes in the lists since the adoption of
resolution 2152 (XXI), see resolutions 2385 (XXIII) of 19
November 1968, 2510 (XXIV) of 21 November 1969, 2637
(XXV) of 19 November 1970 and 2824 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971.

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

8
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mongolia
Morocco
Nepal
Niger
Nigeria
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Republic of Korea
Republic of Viet-Nam
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal

B.

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION
PARAGRAPH 4 (b)

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Cyprus
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany, Federal Republic of
Greece
Holy See
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Liechtenstein
C.

II,

(XXIV) of 20 November 1969 and 2863 (XXVI)
of 20 December 1971 on co-operation between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
Noting with satisfaction the further development of
co-operation between the Organization of African Unity
and the United Nations, the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system,
especially in their efforts to solve the grave situation in
southern Africa,
Noting in particular the results of the meetings held
by the Security Council in Addis Ababa, from 28
January to 4 February 1972,13 in response to the invitation of the Organization of African Unity,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity 1. and
commends his efforts in promoting such co-operation;

2. Reiterates the firm intention of the United Nations, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to intensify its efforts to find a solution to the
present grave situation in southern Africa;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to intensify co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, particularly with regard to the provision of assistance to the victims of colonialism and
apartheid in southern Africa and the dissemination
of information on the present grave situation in that
region;
4. Invites the specialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the United Nations system, particularly the United Nations Development
Programme, to continue and intensify their co-operation with the Organization of African Unity;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly, at its twenty-eighth session,a report
on the implementation of the present resolution and
on the development of co-operation between the Organization of African Unity and other organizations
concerned within the United Nations system.

Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION
PARAGRAPH 4 (d)

Albania
Bulgaria
Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic
Czechoslovakia
Hungary

II,

Luxembourg
Malta
Monaco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
San Marino
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland
United States of America

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION
PARAGRAPH 4 (c)

Argentina
Barbados
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
EI Salvador
Guatemala
D.

Sierra Leone
Singapore
Somalia
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Swaziland
Syrian Arab Republic
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
United Arab Emirates
United Republic of Tanzania
Upper Volta
Western Samoa
Yemen
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia

2108th plenary meeting
13 December 1972

2991 (XXVII). Report of the Security Council
II,

Poland
Romania
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics

2962 (XXVII). Co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African
Unity
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2011 (XX) of 11 October
1965, 2193 (XXI) of 15 December 1966, 2505

The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the Security Council
to the General Assembly covering the period from 16
June 1971 to 15' June 1972,15 submitted in accordance
with Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Having also received the report of the SecretaryGenera1l 6 submitted in accordance with General As13 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twentyseventh Year, 1627th to 1639th meetings.
14 A/8859.
15 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No.2 (A/8702).
16A/8847 and Add.I.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

in accordance with Article 25 of the Charter of the
United Nations;
3. Appeals to Member States which have not yet
expressed their views on ways and means of enhancing
the effectiveness of the Security Council in accordance with the principles and provisions of the Charter
to do so by 30 June 1973 at the latest;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.
2111th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

sembly resolution 2864 (XXVI) of 20 December
1971,
Taking note of the views and suggestions contained
in the report of the Secretary-General and in the replies
of Member States annexed to that report,
1. Takes note of the report of the Security Council
to the General Assembly covering the period from
16 June 1971 to 15 June 1972, as well as the report
of the Secretary-General submitted in accordance with
Assembly resolution 2864 (XXVI);
2. Calls upon Member States to ensure the strict
application of the decisions of the Security Council

•

9

•

•

Other decisions
Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2,
of the Charter of the United Nations
(Item 7)

At its 2037th plenary meeting, on 23 September 1972, the General Assembly
took note of the communication dated 20 September 1972 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the General AssemblyP
Adoption of the agenda
(Item 8)

At its 2035th, 2036th, 2037th, 2047th, 2070th and 2081st plenary meetings,
on 22, 23 and 29 September, 20 October and 9 November 1972, the General
Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee,18 adopted the agenda
for the twenty-seventh session.
At its 2035th and 2036th plenary meetings, on 22 and 23 September 1972,
the General Assembly decided, on the recommendation of the General Committee,IlI to include the following items in the provisional agenda of the twentyeighth session:
Measures to be taken against ideologies and practices based on terror or on
incitement to racial discrimination or any other form of group hatred.
Declaration on Universal Participation in the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties.
Question of issuing special invitations to States which are not Members of the
United Nations or members of any of the specialized agencies or of the
International Atomic Energy Agency or parties to the Statute of the
International Court of Justice to become parties to the Convention on
Special Missions.
Amendment to Article 22 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice
(Seat of the Court) and consequential amendments to Articles 23 and 28.
Question of Korea: report of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea.
Creation of favourable conditions to accelerate the independent and peaceful
reunification of Korea.
Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization
(Item 10)

At its 2108th plenary meeting, on 13 December 1972, the General Assembly
took note of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization. 20
17 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda
item 7, document A/8816.
.
I8Ibid., agenda item 8, documents A/8800/Rev.l and Add.] and 2. For the allocation
of agenda items, see above pp. v-xi.
19 Ibid., document A/8800/Rev.l, paras. 15 and 16.
20 Ibid., Twenty-seventh Session, Supplement No. I (A/8701 and Corr.l) and Supplement No. IA (A/8701lAdd.l).

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Se8tion

18

Report of the Economic and Social Conncil
(Item 12)
At its 2114th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1972, the Gener,a} Assembly
took note of chapters I, II, XX and XXI (section A) of the report of the Ec0nomic and Social Counci1,21
Report of the International Court of Justice
(Item 14)
At its 2108th pLenary meeting, on 13 December 1972, the General Assembly
took note of the report of the International Court of Justice. 22
Appointments to fill vacancies in the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
(Item 22)
At its 2104th plenary meeting, on 8 December 1972, the General Assembly
confirmed the nomination by its President of CHILE and the CoNGO as members
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
to fill two of the three vacancies on the Special Committee.
The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the SecretaryGeneraF3 that, in pursuance of the decision taken at the 2114th plenary meeting,
on 18 December 1972, he had appointed AUSTRALIA to fill the remaining vacancy
on the Special Committee.
As a result, the Special Committee is composed of the following Member
States: AFGHANISTAN, AUSTRALIA, BULGARIA, CHILE, CffiNA, CONGO, CzECHOSLOVAKIA, ETffiOPIA, FIJI, INDIA, INDONESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, IVORY COAST, MALI,
SIERRA LEONE, SWEDEN, SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, TuNISIA, UNION OF SOVIET SoCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA,
VENEZUELA and YUGOSLAVIA.
Confirmation of the appointment of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(Item 43 (c»
At its 2115th plenary meeting, on 19 December 1972, the General Assembly
confirmed the reappointment by the Secretary-General,24 in pursuance of section
II, paragraph 27, of General Assembly resolution ]995 (XIX) of 30 December
1964, of Mr. Manuel PEREZ GUERRERO as Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development for a one-year term beginning on 1 April
1973 and ending on 31 March 1974.
Confirmation of the appointment of the Executive Director of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(Item 44 (c»
At its 2]06th plenary meeting, on 11 December 1972, the General Assembly
confirmed the reappointment by the Secretary-General,25 in pursuance of section
II, paragraph 18, of General Assembly resolution 2152 (XXI) of 17 November
1966, of Mr. Ibrahim Helmi ABDEL-RAHMAN as Executive Director of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization for a two-year term beginning on
1 January 1973 and ending on 31 December 1974.
App,.intment of the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia
(Item 64 (e»)
At its 2114th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1972, the General Assembly
approved t.he proposal of the Secretary-Genera}26 to extend the appointment of
Mr. Agh<.~ Abdul HAMID as United Nations Commissioner for Namibia until 31
December 1973
21 Ibid., SuppTement No.3

(A/8703).
z21bid.. Suppl"menr "No,S (A/8705).

23 A/8992,
24 Ai88315.

25 A/8872.
26 A/8799.

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
R""I.1ift
No.

Dat. of

Ti'l~

Item

adoptio1t-

2914 (XXVII)

International action for the mitigation of the harmful effects of
storms (A/8863)
........

28

9 November 1972

11

2915 (XXVII)

International co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space
(A/8863) ...

28 and
29

9 November 1972

12

2916 (XXVII)

Preparation of an international convention on principles governing
the use by States of artificial earth satellites for direct television
broadcasting (A/8864, A/L.6821Rev.l)

37

9 November 1972

14

2917 (XXVII)

Preparation of international instruments or United Nations arrangements on principles governing the use by States of artificial
earth satellites for direct television broadcasting (A/8864)

37

9 November 1972

14

2930 (XXVII)

World Disarmament Conference (A/8902)

26

29 November 1972

15

2931 (XXVII)

Implementation of the results of the Conference of Non-NuclearWeapon States (A/8903)

27

29 November 1972

15

2932 (XXVII)

General and complete disarmament (A/8904)
Resolution A
Resolution B

30
30

29 November 1972
29 November 1972

16

2933 (XXVII)

Chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons (A/8905)

31

29 November 1972

17

2934 (XXVII)

Urgent need for suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear testa
(A/8906)
32
32
32

29 November 1972
29 November 1972
29 November 1972

17
18
19

Resolution A
Resolution B
Resolution C

16

2935 (XXVII)

Implementation of General Assembly resolution 2830 (XXVI)
concerning the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol
II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) (A/8907)

33

29 November 1972

19

2992 (XXVII)

Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace (A/8908)

34

15 December 1972

20

2993 (XXVII)

Implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security (A/8909)

35

15 December 1972

20

36
36
36

18 December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972

22

3029 (XXVII)

Reservation exclusively for peaceful pUrPoses of the sea-bed and
the ocean floor, and the subsoil thereof, underlying the high seas
beyond the limits of present national jurisdiction and use of
their resources in the interests of mankind, and convening of a
conference on the law of the sea (A/8949)
Resolution A
Resolution B
Resolution C

2914 (XXVII). International action for the mitigation of the harmful effects of storms

21

22

Believing Ihat recent advances in science and technology have opened up new avenucs towards moderating the effects of these destructive natural forces,
Recalling its resolutions 1721 (XVI) of 20 D('cembcr I Q61, 1802 (XVII) of 14 December 1962 and
273J D (XXV) of 16 Decemb('r 1970 and noting the
work being undertaken 3nd the pwgress achieved in
response to them,
Taking into account the views c;;pre-;scd in the Committee t'n the Peacefui Uses of Outer Spacc at its
resll met! 11fteenth session, held from 5 to 15 September
1972,

The General Assembly,
Aware of the continuing harmful effects of storms
and the devastation they cause, particularly to developing countries, whose economies and developmental
efforts are thereby seriously impaired,
Concerned over recent calamities inflicted by storms,
resulting in tremendous losses of life and property in
various parts of the world,
II

12

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

Bearing in mind the various recommendations in the
field of natural disaster prevention and the measures
adopted in General Assembly resolution 2816 (XXVI)
of 14 December 1971 with a view to improving the
co-ordination and effectiveness of international efforts
to deal with natural disasters, and stressing the importance of pre-disaster planning,
Noting the work being carried out by the joint
Typhoon Committee of the World Meteorological Organization and the Economic Commission for Asia and
the Far East and the large degree of collaboration
between the World Meteorological Organization and
other national, regional and international organizations
in matters relating to tropical cyclones,
1. Notes with appreciation the report of the World
Meteorological Organization entitled "Tropical cyclone
project: plan of action'',! prepared by its Executive
Committee Panel of Experts on Tropical Cyclones in
response to General Assembly resolution 2733 D
(XXV) of 16 December 1970, in which the Assembly
requested the World Meteorological Organization to
find ways and means of mitigating the harmful effects
of tropical storms;
2. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the plan of
action should be brought to the attention of Member
States;2
3. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member
States to co-operate to the fuBest possible extent with
the World Meteorological Organization with a view to
achieving the objectives laid down in resolution 2733
D (XXV);
4. Requests the World Meteorological Organization
to pursue actively the implementation of its tropical
cyclone project, continuing and intensifying its other
related action programmes, including the World
Weather Watch and, especially, the efforts being undertaken towards obtaining basic meteorological data and
discovering ways and means to mitigate the ~a~~ul
effects of tropical storms and to remove or mlmmlze
their destructive potential;
5. Calls upon the Member States concerned to undertake or intensify research, as well as operational
projects, towards this end and requests other Member
States to contribute and assist in these projects;
6. Recommends integrated action through increased
co-operation and co-ordination between the World
Meteorological Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, the Office. of the ~isaster ~elief
Co-ordinator and the future Umted NatIOns enVIronment programme, particularly with regard to the preparedness for, and the prediction, detection, prevention
and control of, natural disasters;
7. Requests the World Meteorological Organization
to submit a report, through the Secretary-General, to
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
at its next session, to the Economic and Social Council
and to such other United Nations bodies as may be
appropriate on the progress achieved and on the cooperation measures and other steps taken pursuant to
the present and other relevant resolutions.
2081st plenary meetinR
9 November 1972
1 See AI AC.105/ 105.
2 Official Records of the Gent'rnl Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/8720), para. 29.

2915 (XXVII). International co-operation in the
peaceful uses of outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2776 (XXVI), 2777
(XXVI), 2778 (XXVI) and 2779 (XXVI) of 29
November 1971,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,3
Reaffirming the common interest of mankind in furthering the exploration and use of outer space for
peacefUl purposes,
Recalling its resolution 1721 B (XVI) of 20 December 1961, in which it expressed the belief that the
United Nations should provide a focal point for international co-operation in the peaceful exploration and
use of outer space,
Believing that the benefits deriving from space exploration can be extended to States at all stages of
economic and scientific development on an expanding
basis if Member Sta:tes conduct their space programmes
increasingly with a view to promoting maximum international co-operation, including the widest possible
exchange of information in this field,
Convinced of the need for increased international
efforts, particularly through the United Nations, to promote and expand practical applications of space technology,
Reaffirming the importance of international co-operation in developing the rule of law in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space,
1. Endorses the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
2. Invites States which have not yet become parties
to the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities
of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies 4
and the Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the
Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects
Launched into Outer Space5 to give early consideration
to ratifying or acceding to those agreements so that
they may have the broadest possible effect;
3. Expresses its satisfaction at the recent entry into
force of the Convention on International Liability for
Damage Caused by Space Objects 6 and invites States
that have not yet become parties to it to give early
consideration to ratifying or acceding to the Convention
so that it may have the broadest possible effect;
4. Notes that the Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space has
achieved significant progress in approving a substantial
part of the draft treaty relating to the Moon, observing
at the same time that some issues are still unresolved;
5. Notes further that the Legal Sub-Committee has
made notable progress in preparing the draft convention on registration of objects launched into outer
space, observing at the same time that some issues are
still unresolved;
6. Agrees that the Legal Sub-Committee should at
its next session pursue, as a matter of priority, its work
on the draft treaty relating to the Moon and the draft
convention on registration of objects launched into
outer space;
3 Ibid., Supplement No. 20 (A/8720).
4 See resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.
5 See resolution 2345 (XXII), annex.
6

See resolution 2777 (XXVI), annex.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

------------

7. Notes that, because of lack of time, the Legal
Sub-Committee was not able to consider in any detail
the remaining matters on its agenda, as mentioned in
paragraph 19 of the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, and expresses the hope
that early consideration will be given to those matters;
8. Welcomes efforts of Member States to keep the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space fully
informed of their space activities and invites all Member States to do so;
9. Welcomes also the continuing progress achieved
by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
and the Secretary-General, through the Expert on
Space Applications, in their efforts to develop the
United Nations programme on space applications into
a significant means of promoting international cooperation in this field and commends to the attention
of Member States, the specialized agencies and interested United Nations bodies the programme set forth
in the report of the Committee's Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee on the work of its ninth session;7
10. Endorses the United Nations programme on
space applications for 1973 and the guidelines for the
programme for 1974 and recommends the continuing
development of the programme, taking especially into
account the needs of the developing countries;
11. Notes with appreciation that several Member
States have offered educational and training facilities,
under United Nations sponsorship, in the practical
application of space technology and draws the attention
of Member States, particularly the developing countries, to these opportunities as outlined in paragraphs
28 to 32 of the report of the Scientific and Technical
Sub-Committee;
12. Notes with appreciation that data from experiments testing the feasibility of remote sensing of the
earth from space platforms will soon be made available
to the Working Group on Remote Sensing of the Earth
by Satellites;
13. Welcomes the fact that the Working Group on
Remote Sensing of the Earth by Satellites plans to
begin its substantive work in January 1973 and notes
that the Working Group has requested the SecretaryGeneral to prepare, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2778 (XXVI), a background paper
assessing the documents and other data brought to its
attention, including the data referred to in paragraph
12 above, and that it has set up a task force to assist
the Secretary-General in this respect;
14. Looks forward to a comprehensive progress report on remote sensing to be submitted by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
15. Takes note with gratification of the consideration being devoted by the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space to the potential of satellites and
other space platforms in monitoring the environment
with a view ,to helping to achieve the objectives of the
future United Nations environment programme;
16. Welcomes the efforts of a number of Member
States to share with other interested Member States the
practical benefits that may be derived from programmes
in space technology;
17. Welcomes the further progress achieved in international co-operation among Member States in space
7 A/AC.I05/102.

research and exploration, including in particular the
continuing exchange and analysis of lunar material on
a broad international basis, experiments in earth resources surveying making use of the United States
satellite ERTS-I and the agreement between the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America on the development of compatible rendezvous
and docking systems for manned spacecraft with a view
to developing joint flight and improved rescue capabilities;
18. Notes that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space has recommended that its Working
Group on Direct Broadcast Satellites, in view of its interdisciplinary character and its co-ordinating functions,
should be reconvened to study the substantive material
concerning the subject-matter under its mandate that
has become available since the Working Group's last
session, in accordance with the relevant paragraphs of
the Committee's report;
19. Reiterates the importance of the goal of making
satellite communications available to States on a wor.Jdwide and non-discriminatory basis, as expressed in
General Assembly resolution 1721 D (XVI) of 20
December 1961;
20. Takes note of the progress achieved in implementing agreements relating to space communications
recently concluded among a number of States and reiterates the desirability of keeping the United Nations
currently informed concerning activities and developments in this field;
21. Approves continuing sponsorship by the United
Nations of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching
Station in India and the CELPA Mar del Plata Station
in Argentina, expresses its satisfaction at the work
being carried out at these ranges in relation to the use
of sounding rocket facilities for international co-operation and training in the peaceful and scientific exploration of outer space and recommends that Member
States should continue to give consideration to the use
of those facilities for space research activities;
22. Welcomes the announcement by Sweden that
the ESRANGE-Kiruna range will also be made available for international co-operative projects;
23. Notes that, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1721 B (XVI) of 20 December 1961,
the Secretary-General continues to maintain a public
registry of objects launched into orbit or beyond on
the basis of information furnished by Member States;
24. Notes with appreciation that a number of specialized agencies, in particular the World Meteorological Organization, the International Telecommunication
Union, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, have continued
to take an active part in the United Nations programme
for the promotion of international co-operation in the
practical application of space technology, including the
organization of technical panels;
25. Takes note of the programmes currently undertaken by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and the International Telecommunication Union in satellite broadcasting for the purpose of contributing to the advancement of education
and training, including consideration by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization of the draft Declaration of Guiding Principles on
the Use of Satellite Broadcasting for the Free Flow of

General Allembly-Twenty-seventh Senion

14

------------------

Information, the Spread of Education and Greater
Cultural Exchange, 8 and also notes the need to coordinate activities of the specialized agencies in this
field with the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space as set out in General Assembly resolution 2776
(XXVI);
26. Requests the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency to continue, as appropriate, to provide the Committee on the Peace~ul Uses
of Outer Space with progress reports on theIr work
relating to the peaceful uses of outer space and to
examine and report to the Committee on the particular
problems that may arise from the use of outer space
in the fie.lds within their competence and that should,
in their opinion, be brought to the attention of the
Committee;
27. Notes that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space has agreed to grant observer status to
the European Space Research Organization and the
European Launcher Development Organization and to
invite them to participate in the Committee's work;
28. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to continue its work, as set out in the
present resolution and in previous resolutions of the
General Assembly, and to report to the Assembly at
its twenty-eighth session.
2081st plenary meeting
9 November 1972
2916 (XXVII). Preparation of an international
convention on principle8 governing the U8e
hy State8 of artificial earth 8atellite8 for
direct televi8ion hroadca8ting

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2222 (XXI) of 19 December 1966, in which it stressed the importance of international co-operation in the field of activities in
the peaceful exploration and use of outer space and
the importance of developing the rule of law in this
new area of human endeavour,
Recalling further its resolution 2453 B (XXIII) of
20 December 1968, in which it stated that the benefits
of space exploration can be extended to States at all
stages of economic and scientific development,
Reaffirming the common interest of all mankind in
furthering the peaceful exploration and use of outer
space for the benefit of all States and for the development of friendly relations and mutual understanding
among them,
Bearing ill mirul that direct television broadcasting
should help to draw the peoples of the world closer
together, to widen the exchange of information and
cultural values and to enhance the educational level
of people in various countries,
Considering at the same time that direct television
broadcasting by means of satellites should take place
under conditions in which this new form of space technology will serve only the lofty goals of peace and
friendship among peoples,
Mindful of the need to prevent the conversion of
direct television broadcasting into a source of international conflict and of aggravation of the relations
among States and to protect the sovereignty of States
from any external interference,
8 See A/AC.105/l04.

Noting the draft convention on principles governing
the use by States of artificial earth sateHites for direct
television broadcasting, submitted to the General
Assembly by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,9
Desiring to further the elaboration of specific rwes
of international law governing the activities of States
in this field on the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies10
and the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations,ll
Believing that the activity of States in the field of
direct television broadcasting must be based on the
principles of mutual respect for sovereignty, non-interference in domestic affairs, equality, co-operation and
mutual benefit,
Considering at the same time that the introduction
of direct television broadcasting by means of satenites
could raise significant problems connected with the
need to ensure the free flow of communications on a
basis of strict respect for the sovereign rights of States,
1. Considers it necessary to elaborate principles
governing the use by States of artificial earth satellites
for direct television broadcasting with a view to concluding an international agreement or agreements;
2. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to undertake the elaboration of such
principles as soon as possible;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space all
documentation relating to the discussion, at the twentyseventh session of the General Assembly, of the item
entitled "Preparation of an international convention on
principles governing the use by States of artificial earth
satelJites for direct television broadcasting".
2081 st plenary meeting
9 November 1972

2917 (XXVII). Preparation of international instrument8 or United Nation8 arrangement8
on principles governing the U8e by State8
of artificial earth 88tellites for cHrecl television hroadc88ting

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2448 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, dealing with freedom of information, and the
preamble of the Treaty on Principles Governing the
Aotivities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,12
which stipulates that General Assembly resolution 110
(II) of 3 November 1947 is applicable to outer space,
Notes that the work done on the draft Convention
on Freedom of Information and deliberations thereon in
the General Assembly may be useful in the discussion
9 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyseventh Session, Annexes, agenda items 28, 29 and 37, document A/8771.
10 See resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.
11 See resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
12 See resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.

ResolutioJl8 adopted OD the npom of the Firat Committee

and elaboration of international instruments or United
Nations arrangements relative to direct television
broadcasting.
2081 st plenary meeting
9 November 1972
2930 (XXVII). World Disarmament Conference

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the responsibility of the United Nations
under the Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and for disarmament,
Convinced that all peoples of the world have a vital
interest in the success of disarmament negotiations,
Believing it imperative that all States exert further
efforts for the adoption of effeotive measures of disarmament and, more particulady, nuclear disarmament,
Believing also that a world disarmament conference
could promote and facilitate the realization of such
aims,

15

5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "World
Disarmament Conference".
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972

•

•

•

The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-General14 that, in pursuance of paragraph 3 of the abuve resolution, he had "decided to appoint
the fol/owing thirty-one Member States to serve on the Special Committee on the World Disarmament Conference:
ARGENTINA, BELGIUM, BRAZIL, BULGARIA, CANADA, CHILE,
COLOMBIA. CzECHOSLOVAKIA, EGYPT, EnuOPIA, HUNGARY,
INDIA, INDONESIA, IRAN, ITALY, JAPAN, LIBERIA, MEXICO, MONGOLIA, MOROCCO, NETHERLANDS, NIGERIA, PAItISTAN, POLAND,
ROMANIA, SPAIN, SRI LANKA, SWEDEN, UNION OF SovIET SoCIALIST REPUBLICS, YUGOSLAVIA and ZAMBIA". He added that

"In accordance with the widely expressed wish, the remaining
four seats will be reserved for the nuclear States which may
wish to become members of the Special Committee ill the
future".

Deeply convinced that substantial progress in the
field of disarmament can be achieved only by ensuring
adequate conditions of security for all States,

2931 (XXVII). Implementation of the results of
the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon
States

Convinced also that all States should contribute to
the adoption of measures for the achievement of this
goal,
Recalling resolution 2833 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971, in which the General Assembly expressed the
conviction that it is most desirable to take immediate
steps in order that careful consideration be given to the
convening, following adequate preparation, of a world
disarmament conference open 'to all States,

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2664 (XXV) of 7 December
1970,
Having considered the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency for the year 1971/1972/ 5
A ware of the steps taken in amending article VI of
the statute of the International Atomic Energy Agencv
to expand the membership of the Board of Governors,
Noting that the International Atomic Energy Agency
is carrying out a survey of the market for nuclear
power in selected developing countries to assess the
extent of the market for various types and sizes of
nuclear reactors,
Noting further that the number of countries and international organizations participating in the International Nuclear Information System has increased and
that the system is to operate with full subject scope
by the end of 1972,
Notillg with satisfaction that the International
Atomic Energy Agency is continuing its efforts to
ensure the supply to its member States, when reqllired,
of special fissionable materials, including materials for
power reactors,
Taking note of the increase in the target for voluntary contributions to the programme of technical assistance of the International Atomic Energy Agency to
$US 3 million,
1. Expresses appreciation for the action taken by
the International Atomic Energy Agency on the recommendations of the Conference of Non-Nuc1earWeapon States;
2. Hopes that, in the context of development goals,
the over-all expansion in resources available to the
International Atomic Energy Agency for technical cooperation will continue;

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,l!
containing the views and suggestions of States on the
questions relating to the holding of a world disarmament conference,
Noting also all the views and suggestions expressed
by Member States during the debate in plenary meeting
and in the First CommiHee at the current session,
1. Invites the Governments of all States to exert
further efforts with a view to creating adequate conditions for the convening of a world disarmament conference at an appropriate time;

2. Considers it necessary to set up a special committee to examine all the views and suggestions expressed by Governments on the convening of a world
disarmament conference and related problems and to
submH, on the basis of consensus, a report to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session;
3. Decides to establish a Special Committee on the
World Disarmament Conference consisting of thirtyfive Member States, to be appointed by the President
of the General Assembly after consultation with all
the regional groups and taking due consideration of
the necessity to ensure adequate political and geographical representation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
necessary assistance to the Special Committee in its
work;
13 A/8817 and Add.!.

14 A/8990.

15 International Atomic Energy Agency, Annual Report,
1 July 1971-30 June 1972 (Vienna, July 1972); transmitted to
the members of the General Assembly by a note of the Secretary-General (A/8774).

16

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

3. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency
to keep under review ways and means of allowing the
developing countries to benefit fully, and in accordance
with their respective stages of nuclear industrialization,
from the technical assistance provided by international
organizations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency the records of the twenty-seventh session of the General Assembly relating to the recommendations of the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon
States;
5. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency,
in consultation with the specialized agencies and other
bodies concerned, to submit, in its annual report to the
General Assembly, information On further action concerning the implementation of the results of the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States.
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972
2932 (XXVII). General and complete
disarmament

A
The General Assembly,
Conscious that all armed conflicts and the use of any
weapons bring suffering and that the only effective
means of eliminating this suffering is through the
elimination of armed conflicts and through general and
complete disarmament,
Recalling the general rules of international law that
the use of weapons that cause unnecessary suffering is
especially forbidden and that only military targets are
legitimate objects of attack,
Convinced that the widespread use of many weapons
and the emergence of new methods of warfare that
cause unnecessary suffering or are indiscriminate call
urgently for renewed elIorts by Governments to seek,
through legal means, the prohibition of the use of such
weapons and of indiscriminate and cruel methods of
warfare and, if possible, through measures of disarmament, the elimination of specific, especially cruel or
indiscriminate weapons,
Conscious that incendiary weapons have always constituted a category of arms viewed with horror and that
the International Conference on Human Rights, held
at Teheran in 1968, in its resolution XXIII on human
rights in armed conflicts l6 considered napalm bombing
to be among the methods and means that erode human
rights,
Noting that complete proposals for both elimination
and non-use of incendiary weapons were advanced at
the disarmament negotiations in 1933 and that proposals have recently been made to prohibit or restrict
their use,
Recalling that the Secretary-General, in his reports
on human rights in armed conflicts of 20 November
1969 and 18 Septcmber 1970, statcd the view that the
legality or otherwise of the usc of napalm would seem
to be a question calling for study that might eventually
16 Final

Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.6S,XrV.2),
p. 18.

be resolved in an international document that would
clarify the situation,17
Recalling further that, in response to an express suggcstion made by the Secretary-GeneraPIJ in his report
of 18 September 1970, the General Asscmbly, by paragraph 5 of resolution 2852 (XXVI) of 20 December
1971, requested him to prepare as soon as possiblc,
with the help of qualified governmental consultant experts, a report on napalm and other incendiary weapons and al1 aspects of their possible usc,
Noting that the report of the Secrdary-Gcncral entitlcd Napalm and Other Incendiary Weapons and All
Aspects vf Their Possible Vse l9 concludes that the
massive spread of fire through incendiary weapons is
largely indiscriminate in its effects on military and
civilian targets,20
Noting further the conclusion that burn injurics,
whether sustained directly from the action of incendiaries or as a result of fires initiated by them, are
intensely painful and require exceptional resources for
their medical treatment that are far beyond the reach
of most countries, ~I
Noting finally the conclusion that the rapid increase
in the military use of these weapons is but one aspect
of the more general phenomenon of the increasing
mobilization of science and technology for purposes
of total war, alongside which the long-upheld principle
of the immunity of the non-combatant appears to be
receding from the military consciousness, and that
these trends have grave implications for the wor1d
community,~~

1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
entitled Napalm and Other Incendiary Weapons and
All A spects of Their Possible Use and exprcsses appreciation to him for having submitted it without
delay;
2. Takes note of the views expressed in the report
regarding the use, production, development and
stockpiling of napalm and other incendiary weapons;
3. Deplores the use of napalm and other inccndiary
weapons in all armed conflicts;
4. Commends the report to the attention of all
Governments and peoples;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to publish the
report for wide circulation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
report to the Governments of Member States for their
comments and to report on these comments to thc
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2602 A (XXIV) of 16
December 1969, whereby it appealed to the Governments of the Union of Soviet Socialbt Republics and
the United States of America, which on 17 November
19ti9 had initiated bilateral negotiations on the limita17 A/7720, para. 200; A/8052, para. 125.
IS A/S052, para. 126.
III A/S803/Rev.1 (United Nations publication, Sales No.:
E.7U.3).
20 I hid., para. ll:Hi.
~I Ibid., para. 187.
22 I bid., para. 190.

17

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

tion of offensive and defensive strategic nuclear-weapon
systems, to agree, as an urgent preliminary measure,
on a moratorium on further testing and deployment
of new offensive and defensive strategic nuclear-weapon systems,
Noting with satisfaction that the first phase of such
negotiations resulted in the conclusion, on 26 May
1972, of three bilateral instruments on the abovementioned matter23 and that the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America
announced that they had entered, on 21 November
1972, a second phase of negotiations,
Convinced of the necessity that the renewed negotiations should bring about early and positive results
in the field of nuclear disarmament,
1. Appeals to the Governments of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America to make every effort to expedite the
conclusion of further agreements including important
qualitative limitations and substantial reductions of
offensive and defensive strategic nuolear-weapon
systems;
2. Invites those two Governments to keep the
General Assembly informed of the results of their
negotiations.
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972
2933 (XXVII). Chemical amI hacteriological
(biological) weapons

The General Assemblv,
Reaffirming its resolutions 2454 A (XXIII) of 20
December 1968, 2603 B (XXIV) of 16 December
1969, 2662 (XXV) of 7 December 1970 and 2827 A
(XXVI) of 16 December ] 971,
Expressing its determination to act with a view to
achieving effective progress towards general and
complete disarmament, including the prohibition and
elimination of all types of weapons of mass destruction
such as those using chemical or bacteriological
(biological) agents,
Noting that the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction24 has been opened for signature
and has already been signed by a large number of
States,
Convinced that the Convention is a first possible
step towards the achievement of early agreemcnt on
the effective prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of chemical weapons and on the
elimination of such weapons from military arsenals of
a]] States, and determined to continue negotiations to
this end,
Recalling the provisions of article IX of that
Convention,
Recalling that the General Assembly has repeatedly
condemned al1 actions contrary to the princi pIes and
objectives of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the
Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonou<; or Other
Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of \Varfarc,
signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925. 2 "
~3 See A/C.1I1026.

----------------

Reaffirming the need for the strict observance by
all States of the principles and objectives of that
Protocol,
Having considered the report of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament,26
Noting that a work programme, a draft convention
on the prohibition of the development, production and
stockpiling of chemical weapons and on their
destruction, and other working papers, proposals and
suggestions were submitted to the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament,
Conscious of the benefits to mankind that would
result from the prohibition of the development,
production and stockpiling of chemical weapons,
Desiring to create a favourable atmosphere for a
successful outcome of these negotiations,
1. Reaffirms the recognized objective of effective
prohibition of chemical weapons;
2. Reiterates, to this end, the request made by the
General Assembly to the Conference of the Committee
on Disarmament, in resolution 2827 A (XXVI), to
continue negotiations, as a matter of high priority,
with a view to reaching early agreement on effective
measures for the prohibition of the development,
production and stockpiling of chemical weapons and
for their destruction;
3. Stresses the importance of working towards the
complete realization of the objective of effective
prohihition of chemical weapons as set forth in the
present resolution and urges Governments to work
towards that end;
4. Reaffirms its hope for the widest possible
adhcrence to the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (BiologicaD and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction;
5. Invites all States that have not yet done so to
accede to the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use
in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases,
and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare of 17 June
1925 and/or ratify this Protocol, and calls anew for
the strict observance by all States of the principles
and nhjectives contained therein;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament all
documents of the First Committee relating to questions
connected with thc problem of chemical weapons and
c1wllli-:al metlwds of warfare;
7. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to report on the results of its negotiations
to the Gencral Asscmbly at its twenty-eighth session.
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972

29.'Uo (XXYII). Urgent need for suspension of
nuclear and thermonuclear tests

A
The (Jenera! Assonhlv.
H.ccogni.-illg the urgent nced for the cessation of
J1U,:IC:lr and thermonllclear weaIX)n tests,

24 See resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.
25 League

p. 65.

of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, No. 2138,

ZG OjJit';d Records of the Disarmamellt Commission, Supplement for 1972, document DC/235.

General A..embly-Twenty••eventh Sea.ion

18

Recalling its resolution 2602 E (XXIV) of 16
December 1969, by which it declared the decade of
the 1970s as a Disarmament Decade, and its resolution
2734 (XXV) of 16 December 1970, which contains
the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security,
Recalling also its resolutions 914 (X) of 16 December 1955, 1762 (XVII) of 6 November 1962,
1910 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963, 2032 (XX)
of 3 December 1965, 2163 (XXI) of 5 December
1966, 2343 (XXII) of 19 December 1967, 2455
(XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2604 (XXIV) of
16 December 1969, 2663 (XXV) of 7 December
1970 and 2828 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971,

I
Noting with regret that all States have not yet
adhered to the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon
Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under
Water, signed in Moscow on 5 August 1963,27
Expressing serious concern that testing of nuclear
weapons in the atmosphere has continued in some
parts of the world, -including the Pacific area, in
disregard of the spirit of that Treaty and of world
opinion,
Noting in this connexion the statements made by
the Governments of various countries in and around
the Pacific area, expressing strong opposition to those
tests and urging that they be halted,
1. Stresses anew the urgency of bringing to a halt
aU atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons in the
Pacific or anywhere else in the world;
2. Urges all States that have not yet done so to
adhere without further delay to the Treaty Banning
Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer
Space and under Water and, meanwhile, to refrain
from testing in the environments covered by that
Treaty;
II

Noting that no less than nine years have elapsed
since the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in
the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water
came into force,
Taking into account the determination expressed by
the parties to that Treaty to continue negotiations to
conclude a treaty resulting in the permanent banning
of all nuclear weapon test explosions,
1. Declares that a treaty banning all nuclear weapon
tests is an important element in the consolidation of
the progress towards disarmament and arms control
made thus far and that it would greatly facilitate
future progress in these fields;
2. Calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to suspend
nuclear weapon tests in all environments;
3. Calls upon the Conference of the Committee
on Disarmament to give urgent consideration to the
question of a treaty banning all nuclear weapon tests,
taking into account the views already expressed in the
Conference, the opinions stated at the current session
of the General Assembly and, above all, the pressing
need for the early conclusion of such a treaty.
2093nl plenary meeting
29 November 1972

27 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 480, No. 6964, p. 43.

B
The General Assembly,
Conscious of the dangers to mankind presented by
a continuation of the nuclear arms race,
Believing that a cessation of all nuclear and thermonuclear weapon tests, including those carried out
underground, would contribute to a deceleration of the
nuclear arms race, to the promotion of further arms
control and disarmament measures, and to a reduction
in world tension,
Believing further that a cessation of all nuclear
weapon testing would inhibit the wider dissemination
of nuclear weapons,
Noting with regret that not all States have yet
adhered to the Treaty Banning Nuolear Weapon
Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under
Water, signed in Moscow on 5 August 1963,28
Noting with regret that, despite the determination
expressed by parties to that Treaty to achieve the
discontinuance of aU test explosions of nuclear weapons
for all time, parties to the Treaty continue to test
nuclear weapons underground and that no specific
proposals for an underground test ban agreement are
under negotiation,
Recalling that the General Assembly has repeatedly
expressed its concern regarding the continuation of
nuclear and thermonuclear weapon testing, in particular in its resolutions 914 (X) of 16 December
1955,1762 (XVII) of 6 November 1962,1910
(XVIII) of 27 November 1963, 2032 (XX) of 3
December 1965, 2163 (XXI) of 5 December 1966,
2343 (XXII) of 19 December 1967, 2455 (XXIII)
of 20 December 1968, 2604 (XXIV),,of 16 December
1969, 2663 (XXV) of 7 December 1970 and 2828
(XXVI) of 16 December 1971,
Having considered the report submitted on 26
September 1972 by the Conference of the Committee
on Disarmament,29 and in particular the sections
thereof concerned with achieving a comprehensive test
ban,
Noting with satisfaction the completion of a first set
of bilateral agreements on the limitation of strategic
arms and expressing the hope that the progress so
far achieved will lead to further agreed limitations
on nuclear arms and be conducive to the negotiation
of a ban on underground nuclear weapon testing,
1. Stresses again the urgency of halting all nuclear
weapon testing in all environments by all States;
2. Urges all States that have not yet done so to
adhere without further delay to the Treaty Banning
Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer
Spice and under Water and, meanwhile, to refrain
from testing in the environments covered hy that
Treaty;
3. Calls upon all Governments conducting underground nuclear weapon tests, particularly those parties
to the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the
Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water, immediately to undertake unilateral or negotiated measures
that would suspend or reduce sllch testing, pending
the ear~y entry into force of a ban on all nuclear
weapon tests in all environments;

28 Ibid.
29 Official Records of the Disarmament Commission, Sup-

plement for 1972, document DC1235.

19

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4. Urges Governments that have been carrying out
nuclear weapon tests to take an active and constructive
part in presenting and developing in the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament, or in any other
appropriate body, specific proposals for a comprehensive test ban;
5. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to give first priority to its deliberations
on a treaty banning underground nuclear weapon
tests, taking full account of views of experts and of
technical developments bearing on the verification of
such a treaty, and further requests the Conference to
submit a special report to the General Assembly at
its twenty-eighth session on the results of its deliberations on this matter;
6. Urges Governments to take all appropriate
measures further to develop existing capabilities for
detection and identification of underground nuclear
tests through seismological and other technical means,
and to increase international co-operation in the
elaboration of relevant techniques and evaluation of
seismographic data, in order to facilitate an underground nuclear weapon test ban;
7. Calls upon Governments to seek asa matter of
urgency a haIt to all nuclear weapon testing, and to
endeavour to achieve at the earliest possible date a
comprehensive test ban and to obtain universal
adherence to such a ban.
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972

c
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its deep apprehension concerning the
harmful consequences of nuclear weapon tests for the
acceleration of the arms race and for the health of
present and future generations of mankind,
Deploring that the General Assembly has not yet
succeeded in its aim of achieving a comprehensive
test ban, despite twenty-one successive resolutions on
the subject,
Deploring further that the determination expressed
by the original parties to the Treaty Banning Nuclear
Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and
under Water, signed in Moscow on 5 August 1963,30
to pursue negotiations to achieve the discontinuance
of all test explosions of nuclear weapons for all time
has not so far produced the desired results,
Recalling its resolutions 1762 A (XVII) of 6
November 1962 and 2828 A (XXVI) of 16 December
1971, whereby all nuclear weapon tests, without
exception, were condemned,
1. Reiterates once again with the utmost vigour its
condemnation of all nuclear weapon tests;
2. Reaffirms its conviction that, whatever may be
the differences on the question of verification, there
is no valid reason for delaying the conclusion of a
comprehensive test ban of the nature contemplated in
the preamble to the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon
Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under
Water;
3. Urges once more the Governments of nuclearweapon States to bring to a halt all nuclear weapon
tests at the earliest possible date, and in any case
not later than 5 August 1973, either through a
30 United

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 480, No. 6964, p. 43.

permanent agreement or through unilateral or agreed
moratoria;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the nuclear-weapon States and
to inform the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session of any measures they have taken to implement it.
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972

2935 (XXVII). Implementation of General Assembly resolution 2830 (XXVI) concerning
the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty for t.he Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(Trealy of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1911 (XVIII) of 27
November 1963, 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967,
2456 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2666 (XXV)
of 7 December 1970 and 2830 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971,
Recalling in particular that in four of those resolutions it addressed appeals to the nuclear-weapon
States to sign and ratify Additional Protocol II of the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America (Treaty of llatelolco) as soon as
possible,
Having taken note of the fact that the Government
of the People's Republic of China, on 14 November
1972, made the following solemn declaration:
"The Chinese Government has repeatedly declared
that at no time and in no circumstances will China
be the first to use nuclear weapons. As a specific
undertaking regarding the nuclear-weapon-free zone
in Latin America, I now declare solemnly on behalf
of the Chinese Government: China will never use
or threaten to use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear Latin American countries and the Latin
American nuclear-weapon-free zone, nor will China
test, manufacture, produce, stockpile, install or
deploy nuclear weapons in these countries or in this
zone, or send her means of transportation and
delivery carrying nuclear weapons to traverse the
territory, territorial sea and territorial air space of
Latin American countries.'?l
1. Reaffirms its conviction that, for the maximum
effectiveness of any treaty establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone, the co-operation of the nuclearweapon States is necessary and that such co-operation
should take the form of commitments likewise undertaken in a formal international instrument which is
legally binding, such as a treaty, convention or
protocol;
2. Recalls with particular satisfaction that the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America became
parties to Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for
the Prohihition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(Treaty of llatelolco) in 1969 and 1971, respectively;
3. Welcomes also lvith satisfaction, as a preliminary
measure. the solemn decbrntion made by the Government of the People's Republic of China on 14
;,1 Statement hy the Minister for Forei.~n ;\!hirs of
People's Republic of China. See A/Ct! I028.

~he

20

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

November 1972, by which it entered into obligations
similar to those implicit in Additional Protocol II of
the Treaty for States parties thereto, and invites the
Government of China to try to find procedures that
will enable it to accede to the Protocol as soon as
possible;
4. Deplores that the other two nuclear-weapon
States have not yet heeded the urgent appeals which
the General Assembly has made in four different
resolutions and urges them once again to sign and
ratify without further delay Additional Protocol II of
the Treaty;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session an item entitled "Implementation of General Assembly resolution 2935 (XXVII)
concerning the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco)";
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the nuclear-weapon States and
to inform the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session of any measure adopted by them in order to
implement it.
2093rd plenary meeting
29 November 1972

2992 (XXVII). Declaration of the Indian Ocean
as a zone of peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2832 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971 entitled "Declaration of the Indian
Ocean as a zone of peace",
Noting the report of the Secretary-GeneraJ32 submitted in accordance with paragraph 4 of that resolution, in which he was requested to report to the
General Assembly at it~ twenty-seventh session on the
progress made with regard to implementation of the
Declaration,
Noting further that the consultations envisaged in
paragraphs 2 and 3 of that resolution have not taken
place,
Convinced that action in furtherance of the objectives
of the Declaration would be a substantial contribution
to the strengthening of international peace and
security,
Noting that, in the Georgetown Declaration of 12
August 1972, the Conference of Foreign Ministers of
Non-Aligned Countries took note with satisfaction of
the adoption by the General Assembly at its twentysixth session of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean
as a zone of peace and agreed that further steps should
be taken at the Assembly's twenty-seventh session
towards implementation of the Declaration,
1. Calls lipan the littoral and hinterland States of
the Indian Ocean, the permanent members of the
Security Council and other major maritime users of
the Indian Ocean to support the concept that the
Indian Ocean should be a zone of peace;
2. Decides to establish an Ad Hoc Committee on
the Indian Ocean, consisting of no more than fifteen
members, to study the implications of the proposal,
with special reference to the practical measures that

may be taken in furtherance of the objectives of
General Assembly resolution 2832 (XXVI), having
due regard to the security interests of the littoral and
hinterland States of the Indian Ocean and the interests
of any other State consistent with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and
to report to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session;
3. Decides further that the Ad Hoc Committee
shall consist of the following States: Australia, China,
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Japan, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mauritius, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, United
Republic of Tanzania. Yemen and Zambia;33
4. Urges all the States concerned to extend their
co-operation to the Ad Hoc Committee in the discharge
of its functions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
necessary assistance to the Ad Hoc Committee;
6. Decides to inc1ude in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Declaration
of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace".

2111 th plenary meeting
15 December 1972
2993 (XXVII). Implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation
of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security",
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security, contained in General
Assembly resolution 2734 (XXV) of 16 December
1970, and also recalling Assembly resolution 2880
(XXVI) of 21 December 1971 on the implementation
of that Declaration,
Noting with satisfaction that the development of
encouraging trends and the improvement of relations
among States ill the bilateral, regional and multilateral
spheres contribute to the strengthening of international
security,
Expressing at the same time deep concern at the
persistence of armed conflicts and other situations in
different areas of the world which require the urgent
attention of the international community in order to
strengthen international security,
Recognizing that a co-ordinated approach, in
accordance with the Declaration on the Strengthening
of International Security, to the closely connected
problems of the strengthening of international security,
disarmament and development, including the evolving
concept of collective economic security, would be
conducive to a more precise identification of areas
where progress might be achieved,
Reaffirming that respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms is an essential element in the
strengthening of international security,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,34
1. Solemnly reaffirms all the principles and provisions contained in the Declaration on the Strengthening
33 See A/8976.

32 A/8809.

34 A/8775 and Add.1-4.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fint Committee

of International Security and also its urgent appeal to
all States to implement consistently and without any
delay the provisions of the Declaration in its entirety;
2. Expresses the hope that the present favourable
trends in bilateral, regional and multilateral relations,
including the creation of zones of peace and cooperation in various areas of the world, will continue
and that efforts to that end will be pursued and intensified, thus furthering the strengthening of international
security, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
3. Urges all States to take measures towards the
elimination of armed conflicts which threaten international peace and security, of colonialism, racism and
alien domination and other situations persisting in
different areas of the world which prevent peoples from
exercising their right to self-determination and independence, in keeping with the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security and in accordance with
the Charter;
4. Reaffirms that any measure or pressure directed
against any State while exercising its sovereign right
freely to dispose of its natural resources constitutes a
flagrant violation of the principles of self-determination
of peoples and non-intervention, as set forth in the
Charter, which, if pursued, could constitute a threat
to international peace and· security;
5. Believes that the co-ordinated consideration of
related issues, inter alia, disarmament, peace-keeping
and strengthening of the role of the United Nations,
would to a large extent enhance the political and diplomatic effectiveness of the United Nations, including the
work of the General Assembly, thus facilitating action
towards the strengthening of international security;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General ~ssembly at its twenty-eighth session a report
on the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security".

2111 th plenary meeting
15 December 1972
3029 (XXVII). Reservation exclusively for peaceful purposes of the sea-bed and the ocean
floor, and the subsoil thereof, underlying
the high seas beyond the limits of present
national jurisdiction and use of their resources in the interests of mankind, and
convening of a conferf'ncf' on the law of
the sea

A
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2467 (XXIII) of 21 December 1968, 2750 (XXV) of 17 December 1970
and 2881 (XXVI) of 21 December 1971,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor
beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction on the work
of its sessions in 1972,~5
35 Official Records at the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/8721 and Corr.i).

21

Noting with satisfaction the further progress made
towards the preparations for a comprehensive international conference of plenipotentiaries on the law of the
sea, including in particular acceptance of a list of subjects and issues relating to the law of the sea,
Reaffirming ·that the problems of ocean space are
closely interrelated and need to be considered as a
whole,
Recalling its decision, in resolution 2750 C (XXV),
to convene a conference on the law of the sea in 1973,
Expressing the expectation that the conference may
be concluded in 1974 and, if necessary, as may be decided by the conference with the approval of the General Assembly, at a subsequent session or subsequent
sessions no later than 1975,
1. Reaffirms the mandate of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor
beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction set forth in
General Assembly resolutions 2467 (XXIII) and 2750
(XXV), as supplemented by the present resolution;
2. Requests the Committee, in the discharge of its
mandate in accordance with resolution 2750 C (XXV),
to hold two further sessions in 1973, one of five weeks
in New York, beginning in early March, and the other
of eight weeks at Geneva, beginning in early July, with
a view to completing its preparatory work, and to
submit a report with recommendations to the General
Assembly at its twenty-eighth session and, in the light
of the decision taken under paragraph 5 below, to the
Conference;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the
first session of the Third United Nations Conference on
the Law of the Sea in New York for a period of approximately two weeks in November and December
1973, for the purpose of dealing with organizational
matters, including the election of officers, the adoption
of the agenda and the rules of procedure of the Conference, the establishment of subsidiary organs and the
allocation of work to these organs;
~
4. Decides to convene the second session of the
Conference, for the purpose of dealing with substantive
work, at Santiago, Chile, for a period of eight weeks
in April and May 1974 and such subsequent sessions,
if necessary, as may be decided by the Conference and
approved by the General Assembly, bearing in mind
that the Government of Austria has offered Vienna as
a site for the Conference for the succeeding year;
5. Further decides to review at its twenty-eighth
session the progress of the preparatory work of the
Committee and, if necessary, to take measures to
facilitate completion of the substantive work for the
Conference and any other action it may deem
appropriate;
6. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Chairman of the Committee, to make such
arrangements as may be necessary for the efficient
organization and administration of the Conference and
the Committee, utilizing to the fullest extent possible
the resources of staff at his disposal, to render to the
Conference and the Committee all the assistance they
may require in legal, economic, technical and scientific
matters and to provide them with aJ] relevant documentation of the United Nations, the specialized agencies
and the International Atomic Energy Agency;
7. Decides to consider as a matter of priority at
its twenty-eighth session any further matters requiring

General Assembly-Twenty.seventh Session

22

decision in connexion with the Conference, including
the participation of States in the Conference, and to
include in the provisional agenda of that session the
item entitled "Reservation exclusively for peaceful
purposes of the sea-bed and the ocean floor, and the
subsoil thereof, underlying the high seas beyond the
limits of present national jurisdiction and use of their
resources in the interests of mankind, and convening
of a conference on the law of the sea";
8. Invites the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and other intergovernmental
organizations to co-operate fully with the SecretaryGeneral in the preparations for the Conference and to
send observers to the Conference;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, subject to approval by the Conference, to invite interested nongovernmental organizations having consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council to send
observers to the Conference;
10. Decides that the Conference and its main committees shall be provided with summary records of
their proceedings.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
B

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2749 (XXV) of 17 December 1970, containing the Deolaration of Principles
Governing the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor, and the
Subsoil Thereof, beyond the Limits of National
Jurisdiction,
Noting that, in the said Declaration, the General
Assembly declared, inter alia, that the exploration of
the area of the sea-bed and the ocean floor, and the
subsoil thereof, beyond the limits of national jurisdiction (hereinafter referred to as the area) and the
exploitation of its resources should be carrIed out for
the benefit of mankind as a whole, and that an international regime applying to the area and its
resources and including appropriate international
machinery should be established,
Realizing that the economic significance of the area
would depend on its final delimitation, as stated in
the reports of the Secretary-General,36
Considering that there is a close relationship between
any decision concerning the activities and functions
of the international machinery and any decision
concerning limits,
Convinced that information and data on the economic
implications and significance for the area of the various
proposals for limits would be helpful to the participants
at the forthcoming United Nations Conference on the
Law of the Sea, particularly to developing States,
many of which are not members of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor
beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction,
36 AIAC.138/36, AIAC.138173.

1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, on
the basis of data and information at his disposal, a
comparative study of the extent and the economic
significance, in terms of resources, of the international
area that would result from each of the various
proposals on limits of national jurisdiction submitted
so far to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the
Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of
National Jurisdiction;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
his study as soon as possible, but no later than the
opening date of the session of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor
beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction to be held
in the summer of 1973;
3. Invites States, the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the s-pecialized agencies and
other competent organizations of the United Nations
system to co-operate with the Secretary-General in the
preparation of such a study;
4. Declares that nothing in the present resolution
or in the study shall prejudice the position of any State
concerning limits, the nature of the regime and machinery or any other matter to be discussed at the
forthcoming United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
C

The General Assembly,
Convinced of the importance to coastal Stalt:s, for
purposes of economic development and social progress,
of the ocean resources adjacent to their coasts,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, on
the basis of the information at his disposal and in conncxion with the study to be submitted pursuant to resolution B above, a comparativc study of the potential
economic significance for riparian States, in terms of
resources, of each of the various proposals on limits
of national jurisdiction presented so far to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the
Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit his study as soon as possible. but no later than the
opening date of the session of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean FIQ('r
beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction, to be held
in the summer of 1973, simultaneously with the study
to be prepared under resolution B above;
3. Declares that nothing in the present resolution
or in the study shall prejudice the position of any
State concerning limits. the nature of the r~gime and
machinery or any other matter to be discussed at the
forthcoming United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea.
2114th plennry meeting
18 December 1972

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
DAtI of

Ruol."'"

No.

11....

T~

POI1I

39

17 October 1972

23

2-4

2905 (XXVII)

Effects of atomic radiation (A/8843)

2923 (XXVII)

Policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa (A/8879
and Add.1)
Resolution A
Resolution B
Resolution C
Resolution D
Resolution E
Resolution F

38
38
38
38
38
38

15 November 1972
15 November 1972
15 November 1972
15 November 1972
15 November 1972
13 December 1972

24
25
25
26

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (A/8915)
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.
Resolution C
Resolution D
Resolution E
Resolution F

40
40
40
40
40
40

13 December 1972
13 December 1972
13 December 1972
13 December 1972
13 December 1972
13 December 1972

27
27
28
28
29
29

Working Group on the Financing of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(A/8915)
.

40

13 December 1972

29

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peace-keeping
operations in all their aspects (A/8926)
.
.

41

13 December 1972

29

Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied
.
Territories (A/8950)

42

15 December 1972

30

2963 (XXVII)

2964 (XXVII)

2965 (XXVII)
3005 (XXVII)

2905 (XXVII).

.

adOptiON

Eff('(~18 of afmni(~ radiation

24

1. Notes with appreciation the report submitted
by the United Nations Scientific Committee on the
Effects of Atomic Radiation;l
2. Commends the Scientific Committee for the
valua.ble contributions it has made since its inception
to WIder knowledge and understanding of the levels
and effects of atomic radiation;

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December
1955, which established the United Nations Scientific
Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radia'tion, and
its subsequent resolutions,
Reaffirming the desirability of the Scientific Committee continuing its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects on
present and future generations resulting from the levels
of radiation to which man is exposed,
Conscious of the continued need for compiling
information about atomic radiation and for analysing
its effects on man and his environment,
Recognizing that, under its present terms of reference as laid down in General Assembly resolution
913 eX), the Scientific Committee can become an
element of value in the future United Nations envimnment programme,

3. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue
its work, including its co-ordinating activities, to increase knowledge of the levels and effects of atomic
radiation from all sources;
4. Concurs in the request of the Scientific Committee, contained in paragraph 4 of its report, that it
be relieved of the obligation to report to the General
Assembly before the twenty-ninth session and notes
that the Committee is not planning to meet before the
end of 1973, unless asked to undertake new tasks
either in the context of the United Nations environ1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/8725 and Corr.l).

23

24

General Assembly-Twenty".eventh 51'ssion
----------

ment programme or in response to any other special
demand;
5. Requests, accordingly, the Scientific Committee
to meet before the twenty-ninth session of the General
Assembly and to report to the Assembly at that session,
on the understanding that the Assembly will then
decide, taking into account the recommendation of the
Committee, on the convening of its subsequent session;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance
rendered to the Scientific Committee by the International Atomic Energy Agency, the specialized
agencies and the non-governmental organizations concerned;
7. Notes and welcomes the readiness of the Scientific Committee to playa role in the United Nations
environment programme;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Scientific Committee with the assistance
necessary for the conduct of its work and the dissemination of its findings to the public.
2064th plenary meeting
17 October 1972
2923 (XXVII). Policies of apartheid of the
Governnwnt of South Africa
A
MALTREATMENT AND TORTURE OF PRISONERS
AND DETAINEES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2764 (XXVI) of 9 November 1971 concerning the maltreatment and torture of
opponents of apartheid in South Africa and t~e persecution of religious leaders opposed to that pohcy,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on Apartheid entitled "Maltreatment and torture
of prisoners in South Africa'? submitted in pursuance
of that resolution,
Expressing grave concern over any and every act of
maltreatment and torture of opponents of apartheid
in South Africa, and over the deaths while in detention
of a number of detainees,
1. Calls upon the Government of South Africa
immediately to put an end to all forms of physical and
mental torture and other acts of terror against opponents
of apartheid under detention or imprisonment and to
punish the perpetrators of such criminal acts;
2. Requests the Special Committee on Apartheid to
follow the situation and take appropriate steps to
promote an international campaign for an end to
repression, maltreatment and torture of opponents of
apartheid under detention or imprisonment in South
Africa;
3. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To publicize the report of the Special Committe on Apartheid on maltreatment and torture of
prisoners and detainees and all other available information concerning this matter;
(b) To transmit the report of the Special Committee to the Commission on Human Rights and to
appropriate international non-governmental organizations.
2085th plenary meeting
15 November 1972
2 A/8770.

B
UNITED NATIONS TRUST FUND FOR SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa,3
to which is annexed the report of the Committee of
Trustees of the United Nations TofUst Fund for South
Africa,
Recalling that, in paragraph 6 of Security Council
resDlution 311 (1972) of 4 February 1972, the Council
urged Governments and individuals to contribute
generously and regularly to the Trust Fund,
Conscious of the continuing and increasing needs
for humanitarian assistance to persons persecuted under
repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa,
as well as in Namibia and Southern Rhodesia, and
to their families,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and the Committee of Trustees to promote
contributions to the Trust Fund,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have contributed
to the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
2. Again appeals to all States, organizations and
individuals for generous annual contributions to the
Trust Fund and for direct contributions to the voluntary
agencies concerned, in order to enable them to provide
relief and assistance to persons persecuted under
repressive and discriminatory legislation in South
Africa, Namibia and Southern Rhodesia;
3. Requests the Secretary-General and the CommiNee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa to continue their efforts to obtain
increased contributions from governmental and nongovernmental sources to the Trust Fund.
2085th plenary meeting
15 November 1972

c
PROGRAMME OF WORK OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE
ON Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Commending the work of the Special Committee all
Apartheid in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 2775 (XXVI) of 29 November 1971,
Endorsing the programme of work of the Special
Committee on Apartheid contained in its report,4
Requests and authorizes the Special Committee on
Apartheid, within the budgetary appropriation to be
made for this purpose:
(a) To hold consultations with experts and representatives of the oppressed people of South Africa and
African liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity, as well as anti-apartheid
movements and other non-governmental organizations
concerned with the campaign against apartheid, in order
to consider ways and means of intensifying international
action against G[Jartheid;
3 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sevellth
Sessioll. A IIl1exes, agenda item 38, document A/8822.
4/bid.. Tll'entv-sl'l'ellth Sessioll, Supplement No. 22 (AI
8722), paras. 245-250.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

(b) To send representatives or delegations, as appropriate, to national and international conferences dealing
with the problem of apartheid and -to the headquarters
of specialized agencies and the Organization of African
Unity;
(c) To take appropriate steps, in co-operation with
the Organization of African Unity, to ensure greater
moral and material assistance to the national movement
of. the oppressed people of South Africa;
(d) To continue co-operation with other United
Nations bodies concerned with apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism in southern Africa;
(e) To submit a special report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the implementation by States of United Nations resolutions on
apartheid.
2085th plenary meeting
15 November 1972

25

4. Requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to expedite the preparation and publication of an educational kit on racial
discrimination and apartheid in southern Africa;
5. Invites Governments and organizations to encourage information media to contribute to the campaign against apartheid by the widest dissemination of
information on the evils of apartheid and on the international efforts towards the eradication of apartheid;
6. Requests States and public organizations to take
appropriate steps to promote the establishment in
countries where they do not exist of non-governmental
organizations actively concerned with the campaign
against apartheid;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
2085tlz plenary meeting
15 November I9T!.

D
DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2775 Band G (XXVI) of
29 November 1971,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-GeneralIS
on the implementation of resolutions 2775 D, F and
G (XXVI),
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the Unit on
Apartheid and the Office of Public Information in this
respect,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on Apartheid,8
Considering that the dissemination of information
on the evils and dangers of apartheid and on the international efforts for the eradication of apartheid should
be intensified in co-operation with Governments, specialized agencies and appropriate regional and non-governmental organizations,
Desirous of increased cO-Dporation between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
in disseminating information on apartheid,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, taking into
account paragraphs 220 to 228 of the report of the
Special Committee on Apartheid and in consultation
with the Organization of African Unity, to take steps
to intensify the dissemination of information on
apartheid and, in particular, to arrange for an increase
in the circulation of publications and films and for
additional translations into various languages;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make appropriate arrangements for wider and more effective
publicity by the Office of Public Information through
all media, including films and broadcasts, on the evils
of apartheid and the efforts of United Nations organs
towards the eradication of apartheid;
3. Requests the specialized agencies concerned, particularly the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and the International Labour
Organisation, -to co-operate closely with the Office of
Public Information and the Unit on Apartheid in disseminating information on apartheid;
5 A/88B.

6 Official Records of the

General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/8722) and Supplement No. 22.1
(A/8722/Add.1);

E
SITUATION IN SOUTH AFRICA RESULTING FROM THE
POLICIES OF apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the question of apartheid,
in particular resolution 2775 (XXVI) of 29 November 1971,
Strongly convinced that the United Nations has a
vital interest in securing the speedy elimination of
apartheid,
.Having considered the reports of the Special CommIttee on Apartheid7 and the relevant sections of the
report of the Economic and Social Council. s
Gravely concerned about the explosive situation in
South Africa and in southern Africa as a whole resulting fro.m the inhuman and aggressive policies of
apartheid pursued by the Government of South Africa
a situation which constitutes a threat to internationai
peace and security,
Noting that the Security Council decided, in its
resolution 311 (1972) of 4 February 1972 adopted
in Addis Ababa, to examine, as a matter of urgency,
methods of resolving the present situation arising out
of the policies of apartheid of the Government of
South Africa,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of the people of
South Africa to self-determination and freedom.
Alarmed at the forcible removal of the African
people from their rightful homes to the so-called Bantustans.
Further reaffirming that the practice of apartheid
constitutes a crime against humanity,
1. Condemns the racist Government of South Africa
for continuing and intensifying the implementation of
its inhuman policy of apartheid, and subjecting the
opponents of apartheid to ruthless repression, in violation of its obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations. thereby creating a grave threat to the peace;
2. Condemns the establishment by the racist Gowrnment of South Africa of the so-called Bantustans and
the forcible removal of the African people of South
• Ibid.: A/8770.
8 Official Records of th" GClleral Assembly. Twclltv-.fiTenth
Sc.<sioll. Supplemellt No.3 (A/8703), chap. XIV, sects. B.3
and B.4.

26

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

Africa to those areas as a violation of their inalienable
rights, contrary to their inherent right to self-determination and prejudicial to the territorial integrity of the
country and the unity of its people;
3. Demands that the Government of South Africa
repeal all repressive laws, regulations and proclamations
used to persecute persons opposed to the policies of
apartheid and immediately release all those imprisoned,
detained or restricted for their opposition to apartheid;
4. Further condemns the South African regime for
its progressive exportation of the policy of apartheid
into neighbouring African Territories, especially Namibia which it continues to occupy illegally in defiance
of the United Nations;
5. Condemns the continued and increasing cooperation of certain States and foreign economic interests with South Africa in the military, economic,
political and other fields, as such co-operation encourages the South African regime in the pursuit of
apartheid in defiance of the United Nations;
6. Again calls upon all Governments to implement
fully the arms embargo against South Africa, without
any exceptions or reservations;
7. Reaffirms its conviction that economic and other
sanctions, instituted under Chapter VII of the Charter
and universally applied, constitute one of the essential
means of achieving a peaceful solution of the grave
situation in South Africa;
8. Requests the Security Council to consider urgently
the situation in South Africa with a view to adopting
such effective measures under Chapter VII of the
Charter;
9. Firmly supports the efforts of all those engaged
in the struggle inside South Africa against apartheid
and its evil consequences;
10. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of the
oppressed people of South Africa to eradicate apartheid
and racial discrimination by all available means and
to attain in the country as a whole majority rule
based on universal suffrage;
11. Appeals to Governments, specialized agencies,
national and international organizations and individuals
to provide greater assistance, directly or through the
Organization of African Unity, to the national movement of the oppressed people of South Africa;
12. Requests the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system to
discontinue all collaboration with the Government of
South Africa until it renounces its policies of apartheid
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
13. Requests States members of international agencies and organizations, particularly the members of the
European Economic Community, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the International
Monetary Fund, to take the necessary steps to deny
all assistance and commercial or other facilities to the
Government of South Africa so long as it pursues its
policies of apartheid and racial discrimination and
continues to defy the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council;
. 14. Requests all States to take appropriate steps,
In accordance with General Assembly resolution 2775 D
(XXVI), to uphold the Olympic principle of nondiscrimination in sports and to withhold any support

from sporting events organized in violation of this
principle, particularly with the participation of racially
selected teams from South Africa;
,15. Commends the activities of anti-apartheid movements, trade unions, student organizations, churches and
othe-r groups which have promoted national and international action against apartheid;
16. Invites all organizations, institutions and information media to organize in 1973, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions adopted by the United
Nations, intensified and co-ordinated campaigns with
the following goals:
(a) Discontinuance of all military, economic and
political collaboration with South Africa;
. (b) Cessation of all activities by foreign economic
mterests which encourage the South African regime
in its imposition of apartheid;
(c) Condemnation of torture and ill-treatment of
prisoners and detainees in South Africa;
(d) Discouragement of emigration to South Africa,
especially of skilled workers;
(e) Boycott of South Africa in sports and in cultural
and other activities;
(f) World-wide collection of contributions for assistance to the victims of apartheid and support to the
movement of the oppressed people of South Africa
for freedom;
17. Requests the Special Committee on Apartheid
to arrange, in consultation with the Secretary-General,
for ~he preparation and widest dissemination of expert
studies . to counteract the propaganda by foreign
economic and financial interests against resolutions of
the United Nations and in favour of economic collaboration with the South African regime and racist institutions in South Africa;
18. Further requests the Special Committee on
Apartheid to take steps to publicize all available information on collaboration by States and foreign
economic and financial interests with the South African
regime and South African companies;
19. Requests the Secretary~General to report to
the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on
the implementation of the present resolution.

2085th plenary meeting
15 November 1972
F
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE OF TRADE UNIONS
AGAINST Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2671 D (XXV) of R December 1970 and 2775 H (XXVI) of 29 Novemher
1971,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on Apartheid,9
Gravely concerned over the infringements of trade
union rights in South Africa, especially the denial of
those rights to African workers,
StronglY convinced of the need to promote concerted
action by the trade union movement at the national
and international levels against apartheid,
91hid.. Supplement No. 22 (1\/87221. Supplement No. 2.'A
:IOLl Supplcl1lcfI( No. 2213 (A/8722/Add.2).

(A/8722/ Add.l)

ResolutioDs adopted on the reporb of the Special Political Committee

Noting with appreciation the readiness of the International Labour Organisation to provide conference
services for the meetings of the proposed International
Conference of Trade Unions against Apartheid and
the Preparatory Committee for the Conference,
1. Again appeals to all national and international
trade union organizations to intensify their action
against apartheid;
2. Welcomes the decision taken by the Workers'
Group at the International Labour Conference to
convene at Geneva, in 1973, an international conference of trade unions to work out a common programme
of action against apartheid;
3. Notes with satisfaction the constructive attitude
of the main international trade union organizations in
regard to the convening of the International Conference
of Trade Unions against Apartheid;
4. Commends the Special Committee on Apartheid
for its efforts in helping to promote action by the workers of the world against apartheid;
5. Requests and authorizes the Special Committee
on Apartheid to participate effectively in the proposed
International Conference of Trade Unions against
Apartheid and in the meeting of the Preparatory Committee for the Conference;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide appropriate assistance to facilitate the holding of the Conference;
7. Authorizes the Secretary-General to reimburse
the costs necessary to enable up to five representatives
of trade union organizations from southern Africa to
participate in the Conference, as shall be decided by
the Special Committee on Apartheid, on the proposal
of the Preparatory Committee for the Conference and
in consultation with the Organization of African Unity;
8. Requests the Special Committee on Apartheid to
submit a special report to the General Assembly, at its
twenty-eighth session, on the results of the International
Conference of Trade Unions against Apartheid and on
other related developments concerning workers' action
against apartheid.
2108tl1 plenary meeting
13 December 1972
2963 (XXVII). United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2792 A (XXVI) of 6 December 1971 and all previous resolutions referred to
therein, including resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948,
Taking note of the annual report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, covering the period from 1 July 1971 to 30 June 1972,10
Taking note also of the appeal made by the SecretaryGeneral on 20 March 1972,11
1. Notes with deep regret that repatriation or compensation of the refugees as provided for in paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (III)
10 Ibid., Supplement No. 13

11 A/8672.

(A/8713 aDd Corr.l and 2).

27

has not been effected, that no substantial progress has
been made in the programme endorsed by the Assembly
in paragraph 2 of resolution 513 (VI) of 26 January
1952 for the reintegration of refugees either by repatriation or resettlement and that, therefore, the situation of
the refugees continues to be a matter of serious concern;
2. Expresses its thanks to the Commissioner-General
and to the staff of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East for
their continued faithful efforts to provide essential
services for the Palestine refugees, and to the specialized agencies and private organizations for their valuable work in assisting the refugees;
3. Notes with regret that the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine was unable to find
a means of achieving progress in the implementation
of paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution 194
(III) and requests the Commission to exert continued
efforts towards the implementation thereof and to report thereon as appropriate, but no later than 1 October ]973;
4. Directs attentioll to the continuing critical financial position of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as
outlined in the Commissioner-General's report;
5. Notes with concern that, despite the commendable and successful efforts of the CommissionerGeneral to collect additional contributions to help
relieve the serious budget deficit of the past year, contributions to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East continue to fall short of the funds needed to cover essential
budget requirements;
6. Calls upon all Governments as a matter of
urgency to make the most generous efforts possible to
meet the anticipated needs of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, particularly in the light of the budgetary deficit
projected in the Commissioner-General's report, and
therefore urges non-contributing Governments to contribute and contributing Governments to consider increasing their contributions.
2108th plenary meeting
13 December 1972
B

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2252 (ES-V) of 4 July
1967, 2341 B (XXII) of 19 December 1967, 2452 C
(XXlII) of 19 December 1968, 2535 C (XXIV) of
10 December 1969, 2672 B (XXV) of 8 December
1970 and 2792 B (XXVI) of 6 December 1971,
Taking note of the annual report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, covering the period from 1 July 1971 to 30 June 1972,12
Taking note also of the appeal made by the Secretary-General on 20 March 1972,1a
Concerned about the continued human suffering
resulting from the June 1967 hostilities in the Middle
East,
12 Official Records of the General ASJernbly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No 13 (A/8713 and Corr.l and 2).
111 A/8672.

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

28

1. Reaffirms its resolutions 2252 (ES-V), 2341 B
(XXII), 2452 C (XXIII), 2535 C (XXIV), 2672 B
(XXV) and 2792 B (XXVI);
2. Endorses, bearing in mind the objectives of those
resolutions, the efforts of the Commissioner-General of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East to continue to
provide humanitarian assistance, as far as practicable,
on an emergency basis and as a temporary measure, to
other persons in the area who are at present displaced
and in serious need of continued assistance as a result
of the June 1967 hostilities;
3. Strongly appeals to all Governments and to
organizations and individuals to contribute generously
for the above purposes to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East and to the other intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations concerned.
2108th plenary meeting
13 December 1972

c
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 15 September 197214 regarding the effect on
the inhabitants of the Gaza Strip of the continued
Israeli policies and measures in the Strip,
Noting that both the Secretary-General and the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East have expressed great concern about the effect on
Palestine refugees of these operations in which shelters
in refugee camps were demolished and thousands of
persons displaced, some of them to places outside the
Gaza Strip,
Noting with regret the failure of Israel to comply with
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 2792 C
(XXVI) of 6 December 1971,
Deeply concerned at the continued measures by Israel
which prejudice the rights of the population and the
demographic composition and the status of the Gaza
Strip,
1. Declares that such measures involving the physical
and demographic structure of the Gaza Strip, including
the destruction of refugee shelters and the forcible
transfer of population, contravene the provisions of
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,15
as well as paragraph 7 of General Assembly resolution 2675 (XXV) of 9 December 1970, entitled "Basic
principles for the protection of civilian populations in
armed conflicts";
2. Strongly deplores these actions by Israel;
3. Calls upon Israel to desist forthwith from all
measures that affect the physical structure and the demographic composition of the Gaza Strip;
4. Calls upon Israel to take immediate and effective
steps for the return of the refugees concerned to the
camps from which they were removed and to provide
adequate shelters for their accommodation;
14 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Annexes, agenda item 40, document A/8814.
15 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.

5. Requests the Secretary-General, after consulting
with the Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, to report as soon as possible and
whenever appropriate thereafter, but in any case not
later than the opening date of the twenty-eighth session
of the General Assembly, on Israel's compliance with
and implementation of the present resolution.
2108th plenary meeting
13 December 1972
D

The General Assembly,
Recalling Security Council resolution 237 (1967) of
14 June 1967,
Recalling also its resolutions 2252 (ES-V) of 4 July
1967,2452 A (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, 2535 B
(XXIV) of 10 December 1969, 2672 D (XXV) of
8 December 1970 and 2792 E (XXVI) of 6 December 1971, calling upon the Government of Israel to
take effective and immediate steps for the return without delay of those inhabitants who had fled the areas
since the outbreak of hostilities,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 13 September 197216 concerning the implementation of resolution 2792 E (XXVI),
Noting that the Israeli occupation authorities have
persisted in changing the physical, geographic and
demographic structure of the occupied territories, by
the displacement of inhabitants, the destruction of
towns, villages and homes, and the establishment of
settlements in violation of the provisions of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in .Time of. War, of 12 August 1949,17 as well as
the pertment Umted Nations resolutions,
. Gr~vely concerned about the plight of the displaced
mhabitants,
Convinced that the plight of the displaced inhabitants could be relieved only by their speedy return to
their ~omes and to the camps which they formerly
occupIed,
Emphasizing the necessity of full implementation of
the above-mentioned resolutions,
1. Affirms the right of the displaced inhabitants to
return to their homes and camps;
2. Considers that the plight of the displaced inhabitants continues since they have not yet returned to
their homes and camps;
3. Expresses its grave concern over the failure of
the Israeli authorities to take steps for the return of the
displaced inhabitants in accordance with the abovementioned resolutions;
4. Calls once more upon Israel immediately to take
steps for the return of the displaced inhabitants;
5. Calls again upon Israel to desist forthwith from
all measures affecting the physical, geographic and
demographic structure of the occupied territories;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
in detail thereon to the General Assembly.
2108th plenary meeting
13 December 1972
16 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Annexes, agenda item 40, document A/8786.
17 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

-----------E

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the problem of the Palestinian Arab
refugees has arisen from the denial of their inalienable
rights under the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Recalling its resolution 2535 B (XXIV) of 10 December 1969, in which it reaffirmed the inalienable
rights of the people of Palestine, its resolutions 2672 C
(XXV) of 8 December 1970 and 2792 D (XXVI) of
6 December 1971, in which it recognized that the people of Palestine are entitled to equal rights and selfdetermination in accordance with the Charter, and its
resolutions 2649 (XXV) of 30 November 1970 and
2787 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971, in which it recognized that the people of Palestine are entitled to the
right of self-determination,
Bearing in mind the principle of equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples enshrined in Articles 1 and 55
of the Charter and more recently reaffirmed in the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations18 and in the Declaration on the Strengthening
of International Security,19
1. Affirms that the people of Palestine are entitled
to equal rights and self-determination, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations;

2. Expresses once more its grave concern that the
people of Palestine have not been permitted to enjoy
their inalienable rights and to exercise their right to
self-determination;
3. Recognizes that full respect for and realization of
the inalienable rights of the people of Palestine are
indispensable for the establishment of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.
2108th plenary meeting
13 December 1972
F

The General Assembly,
Having noted that the present membership of the
Advisory Commission of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
established pursuant to its resolutions 302 (IV) of 8
December 1949 and 720 B (VIII) of 27 November
1953, is composed of Belgium, Egypt, France, Jordan,
Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the United States of America,
Noting further that it is in the general interest that
other contributing countries join the Advisory Commission,
Decides to include Japan in the membership of the
Advisory Commission of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East.
2108th plenary meeting
13 December 1972
18 See resolution 2625

(XXV), annex.

19 Resolution 2734 (XXV).

2964 (XXVII). Working Group on the Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works
AgelH~Y for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2656 (XXV) of 7 December 1970, 2728 (XXV) of 15 December 1970 and
2791 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971,
Having considered the report of the Working Group
on the Financing of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East,20
Taking into account the annual report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
covering the period from 1 July 1971 to 30 June
1972,21
Recognizing with grave concern that the financial
situation of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East continues to be acute, thereby endangering the already
minimum services being provided to Palestine refugees,
Emphasizing the continuing need for extraordinary
efforts in order to maintain, at least at their present
level, the activities of the United Nations Relicf and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
1. Commends the Working Group on the Financing
of the United Nations R~lief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East for its work;
2. Notes with appreciation the report of the Working Group;
3. Endorses the conclusion of the Working Group
that further vigorous and constant fund-raising activities on behalf of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Ncar East are
essential;
4. Requests the Working Group to continue its
efforts, in co-operation with the Secretary-General and
the Commissioner-General, for the financing of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East for a further period of one
year;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary services and assistance to the Working Group
for the conduct of its work.
2108th plenary meeting
13 December 1972
2965 (XXVII). Comprehensive review of the
whole qnestion of peace-ket'ping operations
in all their aspeets

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965, 2053 A (XX) of 15 December ]965,
2249 (S-V) of 23 May 1967, 2308 (XXII) of 13
December 1967, 2451 (XXIII) of 19 December ]968,
2670 (XXV) of 8 December 1970 and 2835 (XXVI)
of 17 December 1971,
20 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Annexes, agenda item 40, document A/8849.
21 Ibid., Twenty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 13 (AI
8713 and Corr.l and 2).

30

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

Having received and examined the report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations of 13 November 1972,'22
Noting with appreciation the agreement arrived at
by the Special Committee concerning the election of a
new Chainnan and two additional Vice-Chainnen and
the enlargement of the Committee's Working Group,
Noting with regret that the mandate entrusted to the
Special Committee has not yet been fulfiUed,
Conscious, nevertheless, that the problems with which
the Special Committee has been faced are of a fundamental nature and require close and thorough consideration to which any Member State may usefully contribute,
Bearing in mind that Member States are deeply concerned in the present international situation over the
continued lack of agreement on concrete guidelines
for carrying out United Nations peace-keeping operations in conformity with the Charter of the United
Nations,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations, in particular
paragraphs 10 and 11 thereof;
2. Notes with appreciation the efforts and contributions of those Member States that have submitted views
and suggestions to the Special Committee and requests
Member States to continue to make available to the
Committee any views and suggestions that they may
wish to submit to help its work;
3. Requests the Special Committee, taking into account the progress made by its Working Group, to
study the views and suggestions submitted by Member
States in response to paragraph 4 of General Assembly
resolution 2835 (XXVI) and referred to in paragraphs
2, 4 and 6 of the fifth report of the Working Group,23
as well as those expressed during the debate in the
Assembly at its twenty-seventh session, with a view to
making renewed efforts;
4. Recommends that, in order to e~pedite progress
and to enable the Special Committee to hold a more
frequent exchange of views on the question, its Working
Group should prepare and submit at intervals reports
that would facilitate discussion and agreement on questions of substance;
5. Urges the Special Committee to accelerate and
intensify its work so as to make substantive progress,
in view of the importance of achieving, in pursuance of
its mandate, agreed guidelines for carrying out peacekeeping operations in confonnity with the Charter of
the United Nations;
6. Requests the Special Committee to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth ses&ion.
2108th plenary meeting
13 December 1972
3005 (XXVII). Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting
the Human Rights of the Population of the
Occupied Territories

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of ,the United Nations,
221bid., Twenty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 41,
document A/8888.
23 Ibid., document A/8888, annex.

Invoking the provisions and principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,24
Recalling Security Council resolutions 237 (1967)
of 14 June 1967 and 259 (1968) of 27 September 1968, as well as other pertinent resolutions of
the United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied
Territories,25
Considering that a system of investigation and protection is required for ensuring effeotive implementation
of the international instruments, such as the Geneva
Convention of 12 August 1949, which provide for
respect for human rights in armed conflicts,
Recalling that, in accordance with article 1 of that
Convention, the States parties have undertaken not
only to respect, but also to ensure respect for, the
Convention in all circumstances,
Considering that implementation of the Geneva
Convention of 12 August 1949 cannot and should not
be left open in a situation involving foreign military
occupation and the rights of the civilian population
of these territories under the provisions of that Convention and in accordance with the principles of international law,
1. Commends the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Population of the Occupied Territories for its efforts
in performing the tasks assigned to it;
2. Strongly calls upon Israel to rescind forthwith,
and desist from, all such policies and practices as:
(a) The annexation of any part of the occupied
territories;
(b) The establishment of Israeli settlements in those
territories and the transfer of parts of an alien population into the occupied territories;
(c) The destruction and demolition of villages,
quarters and houses and the confiscation and expropriation of property;
(d) The evacuation, transfer, deportation and expulsion of the inhabitants of the occupied territories;
(e) The denial of the right of ,the displaced persons
to return to their homes;
3. Reaffirms that alI measures taken by Israel in
contravention of the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
of 12 August 1949, to settle the occupied territories,
including occupied Jerusalem, are null and void;
4. Affirms the principle of the sovereignty of the
population of the occupied territories over their national wealth and resources;
5. Calls upon all States, international organizations and specialized agencies not to recognize or cooperate with, or assist in any manner in, any measures
undertaken by the occupying Power to exploit the
resources of the occupied territories or to effect any
changes in the demographic composition or geographic
character or institutional structure of those territories;
24 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.

25 A/8828.

Resolutions adopted on the report! of the Special Political Committee

-------

6. Requests all States parties to the Geneva Convention of 12 'August 1949 to do their utmost to ensure that Israel respects and fulfils its obligations
under that Convention;
7. Requests the Special Committee, pending the
early termination of Israeli occupation of Arab territories, to continue its work and to consult, as appropriate, with the International Committee of the
Red Cross in order to ensure the safeguarding of the
welfare and human rights of the population of the
occupied territories;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
necessary facilities to the Special Committee, including
those required for its visits to the occupied territories
with a view to investigating Israeli policies and practices
affecting the human rights of the population of the
occupied territories, especially:
(a) The measures concerning the establishment of
Israeli settlements in the occupied territories and the
moving into the occupied territories of an alien population, contrary to the provisions of the Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949;
(b) The situation concerning the annexation of any
part of the territories occupied by Israel since 5 June
1967;
(c) The exploitation and the looting of the resources
of the occupied territories;
(d) The changes in the physical character or
demographic composition or institutional structure of

31

those territories, including the transfer or deportation
of population thereof or the demolition of houses and
towns therein;
(e) The pillaging of the archaeological and cultural
heritage of the occupied territories;
(I) The interference in the freedom of worship in
the holy places of the occupied territories;
9. Calls upon Israel to co-operate with the Secretary-General and the Special Committee and to facilitate their tasks;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the
widest circulation of the reports of the Special Committee by all means available through the Office of
Public Information of the Secretariat;
11. Requests the Special Committee to report to
the Secretary-General as soon as possible and whenever the need arises thereafter;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
task entrusted to him;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Report
of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population
of the Occupied Territories".

2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
Resolution

Date of
adoption

No.

Title

Item

2904 (XXVII)

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (A/8824)
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.
.
United Nations Institute for Tl'aining and Research (A/8911)

43
43
45

26 September 1972
26 September 1972
II December 1972

34
34
35

48

11 December 1972

35

2950 (XXVII)
2951 (XXVII)
2952 (XXVII)

Establishment of the United Nations University (A/8924)
.
Second General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (A/8925)
.

44

11 December 1972

36

2953 (XXVII)

Co-operation between the United Nations Development Progr,amrne and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (A/8925)
"
.

44

11 December 1972

37

2969 (XXVII)

Reports of the Governing Council of the United Nations Develop.
ment Programme (A/8937)
United Nations Volunteers programme (A/8937)
,.

46
46

14 December 1972

38

14 December 1972

38

Special measures related to the particular needs of the land-locked
.
developing countries (A/8937)

46

14 December 1972

39

2972 (XXVII)

Review of criteria for calculating indioative planning figures
(A/8937)
.

46

14 December 1972

39

2973 (XXVII)

Financial resources of the United Nations Development Pro.
gramme (A/8937)

46

14 December 1972

40

46

14 December 1972

40

46
46
47

14 December 1972
14 December 1972

41

15 December 1972

41
42

47

15 December 1972

42

47

15 December 1972

42

47

15 December 1972

43

47

15 December 1972

45

47
47

15 December 1972
15 December 1972

46
46

47

2970 (XXVII)
2971 (XXVII)

2974 (XXVII)

2975 (XXVII)
2976 (XXVII)
2994 (XXVII)
2995 (XXVII)
2996 (XXVII)

Co-operation among developing countries in the United Nations
technical co-operation programmes and increased efficiency
of the capacity of the United Nations development system
(A/8937)
.
Measures to strengthen the executing agencies of the United
.
Nations Development Programme (A/8937)
United Nations Capital Development Fund (A/8937)
.
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment (A/890l)
Co-operation between States in the field of the environment
(A/8901)
.
International responsibility of States in regard to the environment
(A/8901)

2997 (XXVII)
2998 (XXVII)
2999 (XXVII)
3000 (XXVII)
3001 (XXVII)
3002 (XXVII)
3003 (XXVII)
3004 (XXVII)
3015 (XXVII)

.

Institutional and financial armngements for international environ.
mental co-operation (A/8901)
Criteria governing multilateral financing of housing and human
settlements (A/8901)
.
Establishment of an international fund or financial institution
.
for human settlements (A/8901)
Measures for protecting and enhancing the environment (AI 890 I)
United Nations Conference-Exposition on Human Settlements
(A/8901)
.

15 December 1972

47

Development and environment (A/8901)
.
International prize for the most outstanding contribution in the
field of the environment (A/8901)
.
Location of the environment secretariat (A/8901)

47

15 December 1972

47

47
47

15 December 1972
15 December 1972

48
48

United Nations Children's Fund (A/8963)

12

18 December 1972

48

3016 (XXVII)

Permanent sovereignty over natural resources of developing coun,
.
tries (A/8963)

12

18 December 1972

48

3017 (XXVII)

Outflow of trained personnel from developing to developed countries (A/8963)
The problem of mass poverty and unemployment in developing
.
countries (A/8963, A/L.695)

12

18 December 1972

49

12

18 December 1972

so

3018 (XXVII)

33

34

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session
Re.wltttiotl
No.

3019 (XXVII)
3035 (XXVII)
3036 (XXVII)
3037 (XXVII)
3038 (XXVII)
3039 (XXVII)
3040 (XXVII)
3041 (XXVII)

Date of
adoption

Title

Item

United Nations Fund f(ilr Population Activ,ities (A/8963)
Code of conduct for liner conferences (A/8824/ Add.l)
.
Special measures in favour of the least developed among the de.
veloping countries (A/8824/ Add.l)
Charter of the economic rights and duties of States (A/8824/
Add.l)
.
Dissemination of information and mobilization of pubIic opinion
regarding problems of trade and development (A/8824/ Add.l)
External debt servicing by the developing countries (A/8824/
Add.l)
.
Multilateral trade negotiations (A/8824/Add.l)
.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development on its third session (A/8824/ Add. I) ....

12
43

18 December 1972
19 December 1972

51
51

43

19 December 1972

52

43

19 December 1972

53

43

19 December 1972

53

43
43

19 December 1972
19 December 1972

53
54

43

19 December 1972

55

12
43

18 December 1972
19 December 1972

58
59

Page

Other decisions

Report of the Economic and Social Council
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development ..

2904 (XXVII). United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development

A
AMENDMENTS TO GENERAL ASSEMBLY RESOLUTION

1995 (XIX)

The General Assembly,
Having considered resolution 80 (II!), relating to
a review of the institutional arrangements of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
adopted by the Conference on 20 May 1972, 1 and
more particularly paragraphs 1 and 4 thereof containing the recommendations addressed by the Conference to the General Assembly,
Decides to amend it~ resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30
December 1964, entitled "Establishment of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development as an
organ of the General Assembly", as follows:
(a) In section II, paragraph 2, the first sentence is
amended to read:
"The Conference shall normally be convened at
intervals of not more than four years.";
(b) Paragraph 5 is amended to read:
"The Board shall consist of sixty-eight members
ejected by the Conference from among its membership. In electing the members of the Board, the
Conference shall have full regard for both equitable
geographical distribution and the desirability of continuing representation for the principal trading
States, and shall accordingly observe the following
distribution of seati:
"(a) Twenty-nine from the States listed in part A
of the annex to the present resolution as revised in
accordance with paragraph 6 below;
"( b) Twenty-one from the States listed in part B
of the annex as revised;
"(c) Eleven from the States listed in part C @f
the annex as revised;
"(d) Seven from the States listed in part D of
the annex as revised.";
1 See Proceedings of .the UniJ~d Nations Conference 011
Trade Ulld Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.DA),
annex LA.

(c) Paragraph lOis amended to read:

"Any member of the Conference shall be entitled
to participate in the deliberations of the Board on
any item on its agenda of particular concern to that
member with all the rights and privileges of a Board
member except the right to vote.";
(d) In the second sentence of paragraph 13, the
word "twice" is replaced by "once";
(e) In paragraph 25:
(i) Wherever the words "Chairman of the Board"
are used, they are replaced by "President of
the Board";
(ii) The title of (c) is amended to read "Initiation
of conciliation by a presiding officer";
(iii) In the first sentence of (d), the words "the
President or the Chairman" are amended to
read "the President of the Conference or the
President of the Board";
(iv) In the second sentence of (d), the words
"Chairman of the organ concerned" are
amended to read "presiding officer of the
organ concerned".
2041sf plenary meeting
26 September 1972
B
REVISION OF THE LISTS OF STATES ELIGIBLE FOR
MEMBERSHIP IN THE TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT
BOARD

The General Assembly,
Recalling that ~t its 1741st plenary meeting, on 13
December 1968, It took note of the decision of the
Uni,ted Nations Conference on Trade and Development
at Its second session2 to revise the lists annexed to
General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964,
Takes note that the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development at its third session decided
to include the following States in list A of the annex
to General Assembly resolution 1995 (X£X): Bahrain,
2 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Second Session, vol. I and Corr.l and
3. an~ Add.l and 2, Report and Annexes (United Nations publIcatlon, Sales No.: E.68.n.D.14), p. 57.

35

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Bangladesh, Bhutan, Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, Oman,
Qatar, Swaziland and United Arab Emirates.
2041 st plenary meeting
26 September 1972

*
*
*
As a result of the decision set forth in resolution B above.
the lists of States eligible for membership in the Trade and
Development Board will be as follows:
A.

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN PARAGRAPH 5 (a)
GENERAL ASSEMBLY RESOLUTION 1995 (XIX)

Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Botswana
Burma
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
China
Congo
Dahomey
Democratic Yemen
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Ethiopia
Fiji
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Ivory Coast
Jordan
Kenya
Khmer Republic
Kuwait
Laos
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libyan Arab Republic
Madagascar
Malawi

OF

Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mongolia
Morocco
Nepal
Niger
Nigeria
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Republic of Korea
Republic of Viet-Nam
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Somalia
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Swaziland
Syrian Arab Republic
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
United Arab Emirates
United Republic of Tanzania
Upper Volta
Western Samoa
Yemen
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia

B. LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN PARAGRAPH 5 (b)
Australia
Luxembourg
Austria
Malta
Belgium
Monaco
Canada
Netherlands
Cyprus
New Zealand
Denmark
Norway
Finland
Portugal
France
San Marino
Germany, Federal Republic of Spain
Greece
Sweden
Holy See
Switzerland
Iceland
Turkey
Ireland
United Kingdom of Great
Italy
Britain and Northern IreJapan
land
Liechtenstein
United Slates of America
C. LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN PARAGRAPH 5 (c)
Argentina
Chile
Barbados
Colombia
Bolivia
Costa Rica
Brazil
Cuba

Dominican Republic
Ecuador
EI Salvador
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica

Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

D. LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN PARAGRAPH 5 (d)
A,lbania
Bulgaria
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Czechoslovakia
Hungary

Poland
Romania
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics

2950 (XXVII). United Nations Institute for
Training and Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its past resolutions relating to the United
Na.tions Institute for Training and Research, particularly
resolution 2767 (XXVI) of 18 November 1971, and
the resolutions of the Economic and Social Council on
the same subject,
1. Takes note of the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research;3
2. Notes with satisfaction the increasing effectiveness
of the Institute in the discharge of its responsibilities;
3. Expresses the hope that the Institute will have
greater and wider financial support.
2106th plenary meeting
11 December 1972
2951 (XXVII). Establishment of the United
Nations University

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2822 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971,
Taking fWte of Economic and Social Council resolution 1731 (LIII) of 15 September 1972,
Taking rwte also of resolution 1.322 of 17 November 1972, adopted by the General Conference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization at its seventeenth session,·
Having considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral,G
Noting with appreciation that the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research
and other interested organizations in the United Nations
system have fuIIy co-operated with the United Nations
in preparing reports and studies on the subject of the
establishment of an international university,
Conscious of ·the particular responsibilities of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization in the development and implementation
of this project,
3 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/8714 and CorLI).
.. See A/8898.
II A/8510 and Add.J/Rev.l; E/5155 ;,nd Add.!.

36

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

1. Decides to establish an international university
under the auspices of the United Nations to be known
as the United Nations University;
2. Decides that the United Nations University
should be guided, inter alia, by the following objectives
and principles:
(a) The concept of the University should be that
of a system of academic institutions and not of an
intergovernmental organization;
(b) Close co-ordination should be maintained between the activities of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations
Insdtute for Training and Research and other organizations in the United Nations system and those of the
University;
(c) Binding guarantees, under law, of academic
freedom and autonomy should be written into the
char,ter of the University;
(d) Selection procedures should be established .so
as to ensure the highest intellectual and moral quality
of the personnel of the University;
(e) The structure of the University should consist
of a programming and co-ordina~ing ce!ltr~l o!gan ~d
a decentralized system of affiliatf'd InstItutIOns, 10tegrated into the world university community, devoted
to action-oriented research into the pressmg global
problems of human survival, development and welfare
that are the concern of the United Nations and its
agencies, and to the post-graduate training of young
scholars and research workers for the benefit of the
world community;
(f) The research programmes of the institutions of
the University should include, among other matters,
coexistence between peoples of differing cultures, tongues and social systems, peaceful relations between
States and the maintenance of peace and security,
human rights, economic and social change and development the environment and the proper use of resources,
basic' scientific research and the application of the
results of science and technology in the interests of
development;
(g) Capital costs and recurrent cost,> should be met
from voluntary contributions for the University made:
(i) Directly by Governments or through the United
Nations, the specialized agencies or the International Atomic Energy Agency;
(ii) By non-governmental sources including foundations, universities and individuals;
The University should also be authorized to receive
assistance for its projects, particularly fellowships, from
the United Nations, the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and other intergovernmental organizations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization ,to establish a Founding Committee of the United
Nations University 6 to define further the objectives and
6 The Founding Committee of the United Nations University will be composed of the following persons: Mr. Ahmed
Esmat Abdel Meguid, Mr. Roberto T. Alemann, Mr. Sune
Bergstrom, Mr. Borislav Bozovic, Mr. Andrew W. Cordier,
Mr. Roger Gaudry, Mr. Felipe Herrera, Mr. Abdul Razzak
Kaddoura, Mr. Yusuf K. Lule, Mr. Robert Mallet, Mr. Victor
A. Oyenuga, Mr. Gopalaswami Parthasarathi, Mr. Hugh N.
Robson, Mr. Victor Sahini, Mr. Abdus Salam, Mr. Seydou
Madani Sy, Mr. Senjin Tsuruoka, Mr. Puey Ungphakorn,
Mr. Victor L. Urquidi and Mr. Stephan Verosta.

principles of the University and to draft its charter,
consis·ting of not more than twenty experts chosen with
due regard to geographical distribution and major
academic, educational and cultural trends in the world,
taking into account their fields of study as well as the
need to include outstanding young scholars, half of
whom are to be designated by the Secretary-General
and the other half by the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in consultation with the specialized agencies and
programmes concerned, including the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to commence
efforts for raising the necessary funds in order to permit
the launching of the United Nations University at the
earliest possible date and to make recommendations
to the General Assembly concerning the location of the
programming and co-ordination centre and of the other
ins,titutions, in consultation with the Director-General
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and the Executive Director of
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research
and taking into account the views expressed thereon
by the Founding Committee of the United Nations
University and the offers of facilities and other types
of contributions;
5. Invites the Executive Board of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to submit to the General Assembly at its twentyeighth session such comments and observations on the
draft charter as it may consider appropriate;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session, through
the Economic and Social Council, the draft charter of
the United Nations University as well as a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
2106th plenary meeting
11 December 1972

2952 (XXVII). Second General Conference of
the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2152 (XXI) of 17 November 1966 on the United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
Recalling further its resolution 2823 (XXVI) of
16 December 1971 on the report of the Special International Conference of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization,
Having considered the report of the Industrial Development Board on the work of its sixth session, 7
and in particular the recommendations contained in
its resolution 33 (VI) of 2 June 1972 on the Second
General Conference of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, 8
Bearing in mind the importance of the goals and
policy measures related to industrial development that
are included in the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Dccade 9
70lficial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session. Supplement No. 16 (A/8716).
8/bid., annex II.
9 Resolution 2626 (XXV).

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Commilt..,·

and the need to review the progress achieved during
the Decade,
1. Takes note of the report of the Industrial Development Board on the work of its sixth session;
2. Decides to convene a Second General Conference
of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in Vienna, at the highest possible level of governmental representation, for a period of two weeks in
the early months of 1975, in accordance with the
provisions outlined by the Industrial Development
Board in its resolution 33 (VI);
3. Requests the Industrial Development Board and
its Permanent Committee to carry out the functions of
an intergovernmental preparatory committee for the
Second General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and to discharge
these functions as appropriate during their sessions
scheduled before the convening of the Conference;
4. Directs the Industrial Development Board and
its Permanent Committee to undertake, in connexion
with the functions entrusted to them in paragraph 3
above, the following tasks:
(II) Preparation of the provisional agenda for the
Second General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and its submission
to the General Assembly for approval;
(b) Review and approval of the preparatory arrangements for the holding of the Second General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization. including the preparation of adequate
documentation which should cover in a concise and
comprehensive way the major subjects to be discussed
at the Conference;
(c) Discussion and formulation of draft proposals
and recommendations for consideration by the Conference in connexion with the various items on its
agenda;
5. Requests the Industrial Development Board and
the Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-eighth session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the progress of the
preparatory work for the Second General Conference
~f the United Nations Industrial Development OrganizatIOn.
2106th plenary meetinR
II Decemher 1972

2953 (XXVII). Co-operation between the United
Nations Development Pro~ramme and the
Unite.l Nations Industrial Development Or~anization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2823 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971, in which it decided to set up an Ad Hoc
Committee on Co-operation between the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization,
.Having considered the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Co-operation between the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization,lO
10 A/8646.

Taking note of Industrial Development Board resolution 35 (VI) of 2 Junc 1972 11 and of the decisions of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Dcvelopment Programme ~it its fourteenth scssion,l~
Bearing in //lind the central role of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization with respect to
thc activities of the United Nations systcm in the ficld
of industrial development.
Aware of the importance of industrialization for the
successful achievement of the goals of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade,I::
1. Approves with appreciation the report of the
Ad !l0c Committee on Co-operation betwecn the United
Nat~ons Developmcnt Programme and the United
Natl?ns Industrial Development Organization and. in
particular, the stress laid therein on the necd for
dcvising special forms of assistance to industry and
new techniques suitable to the more complex nature
of this field;
2. Endorses the decisions taken, on the basis of the
recomn:endations of the Ad Hoc Committee, by the
Industnal Development Board at its sixth session as
expressed in its resolution 34 (VI) of 2 June 1972,14
and by the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme at its fourteenth scssion;
3. Reaffirms the central role of the United Nations
Industr!a~ .Development. Organi~ation in co-ordinating
the. actlVlt~es of the Umted NatIOns system in 'the field
of mdustnal development and welcomes thc rcadincss
of the United Nations Development Programme to assist
t~e United. N~tions Industrial Development Organizahon fU.1ly ~n Implc~lcnting its co-ordinating role by
consulting It on proJccts in the field of industry;
4. Reaffirms further the importance of thc programme of Special Industrial Services and the need to
maintain its separate identity as a programme specifically devoted to serving most effectively short-term,
urgent and unforeseen requirements in the field of
industry;
5. Approves the guidelines for the operation of the
programme of Special Industrial Services proposed by
the Industrial Development Board in its resolution 35
(V9 and ~ndorsed by the Governing Council of the
Umted NatIOns Development Programme at its fourteenth session, as follows:
(a) The programme of Special Industrial Services is
established to meet special needs in the field of industry,
as desoribed in the report of the Secretary-General of
2~. October 1.965,1~ especially paragraph 10; the proVISions contallled III that report will be interpreted
flexibly from time to time by the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme and the Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in order to take account of
the changing needs of the industrial sector in the
developing countries;
(b) In the operations of the programme of Special
Industrial Services, full consideration will be given to
11 See

Official Records of the Gcneral Assembly, TlI'entyNo. 16 (A/8716), annex H.
1_ Officwl Records of tile Economic and Social Council
Fifty-third Sessioll, Supplement No. 2A (E/51R5/Rev.1):
para. 199.
]:I Resolution 2626 (XXV).
14 See Official Records of the General Assembly Tll'entyseventh. Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/8716). an~ex IT. .
Iii IbId., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 40, document A/6070/Rey.I.

sev~,l1th S~ssioll. Supplement

38

the central responsibilities of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization for co-ordinating
action in the field of industry, as entrusted to it by
the General Assembly;
(c) Requests for Special Industrial Services project
approvals will be forwarded simultaneously by the
resident representatives of the United Nations Development Programme to the headquarters of the Programme
and to the headquarters of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization;
(d) Most projects, including plans for their implementation and level of financing, will be approved
jointly by the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and the Executive Director of
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization; in the remaining small number of cases, especially
when another agency is proposed as an executing
agency, the system of joint approval of the Special
Industrial Services projects will be followed with appropriate flexibility by agreement between the Administrator
and the Executive Director;
(e) The executing agency will be authorized to
commence project operations upon the issuance of
financial authorization by the Administrator;
(f) The programme of Special Industrial Services
will be financed on a continuing basis from the resources
of the United Nations Development Programme; the
level of maximum annual expenditures will be fixed
from time to time by the Governing Council of the
United Nations Development Programme, taking into
account current programme requirements as well as
desirable growth in the light of demonstrated needs;
(g) The Administrator and the Executive Director
will report regularly to theIr respective governing bodies
on the activities carried out under the programme;
(h) The Administrator and the Executive Director
will jointly establish detailed working arrangements and
procedures designed to give effect to the principles
herein established;
6. Welcomes the system of consultation machinery
and periodic meetings between the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization referred to in paragraphs 20
to 24 of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Cooperation between the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization;16
7. Invites the Industrial Development Board and
the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme to take the necessary measures on the
basis of the progress reports and consultations' by the
Administrator and the Executive Director, as provided
in paragraph 22 of the ,report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Co-operation between the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, to ensure the most
harmonious and effective co-operation in their common
objectives of assisting the developing countries in their
industrialization;
8. Stresses the need to strengthen the links of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
with the developing countries through the programme
of industrial field advisers, whose increasing importance
for the development of operational programmes has
been fully recognized, particularly in connexion with
16 A/8646.

the formulation and implementation of the long-term
country programmes and the development of special
measures of assistance to the least developed among
the developing countries, as envisaged in Indust,rial
Development Board resolution 31 (VI) of 2 June
1972;17
9. Urges the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to provide at its next
session additional financing necessary to increase the
number of industrial field advisers of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization serving the developing countries, in order to achieve in 1973 the
level envisaged by the Goveming Council at its
thirteenth session.l 8
2106th plenary meeting
11 December 1972

2969 (XXVII). Reports of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly
Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme on its thirteenth 19 and fourteenth 20
sessions.
2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2970 (XXVII).

United Nations Volunteers
programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2659 (XXV) of 7 December
1970, by which it established the United Nations
Volunteers programme within the United Nations
system, and its resolution 2810 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971,
Expressing its satisfaction with the efforts directed
towards the implementation of its resolution 2659
(XXV),
Taking note of the decision adopted by the Economic
and Social Council at its fifty-third session,21
Noting with appreciation the statement of the Coordinator of the United Nations Volunteers programme,22
Convinced that the United Nations Volunteers programme has the potential to render valuable service
to the development needs of the developing countries,
and particularly of the least developed among them,
Reaffirming that the involvement of youth in the
collective efforts of the United Nations system will
enhance international understanding and co-operation
between nations,
17 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Twentyseventh Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/8716), annex II.
18 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Fifty-third Session, Supplement No.2 (E/S092).
'
191bid.
20 Ibid., Supplement No. 2A (E/S185/Rev.l).
21 Ibid., Supplement No.1 (E/5209), Other decisions, p. 12.
22 See Official Records of the General Assembly Twentyseventh Session, Second Committee, 1478th meeti~g paras
68-78.
'
.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Commilt("·

1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Volunteers
programme23 and expresses satisfaction with the progress
of the programme;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme for
the measures being taken by him in providing volunteers
through United Nations-assisted projects to the least
developed countries free and without charge against
their indicative planning figures;
3. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development P-rogramme and the Governing Council of
the Programme to continue to provide the United
Nations Volunteers programme with every possible
assistance to ensure its progressive integration into
United Nations-assisted projects in order to make the
programme fully operational;
4. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and the specialized agencies
and organizations of the United Nations concerned, as
well as the resident representatives of the United
Nations Development Programme, to promote with the
agreement of the countries concerned the use of United
Nations volunteers in United Nations-assisted projects
and to co-ordinate all voluntary activities within United
Nations-assisted projects with the Co-ordinator of the
United Nations Volunteers programme;
5. Requests Governments, international organizations and individuals to contribute in every way possible to the Special Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Volunteers;
6. Requests the Co-ordinator of the United Nations
Volunteers programme to make renewed efforts for
recruitment of a larger proportion of volunteers from
developing countries;
7. Requests the Secretary-General and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to report, through the Governing Council of
the Programme and the Economic and Social Council,
to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session
on the progress made in implementing the provisions
of the present resolution.
J 1 09th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2971 (XXVII). Special measures related to the
particular needs of the land-locked developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 63 (III) of 19 May 1972,
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its third session,24 concerning
special measures related to the particular needs of
the land-locked developing countries,
Recognizing that the position of the land-locked
developing countries, in particular owing to the high
costs of transportation, the poor development of their
infrastructure, inadequate and inconvenient transport,
storage and port facilities in most transit countries and
the unfavourable trend of transport tariffs and charges,
23 E/5146.

24 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on

Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.D.4),
annex lA.

39

is a factor seriously inhibiting the expansion of their
t,rade and economic development,
Recognizing the need for the international community and the international organizations concerned
to take co-ordinated action in order to secure more
rational treatment< for the land.~lockced developing
countries,
Recognizing that investments in the field of transport
often affect investment decisions in other fields,
Conscious of the urgent need for national and international financial institutions to accord appropriate
attention to the special needs of the land-locked developing countries by extending adequate financial and
technical assistance to projects designed for the development or improvement and maintenance of the
transport and communications infrastructure needed
by these countries,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade 25 recommending financial and/or
technical assistance for these countries, particularly
with respect to infrastructure of all kinds,
1. Invites the developed countries, the United
Nations Development Programme and other competent
international organizations to provide technical and/or
financial assistance to the land-locked developing countries for feasibility studies and investment to assist them,
at their request, in their economic development, so as to
adapt it to their particular geographical situation, and
requests the Secretary-General to report periodically
to the General Assembly through the Economic and
Social Council;
2. Further invites the United Nations Development
Programme, in close collaboration with the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, to undertake operational activities in the field of industrial
surveys to help these countries, at their request, on a
national, subregional or regional basis to evaluate
structure, operation, development possibilities and their
future needs in the field of industrial development,
with particular attention to the specific industries
outlined in paragraph 3 of resolution 63 (III) of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
3. Invites the Economic and Social Council, in consultation with the appropriate organizations of the
United Nations system, to study the desirability and
feasibility, including possible ways and means, of establishing a special fund for defraying the additional
transport costs of land-locked developing countries and
to report its findings to the General Assembly at its
twenty-eighth session.
2109th plenary meetinf?
14 December 1972
2972 (XXVII). Review of criteria for calculating
indicative planning figurcs

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
on its fourteenth session,26
Noting the report of the Governing Council's Working Group on Review of Criteria to be Followed in
~5 Resolution 2626
26 Official Records

(XXV).
of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5185/Rev.l1.

40

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Selsion

Calculating Indicative Planning Figures and the amendments thereto,27
Noting also the discussions in the Governing Council
during its fourteenth session on the review of criteria
to be followed in calculating indicative planning figures,
Recognizing the difficulty of devising a new general
scheme designed to secure equity in the allocation of
United Nations Development Programme resources to
all recipient countries, as a result of which there is
need for further study of the matter,
Convinced that it is imperative to devise a most fair
and equitable new general scheme, envisaged to have
a reasonable degree of stability and a long-term
applicability, considering particularly the anticipated
increase in United Nations Development Programme
resources, and that would be without prejudice to the
relevant special measures in favour of the least developed countries contained in the various resolutions
and decisions of organizations in the United Nations
system,
Noting further the general view expressed by the
Governing Council at its fourteenth session that during
the first development cycle, that is, 1972-1976, there
will be no decrease in the level of the indicative planning figures of recipient countries as presently a1l0cated,28
1. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to undertake a special technical study and review in depth of the criteria for
calculating indicative planning figures, taking into
account the relevant decisions and resolutions of the
Governing Council of the Programme, the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its
third session, the Economic and Social Council and
the General Assembly, the report of the Governing
Council on its fourteenth session concerning the review
of those criteria, and the views expressed on this matter
at the twenty-seventh session of the Assembly;
2. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to submit his study, as envisaged in paragraph 1 above, to the Governing Council
at its sixteenth session for detailed consideration with
a view to finalizing the new criteria for calculating
indicative planning figures at the seventeenth session
of the Council.
2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2973 (XXVII). Financial resources of the United
Nations Development Pro/?:ramme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2688 (XXV) of 11 December 1970,
Reiterating that, unless the resources available for
programme purposes are substantially enlarged and
doubled by 1975, it will not be possible to ensure the
most effective operation of the country programming
system, nor to utilize fully the programme delivery
capacity of the system,
Recalling that the Economic and Social Council in
resolution 1615 (LI) of 26 July 1971, requested'the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
27 Ibid., paras. 96 and 97.
28Ibid., chap. II, sect. D.

Programme to review its planning estimates in order
to attain the goal of doubling the resources of the
Programme by 1975 and urged Governments to increase their contributions to the Programme for this
purpose,
Invites Governments, in particular those donor Governments whose contributions have lagged behind in
recent years, to increase their contI1ibutions to the
United Nations Development Programme by at least
15 per cent annually in order to promote the objective
of doubling the total resources available to the Programme by 1975.
2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2974 (XXVII).
Co-operation among developing eountries in the United Nations technical
co-operation programmes and increased ef·
ficiency of the capacity of the United Nations
development system

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the dynamic nature of the development process in the developing countries,
Conscious of the need to ensure maximum consistency
and coherence in the activities of the United Nations
Development Programme,
Noting the measures adopted by the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
to implement the consensus29 which resulted from the
study of the capacity of the United Nations development system and the provisions of which also appear
in the annex to General Assembly resolution 2688
(XXV) of 11 December 1970,
Prompted by the desire to strengthen those efforts
by an in-depth study of the different options facing
the international community in the field of development assistance and to evaluate them with a view to
selecting those which will ensure the maximum effectiveness of the activities of the United Nations Development Programme in pursuit of its objectives,
Concerned about the need to implement its resolution 2811 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971 on financial
contributions to the United Nations Development Programme, as well as the need for further resources in
order to increase the likelihood that the Programme's
assistance to developing countries, especially to the
relatively less developed among them, will be successful,
Concerned also at the impact of the growing administrative costs of the United Nations Development
Programme on existing resources, and the adverse
effect of this on the net amounts channelled into
assistance,
Reaffirming that the effectiveness of the development
process of developing countries depends primarily on
the developing countries themselves and that the contribution of the international community to this development is essential,
Convinced of the need to make the fullest use of
the capacity and experience of all Member States, independent of their degree of development, in united
action designed to accelerate the development of the
29 Ibid., Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 6A (E/4884/
Rev.)), para. 94.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

developing countries, and especially the relatively less
developed among them,
Convinced also of the importance of ensuring the
optimum impact of the multiplier effect of ass'istance
provided to the developing countries, and in particular
the assistance provided by the United Nations Development Programme,
Recalling paragraph 4 of its resolution 2814 (XXVI)
of 14 December 1971 on the capacity of the United
Nations development system,
1. Invites the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to convene, through
the Administrator of the Programme and in consultation with the interested Member States, a working group
in order to:
(a) Examine and make recommendations on the
best way for developing countries to share their capacities and experience with one another with a v,iew
to increasing and improving development assistance;
(b) Examine the relative possibilities and advantages of regional and interregional technical co-operation among developing countries;
2. Calls upon the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme also to give priority
to the improvement of procedures for the elaboration
and implementation of inteI'regional, regional and subregional programmes of the United Nations Development Programme in accordance with paragraphs 21,
22 and 23 of the annex to General Assembly resolution 2688 (XXV);
3. Also invites the Governing Council of the United
Nations Develop.nent Programme to consider at an
early session measures that are needed to reduce the
administrative costs of the Programme;
4. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session, through
the Economic and Social Council, a report and recommendations on the matters indicated in paragraph 1
above.
2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2975 (XXVII). Mea8ure8 to strengthen the exe.
cuting agencie8 of the United Nations Devel.
opment Programme

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations
development system for attaining the goals and objectives of the International Development Strategy for
the Second United Nations Development Decade30
and the responsibility of the United Nations Development Programme, as wdl as of the participating and
executing agencies, effectively to assist Member States
in their efforts to achieve economic development and
social justice as well as qualitative and structural
changes in society,
Recalling the consensus adopted by the Governing
Co.uncil of the ~nit~d Nations Development Programme
at Its tenth seSSIon, In June 1970,31 designed to increase
30 Resolution

2626 (XXV).

31 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council

Forty-ninth Session. SupplemeTlt No. 6..4. (E/4884/Rev.l):
para. 94. See also General Assembly resolution 2688 (XXV),
annex.

41

the capacity of the United Nations development system
to respond effectlively and rapidly to the needs of
developing countries in accordance with their own
development objectives and priorities,
Further recalling the decision adopted by the Economic and Social Council on 22 July 1970 to recommend to all executing agencies of the United Nations
Development p.rogramme that they take the necessary
administrative and organizational steps for the common
endeavour of implementing the consensus and improving the delivery capacity of the United Nations
development system,32
Bearing in mind its resolution 2688 (XXV) of
11 December 1970 on the capacity of the United
Nations development system,
Aware of the fact that operational activities financed
by the United Nations Development Programme represent a very large and growing share of the total
activities of the agencies,
1. Emphasizes the need for effective and t'imely
preparation as well as implementation of the country
programmes and other activities financed by the United
Nations Development Programme;
2. Stresses that administrative overhead costs involved in the execution of projects of the United
Nations Development Programme should be minimized
in order to secure increased resources for direct assistance to recipient countries;
3. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to take all necessary measures
at the headquarters and in the field offices of the
Programme to ensure the timely approval and execution
of projects;
4. Invites the governing bodies of the participating
and execut,ing agencies to strengthen the executing
capacity of their respective agencies in accordance with
the above-mentioned, as well as other relevant, resolutions and decisions of the United Nations;
5. Further invites the governing bodies of the participating and executing agencies, on the basis of
problem-oriented documentation prepared by the secretariats concerned, to discuss periodically and keep under
review the problems encountered by their respective
organizations in the planning and implementation of
the country programmes, taking into account the
desirability of achieving a high rate of project implementation and the need to promote high quality programmes and projects;
6. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to gather all relevant information on difficulties encountered and measures taken bv
the agencies to strengthen their operational structure
and their delivery capacity and to submit periodic
reports thereon, together with his comments. tll the
Governing Council of the Programme.
:: ! 09th plenan' lIleeting
14 D('('cmhrr 197.?
2976 (XXVII).

United Nationil Capital DevelopJlll'Ht FUU41

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2186 (XXI) of 13 December 1966, 2321 (XXII) of 15 December 1%7. 2·qq
32 Ibid., Supplement No. I (E/4904 and Corr.l). Other
decisions, p. 17.

General A8semb1}~-Twenly-se"enlhSession

42

(XXIII) of 17 December 1968, 2525 (XXIV) of
5 December 1969,2690 (XXV) of 11 December 1970
and 2812 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971,
Decides to preserve the original functions of the
United Nations Capital Development Fund until 31 December 1973, in accordance with the measures set

this matter, taking into ,account the status of implementation of the Action Plan and future developments
in the field of the environment, and report its views
and recommendations to the General Assembly so that
the Assembly can take a decision on all aspects of the
matter not later than at its twenty-ninth session.

2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

forth in paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution

2321 (XXII).
2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

299,'> (XXVII). Co-operation hetween States in
the field of the environment
2994. (XXVII). United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the international
community to take action to preserve and enhance the
environment and, in particular, the need for continuous
international co-operation to this end,
Recalling its resolutions 2398 (XXIII) of 3 December 1968, 2581 (XXIV) of 15 December 1969,
2657 (XXV) of 7 December 1970, 2849 (XXVI) and
2850 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment,33 held at
Stockholm from 5 to 16 June 1972, and the report of
the Secretary-General thereon,34
Expressing its satisfaction that the Conference and
the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment succeeded in
focusing the attention of Governments and public
opinion on the need for prompt action in the field of
the environment,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment;
2. Draws the attention of Governments and the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme35 to the Declaration of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment86 and refers
the Action Plan for the Human Environment37 to the
Goveming Council for appropriate action;
3. Draws the attention of Governments to the recommendations for action at the national level referred
to them by the Conferencc for their consideration and
such action as they mi'ght deem appropriate;
4. Designates 5 June as World Environment Day
and urges Governments and the organizations in the
United Nations system to undertake on that day every
year world-wide activities reaffirming thcir concern for
the preservat,ion and enhancement of the environment,
with a view to deepening environmental awareness and
to pursuing the determinatic)J] expressed at the Conference;
5. Takes note with ul'l)/pciation of rc"o]ution 4 (I)
of 15 Jnne 1972:'.8 adopted hy thr. Conference on the
convening of a secund United Nations Confe:cnce on
the Hum,m Environment <\nd refcl s this maHer to thc
Governing Council "'I' the United ~NJ1ir'llS Em'ironment
Programme with th ri:qllcsl that the Council study
:l3A/CONF,48114 and Corr.l.

The General Assembly,
Having considered principle 20 as contained in the
draft text of a preamble and principles of the declaration on the human environment,:19 referred to it for
consideration bv the United Nations Conference on the
Human Envirollment,
Recalling its resolution 2849 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 entitled "Development and environment",
Bearing in mind that, in exercising their sovereignty
over their natural resources, States must seek, through
effective bilateral anu multilateral co-operation or
through regional machinery, to preserve and improve
the environment.
1. Emphasizes that, in the exploration, exploitation
and development of their natural resources, States must
not produce significant harmful effects in zones situated
outSide thei'r nat,ional jurisdiction;
2. Recognizes that co-operation between States in
the field of the environment, including co-operation
towards the implementation of principles 21 and 22
of the Declaration of the United Nations Conference
on the Human Environment,40 will be effectively
achieved if official and public knowledge is provided
of the technical data relating to the work to be carried
out by States within their national jurisdiction, with a
view to avoiding significant harm that m~lY occur in
the environment of the adjacent area;
3. Further rccogni:::es that the technjca1 data referred
to in paragraph 2 above will be given and received in
thc best spirit or co-upcr:ltion and g()od-neighbourlincss,
without this being construed as enabling each State to
delay or impede the programmes and projects of exploration, exploitation and development of the natural
resources of the States in whose territories such programmes and projects ar,~ carried out.

2112tlt plenary meeting
15 ncall/her 1972

2996 (XXVII). International respulI"ihilily of
State.. in reg-arll to the environment

The General Assembly.
Recalling principles 21 and 22 of the Declaration
the United N;ltions Conference on the Human
Fnvironment l l (~\lIleerning the international responsibility of States in regard to the environment,
Bearing ill IIIlIlti thilt those principks lav down the
hasic rules governing this malteL,
d

::\ A/8783 and Add.!, Add.lle'on,] and Add,::

lc'solution 2997 (XXVII l. ~.-"t ],
c!::'i', I,
:n [hid., chap. lI.
:;c, Sc'c

~'I' AiCONF.4J.L' 14 and Cor: I

:l~ [hid"

ck'p. IV.

",. Sc(' A ICON J ;s! 4~ ;;nilC\~ Sec a!so 1\ 'CON F 4R ! ~ ;111<1

('orr. I, chap. X, ~cet. D.
1(1 A/CONFAiI! 14

11

[hi!.

and ('orr,1. chap, l.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committe,'

Declares that no resolution adopted at the twentyseventh session of the General Assembly can affect
principles 21 and 22 of the Declaration of the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment.
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

2997 (XXVII). Institutional and financial arrangements for international pnvironmental cooperation

The General Assembly,
Convinced of the need for prompt and effective
implementation by Governments and the international
community of measures designed to safeguard and
enhance the environment for the benefit of present
and future gener-ations of man,

Recognizing that responsibility for action to protect
and enhance the environment rests primarily with
Governments and, in the first instance, can be exercised
more effectively at the national and regional levels,
Recognizing further that environmental problems of
broad international significance fall within the competence of the United Nations system,
Bearing in mind that international co-operative programmes in the field of the environment must be undertaken with due respect for the sovereign rights of
States and in conformity with the Charter of the United
Nations -and principles of international law,
Mindful of the sectoral responsibilitic:: uf the organizations in the United Nations system.
Conscious of the significance of regional and subregional co-operation in the field of the environment and
of the important role of the regional economic commissions and other regional intergovernmental organizations,
Emphasizing that problems of the environment constitute a new and important area for international cooperation and that the complexity and interdependence
of such problems require new approaches,
Recognizing that the relevant international scientifiC
and other professional communities can make an important contribution to international co· operation in the
field of the environment,
Conscious of the need for processes within the United
Nations system which would effectively assist developing countries to implement environmental policies and
programmes that are compatible with their development
plans and to participate meanini!fully in international
cnvironmental programmes.
Convinced that, in order to be cffective, international
co-operation in the field of the environment requires
additional financial and technical resources,
Aware of the urgent need for a permanent institutional arrangement within the United N:ltions system
for the protection and improvement of the environmcnt,

I
GOVERNING COUNCIL OF THE UNITI:D NATIONS
ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME

1. Decides to establish a Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme, composed of
fifty-eight members elected by the General Assembly
for three-year terms on the following basis:
((() Sixteen scats for African States;
(b) Thirteen seats for Asian States;
(c) Six seats for Eastern European States;
(tI) Ten seats for Latin American States;
(e) Thirteen seats for Western European and other
States;
2. Decides that the Governing Council shall have
the following main functions and responsibilities:
(a) To promote international co-operation in the
field of the environment and to recommend, as appropriate, policies to this end;
I. h I 'I'll providc gcneral policy guidance for the
direction and co-ordination of cnvironmental programmes within the United Nations system;
(c) To receive and review the periodic reports of
the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, referred to in section TI, paragraph 2,
below, un the implementation of environmental programnh~s within the United Nations system;
(d) To keep under review the world cnvironmental
situation in order to cnsure that emerging environmental problems of wide international significance
receive appropriate and adequate consideration by
Gowrnmcnts;
(<') To promote the contribution of the relevant
internatil1nal scientific and other professional communities to the acquisition, assessment and exchange
of environmental knowledge and information and, as
appmpri:lte, to the technical aspects of the formulation
and il1lj)lcmentation of environmental programmes
within [11e United Nations system;
(f) To maintain under continuing rcview the impact
of n:ltional and international envif0nmental policies
and measures on developing countries, as well as thc
pwh1cm of additional costs that may be incurred by
developing countries in the imp1eml.'ntation of environmental programmes and projects, and to ensure that
such programmes and projects sh311 be compatible with
the development plans and priorities of thosl~ countries;
1 g) To review and approve annually the programme
of wili;::llion of resourccs of the Environment Fund
rekn,'.! !l) in section TIl helow;
l. /}ecides that the Governing Council shaJl rep"rt
annu:illy to the General Assembly through the Ecnnornic
and SllciaI Council, which wi1!transmit to the Assemblv
such l'nmments on the report as it may decm neccss:n,;.
particularly with regard to questions of co-,)rdinati,)11
and Il) the relati'l11ship of environmental policies and
pro,l!rammcs within the United Nations system to over:IJl l'c()T1()ll1ic and social polici,'s and rriorities;

II

Takin,f! no1e of the report of tIll' SC'Cfctary-Gdll'r:ll
on the United Nations Conferencc on the l-hllnan
Environment,.:!
l~ A/87R3

and Add.l, Add.l iCon.l and ."-deL'

El\:VIRONMENT SFCRF.TARIAT

I. Decides that a smal1 secretariat shall be estab··
lishcd in the United Nation, to serve ;IS a focal point
for ('nvironmental actillfi an;! I;o-ordination within the

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

44

United Nations system in such a way as to ensure a
high degree of effective management;
2. Decides that the environment secretariat shall
be headed by the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme, who shall be elected
by the General Assembly on the nomination of the
Secretary-General for a term of four years and who shall
be entrusted, inter alia, with the following responsibilities:
(a) To provide substantive support to the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme;
(b) To co-ordinate, under the guidance of the
Governing Council, environmental programmes within
the United Nations system, to keep their implementation under review and to assess their effectiveness;
(c) To advise, as appropriate and under the guidance
of the Governing Council, intergovernmental bodies of
the United Nations system on the formulation and
implementation of environmental programmes;
(d) To secure the effective co-operation of, and
contribution from, the relevant scientific and other
professional communities in all parts of the world;
(e) To provide, at the request of all parties concerned, advisory services for the promotion of international co-operation in the field of the environment;
(f) To submit to the Governing Council, on his
own initiative or upon request, proposals embodying
medium~range and long-range planning for United
Nations programmes in the field of the environment;
(g) To bring to the attention of the Governing
Council any matter which he deems to require consideration by it;
(h) To administer, under the authority and policy
guidance of the Governing Council, the Environment
Fund referred to in section III below;
(i) To report on environmental matters to the
Governing Council;
(n To perform such other functions as may be
entrusted to him by the Governing Council;
3. Decides that the costs of servicing the Governing
Council and providing the small secretariat referred
to in paragraph 1 above shall be borne by the regular
budget of the United Nations and that operational
programme costs, programme support and administrative costs of the Environment Fund established under
section TIl below shall be borne by the Fund;

for the Human Environment 43 adopted by the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment, with
particular attention to integrated projects, and such
other environmental activities as may be decided upon
by the Governing Council-and that the Governing
Council shall review these initiatives with a view to
taking appropriate decisions as to their continued
financing;
3.~ Decides that the Environment Fund shall be used
for financing such programmes of general interest as
regional and global monitoring, assessment and datacollecting systems, including, as appropriate, costs for
national counterparts; the improvement of environmental quality management; environmental research;
information exchange and dissemination; public education and training; assistance for national, regional and
global environmental institutions; the promotion of environmental research and studies for the development
of industrial and other technologies best suited to a
policy of economic growth compatible with adequate
environmental safeguards; and such other programmes
as the Governing Council may decide upon, and that
in the implementation of such programmes due account
should be taken of the special needs of the developing
countries;
4. Decides that, in order to ensure that the development priorities of developing countries shall not be
adversely affected, adequate measures shall be taken
to provide additional financial resources on terms compatible with the economic situation of the recipient
developing country, and that, to this end, the Executive
Director, in co-operation with competent organizations,
shall keep this problem under continuing review;
5. Decides that the Environment Fund, in pursuance
of the objectives stated in paragraphs 2 and 3 above,
shall be directed to the need for effective co-ordination
in the implementation of international environmental
programmes of the organizations in the United Nations
system and other international organizations;
6. Decides that, in the implementation of programmes to be financed by the Environment Fund,
organizations outside the United Nations system, particularly those in the countries and regions concerned,
shall also be utilized as appropriate, in accordance with
the procedures established by the Governing Council,
and that such organizations are invited to support the
United Nations environmental programmes by complementary initiatives and contributions;
7. Decides that the Governing Council shall formulate such general procedures as are necessary to
govern the operations of the Environment Fund;

III

IV

ENVIRONMENT FUND

1. Decides that, in order to provide for additional
financing for environmental programmes, a voluntary
fund shall be established, with effect from 1 January
1973, in accordance with existing United Nations
financi,tI procedures;
2. Decides that, in order to enable the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programlllc to fulfil its policy-guidance role for tll'.'
direction and co-ordination of environmental activities.
the Environment Fund shall finance wholly or partly
the costs of the new environmental initiatives undertaken within the United Nations svstem--which will
include the initiativcs emi',aged ir; the Action Plan

ENVIRONI\IENT CO-ORDINATION BOARD

1. Decides that, in order to provide for the most
efficient co-ordination of United Nations environmental
programmes, an Environment Co-ordination Board,
under the chairmanship of the Executive Director of
the United Nations Environment Programme, shall be
established under the auspices and within the framework
of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination;
2. Further decides that the Environment Co-ordination Boaru shall meet periodically for the purpose of
ensuring co-oreration and co-ordination among all
4;lI\/CI)NF.4~

14 anel Con.l. chap. II.

45

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

bodies concerned in the implementation of environmental programmes and that it shall report annually to
the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme;
3. Invites the organizations of the United Nations
system to adopt the measures that may be required to
undertake concerted and co-ordinated programmes with
regard to international environmental problems, taking
into account existing procedures for prior consultation,
particularly on programme and budgetary matters;
4. Invites the regional economic commissions and
the United Nations Economic and Social Office at
Beirut, in co-operation where necessary with other
appropriate regional bodies, to intensify further their
efforts directed towards contributing to the implementation of environmental programmes in view of the particular need for the rapid development of regional cooperation in this field;
5. Also invites other intergovernmental and those
non-governmental organizations that have an interest
in the field of the environment to lend their full support
and collaboration to the United Nations with a view
to achieving the largest possible degree of co-operation
and co-ordination;
6. Calls upon Governments to ensure that appropriate national institutions shall be entrusted with the
task of the co-ordination of environmental action, both
national and international;
7. Decides to review as appropriate, at its thirtyfirst session, the above institutional arrangements, bearing in mind, inter alia, the responsibilities of the
Economic and Social Council under the Charter of the
United Nations.
2I 12th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

*

*

*

At its 2112th plenary meeting, on 15 December 1972, the
General Assembly, in pursuance of section I, paragraph 1.
of the above resolution, elected the fifty-eight members of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme.
The following States were elected: ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA,
AUSTRIA, BRAZIL, BURUNDI, CAMEROON, CANADA, CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC, CHILE, CmNA, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, FRANCE,
GABON, GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, GERMANY, FEDERAL
REPUBLIC OF, GHANA, GUATEMALA, ICELAND, INDIA, INDONESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, ITALY, JAMAICA, JAPAN, JORDAN, KENYA,
KUWAIT, LEBANON, MADAGASCAR, MALAWI, MEXICO, MOROCco, NETHERLANDS, NICARAGUA, NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, PANAMA,
PERU, PHILIPPINES, POLAND, ROMANIA, SENEGAL, SIERRA LEONE, SOMALIA, SPAIN, SRI LANKA, SUDAN, SWEDEN, SYRIAN
ARAB REPUBLIC, TuNISIA, TURKEY, UNION OF SOVIET SociALIST
REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA, VENEZUELA and YUGOSLAVIA.

The General Assembly then selected by the drawing of lots
the members of the Governing Council to serve for three
years, for two years and for one year.
As a result of the above election, the composition of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme for 1973 will be as follows: ARGENTINA," AUSTRALlA,"** AUSTRIA,"* BRAZIL,"* BURUNDI,*** CAMEROON, * *
CANADA,*
CENTRAL
AFRICAN
REPUBLlC,***
CHILE,**"
CHINA," CZECHOSLOVAKIA," FRANCE, * GABON," GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLlC,"*" GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF,**
GHANA, * GUATEMALA," ICELAND, * " INDIA,**, INDONESIA,*
IRAN,** IRAQ,*** ITALY,** JAMAICA,* JAPAN,** JORDAN,*"':'
KENYA,** KUWAIT,** LEBANON," MADAGASCAR,*** MALAWI,*"
MEXICO,*** MOROCCO, * NETHERLANDS,""* NICARAGUA,***
NIGERIA,"** PAKISTAN,*** PANAMA,**" PERU,** PHILIPPINES,*

POLAND,*"* ROMANIA,*" SENEGAL,*** SIERRA LEONE,* SoMALIA,** SPAIN,* SRI LANKA,*** SUDAN," SWEDEN," SYRIAN
ARAB REPUBLIC,* TUNISIA,** TURKEY,*** UNION OF SOVIET
SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, * * UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND NORTHERN IRELAND, ** * UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA,*"* UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,** VENEZUELA** and
YUGOSLAVIA. *
* Term of offlce expires on 31 December 1973.
** Term of offlce expires on 31 December 1974.
u* Term of office expires on 31 December 1975.

*

*

*

At tile same meetillg, ill pursuallce of scctioll l/, paragraph ],
of the above resolution, the General Assembly, on the I/omination of the Secretary-General,44 elected Mr. Maurice F.
STRONG Executive Director of the United Nations EllI'ironment
Programme,

2998 (XXVII). Critct'ia ~ovcrning multilateral
financing of housing mill human settlcnwnts

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment,45
Recalling its resolutions 1393 (XIV) of 20 November 1959, 1508 (XV) of 12 December 1960, 1676
(XVI) of 18 December 1961, 1917 (XVIII) of
5 December 1963, 2036 (XX) of 7 December 1965,
2598 (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, 2626 (XXV)
of 24 October 1970 and 2718 (XXV) of 15 December 1970,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1170 (XLI) of 5 August 1966,
Mindful of the aims expressed in the Preamble of
the Charter of the United Nations to employ international machinery for the promotion of the economic
and social advancement of all peoples, as well as in
Articles 55 and 56 of the Charter,
Taking into account the World Plan of Action for
the Application of Science and Technology to Development,46
Considering the important role assigned to housing
as part of the International Development Strategy for
the Second United Nations Development Decade,47
Further recalling resolution 2718 (XXV) in which
the General Assembly set out broad directions and
measures essential for the improvement of human
settlements,
Noting the report of the Secretary-General entitled
Proposals for Action OIl Fillance for Housing, Building
alld Plalllling,4S
Taking into accoullt the annual report of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development for
1970. 4fl in which the Bank, inter alia, considered that
priority should be given to housing and human settlements,
Taking note of the policy statement on urbanization
of 1972 of the International Bank for Reconstruction
H

See A/8965,

4;' A/CONF.48/14

and Corr, I.

46 United Nations publication,
-17 Resolution 2626 (XXV).

Sales No.: E.71.II.A.18,

18 United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.IV.4.
19 International Bank for Reconstruction and DevelopmentInternational Development Association, Annual Report, 1970
(W;lshington, D.r.).

46

(;{'nera I Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

and Development, which, inter alia, reaffirms the important role of housing and human settlements in overall national development,
Further taking note of the recognition by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development of
the necd to establish appropriate national finance institutions to mobilize domestic capital to finance these
activities,
Reaffirming in particular recommendations 1, 15,
16 and 17 of the Action Plan for the Human Environment"O adopted by the United Nations Conference on
the Human Environment,
1. Recommends that all development assistance
agencies such as the United Nations Development Programme and the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development should in their development assistance
activities also give high priority to requests from Governments for assistance in housing and human settlements;
2. Recommends that, in its lending policies in this
sector, the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development should provide funds on terms and conditions which fully reflect the unique nature and
characteristics of housing and related investments.
3. Recommends that in establishing criteria for
eligibility for loans under more favourable terms and
conditions the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development should take into account, in addition
to economic and monetary criteria, such critical socioeconomic factors as levels of unemployment, rates of
urban growth, population density, and the general condition of the housing stock in the developing countries;
4. Further recommends that as a matter of priority
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, in agreement with requesting Governments, should
implement its stated policy of providing seed capital
loans on favourable terms, taking into account the
recommendations in paragraph 3 above, for the establishment of domestic financial institutions and organizations to mobilize and allocate capital for housing and
related investments;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

2999 (XXVII). Establishment of an international
fund or financial institution for human settll'ments

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment,5!
Concerned with the lack of improvement in the
dep!orable world housing situation, particularly the
cntlcal shortage of low-cost housing or minimal
standards of housing in developing countries,
A~qre that the environment cannot be improved in
condItIons of poverty, one of the palpable manifestations of which is the substandard quality of human
settlements, particularly in developing countries,
50 See

A/CONF.48/14 and Corr.!, chap. II.
and Corr.!.

51 A/CONF.48114

Recognizing the need for intensified and more concrete international action to strengthen national programmes in the planning, improvement and management
of rural and urban settlements, thereby narrowing the
growing gap between housing needs and available supply
and improving the environmental quality of human
settlements,
Noting the report of the Secretary-General entitled
Proposals for Action Oil Finance for Housing, lJuilding
and Planning, 52
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1170 (XLI) of 5 August 1966 and 1507 (XLVIlI)
of 28 May 1970 on a proposed international institution
to support domestic savings and credit facilities in
housing,
Noting in particular recommendation 17 of the Action
Plan for the Human Environment,r.:; adopted by the
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment,
that Governments and the Secretary-Gener;ll should
take immediate steps to establish an international [1m"
or financial institution that would provide seed capital
and technical assistance for the effective mobilization of
domestic resources for housing and the environment:ll
improvement of human settlements,
1. Endorses in principle the establishment of an
international fund or financial institution for the purposc
envisaged in recommendation 17 of the Action Plan
for the Human Environment;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, taking into
account the views expressed on this subject at the
twenty-seventh session of the General Assemblv, to
prepare a study on the establishment and operations
of such a fund or institution, together with his recommendations and proposals, and to report thereon to
the Assembly at its twenty-ninth session through the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme and the Economic and Social Council:
3. Invites the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development to collaborate in the preparation of
the study referred to in paragraph 2 above.
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

3000 (XXVII). Measures for protecting and en·
hancing the environment

The General Assembly,
Noting the report of the United Nations Conference
on the Human Environment,54
Cognizant of the effective contribution of the secretariat of the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment and the Preparatory Committee for the
Conference,
Expressing its appreciation to the Government of
Sweden for acting as host to the Conference,
Convinced that actions at the national level can
complement and perfect the Action Plan for the Human
Environment 55 adopted by the Conference,
Recalling its resolution 2849 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 entitled "Development and environment" and

,.2 United Nations pubtication, Sales No.: E.73.lV.4.

r.a See A/CONF.48/14 and Corr.1. chap. IT.

~,4 A/CONFAS/14
[,5 Ibid., chap. II.

and Corr.1.

Resolutions adopted ou the repOl·ts of tile Second CommitteI'

the set of recommendations of the Conference pertaining
to development and environment,56
Recalling further paragraphs 2 (e) and 5 (d) of
Conference resolution 1 (I) of 15 June 1972 57 on
institutional and financial arrangements,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1718 (LIII) of28 July 1972,
1. Stresses the importance of action at the national
level for protecting and enhancing the environment;
2. Calls upon the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme 58 to explore at its
first session ways and means of promoting effective
regional programmes in the field of the environment;
3. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme, in formulating environmental programmes, to ensure the compatibility
of the implementation of these programmes with:
(a) The policy measures and objectives of the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade"9 relating to science and
technology;
(b) Policy measures and objectives that are to be
recommended by the Committee on Science and Technology for Development upon consideration of the
World Plan of Action for the Application of Science
and Technology to Development;60
4. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme and the Committee
on Review and Appraisal to keep this matter under
review and to report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-ninth session, through the Economic and Social
Council, on the steps taken with regard to paragraph 3
above.
2 J 12111 !I!marv m('eting
15 December 1972

3001 (XXVII). United Nations ConferenceExposition on Human Settlements

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 2718 (XXV) of 15 December
1970, in which it recommended broad directions and
measures essential for the improvement of human settlements,
Noting the urgency of the world-wide human settlement problems, present and future,
Taking into account the World Plan of Action for the
Application of Science and Technology to Development,6!
Considering the important role assigned to housing
as part of the International Development Strategy for
the Second United Nations Development Decade,62
Recognizing the need for international efforts to
develop new and additional approaches to these problems, especially in the developing countries,
Desiring to maintain the momentum of the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment in this
,,6 I bid., chap. II. sect. B.
07 Ibid., chap. Ill. Paragraphs 2 (e) and 5 (d) were incorporated in resolution 2997 (XXVII) without change (see
secL I, para. 2 (e), and sect. II. para. 2 (d), of that resolution).
"s See resolution 2997 (XXVII), sect. I.
,,0 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
fin United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.7I.II.A.18.
6tlbid.
6~ Resolution 2626 (XXV).

47

area through a conference-exposition on human settlements, the preparation for which should generate a
review of policies and programmes for human settlements, national and intcrnational, and should result
in the selection and SUPp()~: of a series of demonstration projects on human settlements sponsNcd by individual countries and the United Nations,
Taking into account recommendation 2.2 of the
Action Plan for the Human Environment°:J adopted by
the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment,
1. Decides to hold a United Nations ConferenccExposition on Human Settlements;
2. Accepts the offer of the Government of Canada
to act as host to the Conference~Exposition in 1975;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and
submit to the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme0 4 at its first session a report
containing a plan for, and anticipated costs of, the
Conference-Exposition.
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

3002 (XXVII).

Development and environment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2849 (XXVI) of 20 Deccmber 1971 entitled "Development and environment",
Considering its resolution 2997 (XXVII) of I 5 December I 972 on institutional and financial arrangemcnts
for international environmental co-operation,
Noting the set of recommendations of the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environmenl per··
taining to development and environment,65
Reaffirming the importance of implementing the
objectives and policy measures of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development fecade 66 and the need to provide adequate
resources for their fulfilment,
Bearing in mind that the funds available to the international community for research and action in the
fields of the protection and enhancement of the environment will tend to be scarce in relation to the
needs,
1. Stresses that, in the implementation and financing
of the objectives set forth in section III, paragraphs 2
and 3, of General Assembly resolution 2997 (XXVII).
such environmental measures and programmes as may
also constitute a necessary part of the process of
accelerating the economic development of developing
countries should receive special consideration in the
formulation of programmes and priorities by the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme;
2. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme in formulating environmental programmes to ensure, in accordance with
the principles set forth in General Assembly resolution 2849 (XXVI), the compatibility of these programmes with the objectives and policy measures of
global strategies and sectoral guidelines for the economic
6:l See A/CONF.48/ 14 and Corr.I, chap. II.

See resolution 2997 (XXVII), sect. I.
A/CONF.48/14 and Corr.l, chap. II, sect. B.
06 Resolution 2626 (XXV).

H

6:; See

General Asseluhly-Twellly-se,·clllh Se~sion

development of developing countries as defined by the
United Nations;
3. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
discharge its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations and section I, paragraph 3, of General
Assembly resolution 2997 (XXVII), in such a way
as to enhance the attainment of the goals and objectives
of the International Development Strategy for the
Second United Nations Development Decade and to
ensure that the development priorities of the developing
countries set out in the International Development
Strategy are in no way adversely affected or distorted;
4. Recommends respect for the principle that resources for environmental programmes, both within
and outside the United Nations system, be additional
to the prescnt level and projected' growth of resources
contemplated in the International Development Strategy,
to be made available for programmes directly related to
developmental assistance;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session, through
the Economic and Social Council, a report providing
a comprehensive picture within the United Nations
system of the distribution and patterns oE growth of
resources and programmes in various fields, including
funds for special purposes, in order to permit an evaluation of their conformity with the over-all policies and
priorities of development as established in the relevant
deeisions of the Council and the Assembly.
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

(XXV) of 7 December 1970 and 2850 (XXVI) of
20 December 1971 on the preparations for the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment,
Noting with appreciation the report of the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment,60 in
particular the recommendation on the establishment of
the environment secretariat,
Noting also the report of the Secretary-General on
the location of the proposed environment seeretariat,70
Considering that the headquarters of the United
Nations and of the specialized agencies arc all located
in the developed States in North America and Western
Europe,
Convitu:ed that in order to employ international
machinery for the promotion of the economic and social
advancement of all peoples, in accordance with th . .
Preamble of the Charter of the United Nations, the'
activities and headquarters or secretariats of Unit(',~
Nations bodies or agencies should be located having
regard, inter alia, to equitable geographical distribution
of such activities, headquarters or secretariats,
1. Decides to locate the environment secretariat in
a developing country;
2. Further decides to locate the environment secretariat in Nairobi, Kenya.
2112th plenary meetillg
15 December 1972

3003 (XXVII). International prize for the most
outstamling- ('ontrihulioll in the fi..Id of the
environmenl

The General Assembly,
Having considered the section of the report of the
Economic and Social Council dealing with the United
Nations Children's Fund,71
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1709 (LUI) of 28 July 1972 on the United
Nations Children's Fund;
2. Reiterates its appeal to Governments and other
donors to make every effort to increase their contributions to the Fund so as to enable it to reach its target
figure of $100 million by 1975.
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

The General Assembly,
Recalling recommendation 38 of the Action Plan for
the Human Environment fo7 adopted by the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment,
Recalling also that one main purpose of the Conference was to increase the awareness among Governments and public opinion about the importance and
urgency of the problems of the environment,
Recognizing that effective international co-operation
in the field of the environment should be firmly based
on action at the national level,
Welcomes the initiative of the Government of Iran
in setting aside an area constituting an ecosystem of
global importance to be placed in joint trust with an
international agency and in establishing an annual prize
by that Government for the most outstanding contribution in the field of the environment to be awarded
through the United Nations.
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972
3004. (XXVII). Location of the environment
secrelariat68

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2398 (XXIII) of 3 December 1968,2581 (XXIV) of 15 December 1969, 2657
,,; Sec A/CONF.48/14 and Carr.l, chap. II.
resolution 2997 (XXVII), sect. II.

I;S See

3015 (XXVII).

United Nations Children's Fund

3016 (XXVII). Permanent sovereignty over natural resources of developing cOlintries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 626 (VII) of 21 December
1952, 1803 (XVII) of 14 December 1962, 2158
(XXI) of 25 November 1966, 2386 (XXIII) of 19
November 1968 and 2692 (XXV) of 11 December
1970 concerning permanent sovereignty over natural
resources,
Reaffirmillg the need for further examination of the~('
vital issues by the General Assembly,
Emphasizing the great importance for the economic
progress of all countries, especinlly the developing
G9 A/CONF.48/14

and Corr.t.

70 A/8783/ AJd.l and Corr.! and Add.2.
71 Official Rccords of the General Asscmhly.

Twenty-sc\'I'Il/I,

Session, Supplefll('fI/ No.3 (A/8703), chap. VII, sect.· D.

Resolutions adopted on the repol·ts of the Second Committee

countries, of their fully exercising their rights so as
to secure the maximum yield from their natural
resources, both on land and in their coastal waters,
Taking into account principles II and XI of resolution 46 (III) of 18 May 1972 adopted by the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its
third session,72
Also taking into account resolution 45 (III) of 18
May 1972, adopted by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at its third session,'~ entitled "Charter of the economic rights and duties of
States", and having regard to the relevant principles of
the Declaration of the United Nations Conference on
the Human Environment,73
1. Reaffirms the right of States to permanent
sovereignty over all their natural resources, on land
within their international boundaries as well as those
found in the sea-bed and the subsoil thereof within
their national jurisdiction and in the superjacent waters;
2. Further reaffirms its resolution 2625 (XXV) of
24 October 1970, containing the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, which proclaims that no State may use or encourage the use of
economic, political or any other type of measures to
coerce another State in order to obtain from it the
subordination of the exercise of its sovereign rights
and to secure from it advantages of any kind;
3. Declares that actions, measures or legislative
regulations by States aimed at coercing, directly or
indirectly, other States engaged in the change of their
internal structure or in the exercise of their sovereign rights over their natural resources, both on land
and in their coastal waters, are in violation of the
Charter and of the Declaration contained in resolution
2625 (XXV) and contradict the targets, objectives
and policy measures of the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade;74
4. Calls upon Governments to continue their efforts
aimed at the implementation of the principles and recommendations contained in the aforementioned resolutions of the General Assembly and, in particular, of
the principles enunciated in paragraphs 1 to 3 above;
5. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on permanent sovereignty over natural resources,5 and
requests him to supplement it with a further detailed
study on recent developments, taking into account the
right of States to exercise permanent sovereignty over
their natural resources, as well as the factors impeding
States from exercising this right;
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council to accord high priority, at its fifty-fourth session. to the
item entitled "Permanent sovereignty over natural
resources of developing countries". together with the
report of the Secretary-General and the present resolution, and to report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-eighth session.
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
,2 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session. vol. I, Report {[nd
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.D.4),
annex LA.
n See A/CONF.48114 and Corr.l, chap. I.
74 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
75 E/5170.

49

3017 (XXVII). Outflow of trained personnel from
developing to developed countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2083 (XX) of 20 December
1965, relating to the development and utilization of
human resources, 2090 (XX) of 20 December 1965
and 2259 (XXI[) of 3 November 1967, relating to the
training of national technical personnel for the accelerated industrialization of the developing countries,
and 2320 (XXII) of 15 December 1967 and 2417
(XXIll) of 17 December 1968, relating to the outflow
of trained personnel from the developing countries, and
Economic and Social Council resolution 1573 (L) of
19 May 1971,
Bearing in mind that an acceleration of the rate of
economic growth of the developing countries and a
rapid improvement of their social structures through the
eradication of mass poverty, inequality and illiteracy
require, inter alia, an over-all strategy for technological
development,
Conscious that the technological development of developing countries, even though concentrated on
research and its practical applications with a view to
the promotion of local and adapted technologies,
should, in the most favourable conditions, benefit from
a large-scale transfer of appropriate technological
knowledge accumulated mainly in the developed countries,
Considering how decisively important it is for the
developing countries to have technically and scientifically trained local personnel in order to:
(a) Take advantage of the facilities offered by access to the technology of the developed countries,
(b) Use that technology by adapting it to national
conditions,
(c) Develop techniques suited to their production
structures,
(d) Create their own national technologies,
Considering further that the objectives mentioned
in the preceding paragraph have been adequately enunciated in the World Plan of Action for the Application
of Science and Technology to Development prepared
by the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology to Development,'G
Taking into account that not only has this largescale transfer of the store of technological knowledge
not taken place, but that what has in fact been witnessed in recent years is the opposite phenomenon,
namely. a constant diminution of the store of technological knowledge in the developing countries through
the outflow of trained national personnel who emigrate chiefly to some of the market-economy countries,
thus obviously affecting the capacity of the developing
countries to cope with the tasks of development through
the utilization of trained national personnel,
Recognizing that the outflow of trained personnel
from the developing countries has its roots in the
phenomenon of under-development itself and that any
measures to overcome it must take into consideration
that fall. as well as an understanding of the reasons
for the outllow.
I. Invites the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with lhe organizations of the United Nations system
,11 Unitc,i Nations publication. Sales No.: E.71.II.A.18.

50

General Assembly-Twenty·seventh Session

concerned and taking due note of the report on the
subject being prepared by the Secretary-General of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and of the work done by the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research, the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology
to Development and other interested bodies in the
United Nations system, and in consultation with the
Member States concerned:
(a) To prepare a study on the outflow of trained
personnel from the developing countries which affects
their technological development, bringing out the negative consequences in the developing countries and
the advantages reaped by the industrialized countries,
and pin-pointing the mechanics of that outflow and
identifying the countries to which it is directed;
(b) In assessing the negative consequences of this
phenomenon in the developing countries, to give special
attention to the way in which this outflow hinders the
creation of suitable technical infrastructures and prejudices the capacity to utilize imported technology and
the creation of national technologies and to the policy
measures which the developing countries themselves
may have to take to stem this outflow;
2. Invites the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the organizations of the United Nations system
and bearing in mind the study referred to in paragraph
1 above, to draft, in consultation with the Member
States concerned, the necessary guidelines for a programme of action to be elaborated by the Committee
on Science and Technology for Development, indicating viable measures that can be taken to deal with the
problem and, above all, practical and effective guidance
to be followell, mainly by the Governments of industrialized countries, to put an end to, and to reverse,
that process without prejudice to existing international
agreements and in conformity with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take urgent
measures to make widely known to the appropriate
authorities in developing countries the proposals contained in the World Plan of Action for the Application
of Science and Technology to Development as one of
the means to counterbalance the outflow of trained
personnel from developing to developed countries;
4. Requests th{, Secretary-General to submit the
study referred to in paragraph 1 above to the General
Assembly at its twenty-eighth session, through the
Economic and Social Council, and the guidelines for
a programme of action to the Committee on Science
and Teclll1ology for Development at its second session.
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3018 (XXVII). The problem of mass poverty and
unemployment in developing countries

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Economic and
Social Council on its fifty-second and fifty-third sessions,'i7
77 Official Records of the General Assembly, TlI'enty-sel'enth
Session, Supplement No.3 (A/117m) and Supplement No. 3A
(A/8703/Add.!).

Inspired by the solemn determination of the peoples
of the United Nations, as embodied in the Charter, to
promote their economic and social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom,
Reiterating paragraph 7 of the preamble of the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade,78 which states that the
ultimate objective of development must be to bring
about sustained improvement in the well-being of the
individual and bestow benefits on all and that development fails in its essential purpose if undue privileges,
extremes of wealth and social injustices persist,
Noting the report of the Committee for Development Planning on its eighth session,79 which considered
in depth the nature and urgency of the problem of
mass poverty and unemployment in developing countries and the inequalities in the distribution of wealth
and income in those countries,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1727 (LUI) of 28 July 1972 on mass poverty and unemployment,
Deeply concerned that at this stage of the Second
United Nations Development Decade there is no manifest improvement in the individual lives of the great
masses of people in the developing countries,
Recalling resolution 62 (III) of 19 May 1972,
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its third session,80 on special
measures in favour of the least developed among the
developing countries,
Aware that a grave problem in developing countries
is the critical relationship of social equity to economic
growth,
Noting the urgent need for more and better quantitative data on past and current trends in employment
and income distribution in developing countries,
Noting further the statement of the President of the
World Bank GroupS! that, in some ten countries with
per capita income averaging $145, the poorest 40 per
cent of the population receive incatnes of only $50,
and that, in another ten countries with per capita incomes averaging $275, the poorest 40 per cent of the
population receive incomes of only $80,
Convinced that these desperately poor people should
not be left outside the mainstream of development and
that their condition of abject poverty should be improved if the danger of widespread social and economic upheaval is to be averted,
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1727 (LUI);
2. Invites developing countries where large segments
of the population have per capita incomes significantly
lower than the national average to continue their programmes and to take such further steps as may be necessary to achieve a better income distribution and to
create new employment opportunities as a means of
improving the livelihood of the poorest sections of their
populations within their national plans and priorities.
78 Resolution 2626
79 Official Recordr

(XXV).
of the Economic and Social COlII/cil,
Fifty-third Session, Supplement No.7 (E/5126).
~u See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. J. Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.DA).
annex I.A.
81 Statement made to the annual meeting of the Board of
Governors of the World Bank Group on 25 September 1972.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committ..e

including the structural reforms that may be necessary;
3. Invites developcd countries to consider ways of
enlarging the volume of their concessionary assistance
and thus enhance the capacity of developing countries
to eradicate mass poverty and unemployment among
the poorest sections of their communities;
4. Urges organizations within the United Nations
system, in co-operation with the Secretary-General, to
give due consideration to the development and implementation of measures to assist the developing countries in raising the level of living of their low-income
groups;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session, through
the Economic and Social Council, on the progress of
the implementation of the present resolution.
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3019 (XXVII). United Nations Fund for
Populalion Activities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its invitation and the requests set forth
in its resolution 2815 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971,
Welcoming the Secretary-Gcncral's note 82 with interim recommcndations requiring urgent action to
achieve improvements in the administrative machinery
of the United Nations Fund for Population Activities
aimed at thc cfficient and cxpeditious delivery of population programmes,
Expressing its appreciation to the fifty-two Member
States which, to date, have responded to that invitation
and have pledged financial support to the United Nations Fund for Population Activities,
Noting from the information given by the SecretaryGeneral that tl1c administration of the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities has been reorganized
over the past year in order to make even more effective
use of its staff and resources,
Noting further that the resources of the United Nations Fund for Population Activities and its scope of
operations havc now grown to a size which makes
its supervision by an intergovernmental body desirable,
Expressing further its appreciation to the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme
and to the Executive Director of the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities for their efforts, which
have achieved the significant results of the past year,
Noting also the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to change the character of the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities from a trust fund of
the Secretary-General into a fund established under the
authority of the Gencral Assembly,
1. Decides to place the United Nations Fund for
Population Activities under the authority of the General Assembly;
2. Decides further, without prejudice to the overall responsibilities and policy functions of the Economic
:md Social Council, that the Governing Council of
Q? A/8899.

51

the United Nations Development Programme, subject
to conditions to be established by the Economic and
Social Council, shall be the governing body of the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities and
invites the Governing Council to concern itself with
the financial and administrative policies relating to the
work programme, the fund-raising methods and the
annual budget of the Fund;
3. Invites the Governing Council to organize itself
in such a way that it can exercise effectively these functions, taking into account the separate identity of the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities and its
need to operate under the guidance of the Economic
and Social Council, in close relationship with interested Governments and with appropriate international
and national bodies, governmental and non-governmental, interested in population activities;
4. A uthorizes the Governing Council, at its fifteenth
session, to apply to the United Nations Fund for Population Activities funding principles similar to those
of the United Nations Development Programme and
to establish the necessary financial rules and regulations, subject to consideration by the Governing Council of a report, prepared by the Executive Director
of the Fund in consultation with the Administrator of
the Programme, and of the full implications thereof;
5. Requests the Governing Council to consider
further steps necessary to achieve improvements in the
administrative and operational machinery of the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities, to inform the
Economic and Social Council in its annual report of
those further steps taken to implement General Assembly resolution 2815 (XXVI) and the present
resolution and to submit annually a report on thc activities of the Fund to the Economic and Social Council;
6. Renews its invitation to interested Governments
to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities without prejudice to
the agreed level of growth of contributions to the
United Nations Development Programme and development assistance in general.
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

:3035 (XXVII).

Code of conducl for liner
conferences

The General Assembly,
Welcoming the unanimous agreement reached by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
at its third session, held at Santiago, Chile, from 13
April to 21 May 1972, that there was an urgent need
for adopting and implementing a universally acceptable
code of conduct to regulate the activities of liner conferences, which fully takes into account thc special
necds and problems of the developing countries,
Recalling resolution 66 (III) of 19 May 1972 entitled "Draft code of conduct for liner conferences"
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Devclopment/ 3
R3 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sates No.: E.73.I1.D.4),
annex LA.

52

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

1. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to convene as early as possible in 1973, under
the auspices of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Developmcnt, a conference of plenipotentiaries to
consider and adopt a convention or any other multilateral legally binding instrument on a code of conduct for liner conferences;
2. Decides to establish, also under the auspices of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, a Preparatory Committee for the United Nations
Conference on a Code of Conduct for Liner Conferences, consisting of forty-eight members to be appointed by the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference On Trade and DeveJopment S4 with the same
distribution between the difTerent regional areas as
was established for the fourth session of the Working
Group on International Shipping Legislation, with the
addition of two members from each regional area;

3. Also decides that thc Preparatory Committee
shall prepare the draft of a convention or any other
multilateral legally binding instrument on a code of
conduct for liner conferences for submission to the
conference of plenipotentiaries referred to in paragraph
1 above;
4. Decides fur/her that the fin,t session of thc Preparatory Committee should be convcned as early as
possible and that the final session should be held at
least two months before the conference of plenipotentiaries;
5. Recommends that the Preparatory Committee
should take into consideration, as a basis for its work:
(a) The draft code of conduct for liner conferences
annexed to rcsolution 66 (Ill) of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development:

(b) The report of the debates on this subject by
the Fourth Committee of the Unitcd Nations Conference on Trade and Devclopment at its third session, S5 including an informal cxchange of views on the
draft code of conduct for liner confercnces and a summing-up by the Chairman of that (\)Illtllittee;
(c) The report of the secretariat of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development entitled Regula/ion of Liner Conferences;~n

(d) The report of the Working Group on International Shipping Legislation on its third session. ~7

2! 15/h plenary meeting
19 December 1972
S4 The Preparatory Committee will be composed of the
following States: Algeria, Argentina. Australia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada. Chile, Colombia, Czechoslovakia. Denmark.
Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, German Dcmocratic Rcpublic. Germ:my. Federal Republic of. Ghana, Greece, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq. Italy, Ivory Coast, Japan,
Madagascar, Mexico, Netherlands. New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, Philippines. Poland. Romania. Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Thailand. Uganda. Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. United Kingdom of Great BriUlin and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanza!~ia. United Slate' of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yugoslavia :ll1d Zairc.
8~ See Procecdinrr~ of t11(, United ,Viltions Conference 0/1
Trade and Development, Third Session. vol. I. Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication. Sales No.: E.73.II.D.4).
annex VI.D.
86United Nations publication. Sales No.: L72.IL)).13 and
Corr.!.
87 TD/B/C.4/93.

3036 (XXVII).

Special memmrl'S in favour of
the least develop('d muong the developing
eountries

The General Asselllbly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Confcrencc on Trade and Developmcnt on its third
session ss and thc report of the Trade and Development
Board for the period from 22 September 1971 to 25
October 1972, ~~
Bearing in lIlilld the joint slatel1Jent by eight socialist countrics at the twenty-fifth sessinn of the
General Assembly concerning the Second United Nations Developmcnt Decade and social progress 90 and
their declaration at the third session of thc United
Nations Conference on Trade and Developmcnt,9\
Conscious that the production capacity and trade
J10ws of the least developed among 1he developing
countries have been and continue to be extremely low,
and that it is urgcnt for thc commercial policy measurcs
which arc applicd to all developing countrics to be
supplemented by liberal and considerably larger contributions of financial and t<.:chnicd assistance for th,
least developed countries, in ordn tIl eliminate the
existing bottle-neck in their economy at the production
level,
Recognizing that the relevant provisions of resolution 62 (III) of 19 May 1972 adopted by the United
Nations Confcrence on Trade and D~'velopl1lent9~ and
of the International Developmcnt Strategy for the Second Unitcd Nations Development Decadc":: must be
applied in practice as soon as possible,
1. Endorses resolution 62 (Ill) unanimously
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its third session;
2. Requests the specialized agencies concerned and
other United Nations !J,ldies, as well as the regional
economic commissions and the United Nations Economic and Social Office at Beirut, to initiate and accelerate the implementation of their action programmes
in favour of the least dcveloped Clllll1tries in the areas
within their competence and to submit periodic reports
on the matter to the General Assemblv thl"l1u~h the
Economic and Social Council;
3. Also requests all States memhers of the United
Nations Conferencl' on Trade and 1kvelopment, especially developed countries, to implement urgently the
special I11casurt.:s in favour (If 1he least developed countries contained in Conference resolution 62 (III) and
to continue to review the measures they have taken in
favour of these countrics, as well a' ~vavs and means
of carrying out those measures, and tl) imwide information to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference. on Trade and Developmcnt (In actions
taken in connexiof! with the consideration and implementation 01' thl' recommendations Ill' the Conference,
~8 See Proceedillgs oj the lilli/cd IVatioll.\ C,'lIlel<'I/('(' 011
Trade and DCl'I·loplllent. Third Sessioll. vol. I. He/1Ort <lnd
AnI/exes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.11.0.4)'
'!l Official Records of the (;,'/Ieml Assembl". 1'lI'ol/\'-se\'1'/1/1l
SI'ssioll, Supplement No. 15 (A/871.5/Rev.l).
!IO Ibid.. 1'\I'<,nt\' (ilth Se.lsloli. AlIlIl'ICS. ,,~cnda ilclll ·t~. doclII'lcnt A/8074.
!I\ See Proceedings of the United Nlllions C,mjNcrld' on
'J-"ade and Develof'ment. Third Session. vol. I, RI'f'"rt and
A l1/lexcs (United Nations puhlication, Sales No.: E.73.II.0.4).
:'nnex VIII.G.
!l~ Ibid.
!l:; Resolution 2626 (XX\!).

Resolutions adopll'fl 011 the reports of Ihe Second Committee

tt) enable him to submit periodic reports to the Trade
and Developmcnt Board.
::1 J5th plenary meeting
19 December 1972

:\037 (XXVII). Chartpr of the l'l'onomie right8
and ,lutip~ of ~talf''''

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development on its third
session,n4
Decides to enlarge the composition of the Working
Group on the Chartcr of the Economic Rights and
DUlies of Statl's establishcd under resolution 45 (III)
of J 8 May 1972 of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development,n;, and authorizes the Secretary-General of the Conference to appoint nine additional members, in consultation with Governments of
member States.
:: 115 th plenary meeting
19 December 1972

3038 (XXVII). Dis8emination of information and
mohilization of puhlie opinion regarding
prohl"ITIs of It'alle and development

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind paragraph 84 of the International
Devclupmcnt Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade,!'" relating to the mobilization of
public opinion,
Recalling its resolution 2800 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971, regarding the dissemination of information and the mobilization of public opinion relative to
the review and appraisal of progress in the implementation of the International Development Strategy,
Noting with satisfaction resolution 43 (III) of 17
May 1972,97 in which the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development proposed a series of specific measures for the dissemination of information and
the mobilization of public opinion relative to problems
of trade and development,
Noting aha agreed conclusion 89 (XII) of 20 October 1972,98 adopted on the subject by the Trade and
Development Board at the first part of its twelfth session,
Convinced that improvement in the dissemination of
information and the mobilization of public opinion,
particularly among young people, would be an important factor for greater awareness of the general
problems of development and would thus promote the
increased efforts required in the sphere of interna~4 See

Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade (ind Developmcllt. Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication. Sales No.: E.73.II.DA).
~j:; Ibid., annex I.A.
UG Resolution 2626 (XXV).
!J7 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session. vol. I, Report and
Annexps (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.D.4),
annex LA.
!IS See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentysevemh Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/8715/Rev.l), part one,
annex J.

tional co-opcration for development and the success of
the Jnternational Development Strategy,
1. Decides to institute a World Development Information Day with the object of drawing the attention
of world public opinion each year to development problems and the m:cessilv of strengthenine; international
co-operation to solve them:
~
~
2. Further decides that the date for this day shall
coincide in principle with United Nations Day, 24
October, which is also the date on which the International Development Strategy for the Second Nations
Development Decade was adopted in 1970;
3. Invites the Trade and Development Board to
study at its fifth special session, devoted to the review
and appraisal of the Second United Nations Development Decade, the preliminary report of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations,\ill as well as the interim
report requested of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development in
agreed conclusion 89 (Xl [) ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to prepare, for the fifth special session of the
Trade and Development Board, a detailed report elaborating the clements outlined in his preliminary report;
5. Further invites the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to indicate in the delailed report mentioned in paragraph 4 above what measures he is considering, in accordance with paragraph 5 of resolution
43 (Ill) of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, to strengthen the information services of the Conference and to regroup them, in close
liaison with the Office of Public Information, in particular the Centre for Economic and Social Information and other United Nations information sources, in
an information unit responsible for giving wider publicity to the debates and decisions of the Conference
concerning problems of trade and development and to
the objectives of the International Development Strategy
of concern (co the ConferL'l1cc;
6. Requests the Trade and Development Board at
its fifth special session to outline a programme of
events for World Development Information Day in
1973 and to make specific proposals to that end;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council at its
fifty-fifth session, taking into consideration the report
of the Trade and Development Board on its fifth special se.,sion, to draw up a programme of events for
World Development Information Day in 1973.
:! 1 15th plenary meeting
19 n('cember 197::

:-JO:l9 (XXVII). Exlt~rnal deht 8crvu'mg hv the
den'loping eountrit'A

The General A sselllfi[Y,
Mindful of the purposes set forth in Article 55 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which specifies that the
United Nations should promote higher standards of
living, full employment. and conditions of economic and
social progress and development,
Recatring its resolutions 2170 (XXI) of 6 December
19M, 2415 (XXIII) of 17 December 1968 and 2807
(XXVI) of 14 December 1971 concerning the need
~9 A/8893.

54

General Asscmbi}·-Twenty-sevcnth Session

to find practical solutions to the increasing external
indebtedness of developing countries,
Bearing in mind resolution 59 (III) of 19 May 1972
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its third session,lOo
Noting that, according to ofi1cial information given
by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development to the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its third session, the combined
gross national products of the countrie~ of the world
increased by $1,100,000 million during the First United
Nations Development Decade and all the developing
countries together accounted for only 20 per cent of
that increase,
Taking into account the report of the World Bank
Group to the Board of Governors, dated 25 September
1972,101 on the steadily increasing burden of external
debt servicing (amortization and interest) by the developing countries, which this year will exceed $7,000
million,
A ware that, by absorbing ever-increasing percentages
of their export earnings, the servicing of the external
debt of the developing countries is jeopardizing the
chances of attaining the goals set for the Second United
Nations Development Decade,
Considering therefore that it is urgently necessary to
adopt practical measures to reduce effectively the
burden represented by the external debt servicing of the
developing countries,
1. Requests the Trade and Development Board to
study, through its Committee on Invisibles and Financing related to Trade at its sixth session, the problems deriving from the burden for the developing countries represented by the servicing of their external debt,
including the desirability and feasibility of the establishment and operation of a special fund for the financing, and/or compensation, of the interest on that
debt;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
to prepare, after consultation with the President of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the Managing Director of the International
Monetary Fund, a study on the matters referred to in
paragraph 1 above with a view to its submission to
the Committee on Invisibles and Financing related to
Trade for consideration at its sixth session.
2115th plenary meeting
19 December 1972
3040 (XXVII).

Multilateral trade negotiations

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 82 (III) of 20 May 1972 as
well as resolution 62 (III) of 19 May 1972, adopted
by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its third session,10~ and the principles
100 See Proceedings of the Vllited Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.D.4),
annex LA.
101 See International Bank for Reconstruction and Development-Intern~tional Development Association, Annual Report,
1972 (Washmgton, D.C.).
102 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.D.4),
annex LA.

contained in paragraph 1 of resolution 82 (I I J), which
were drawn up by th~ developing countries to serve as
guidelines for the multilateral trad~ negoti:ltions in
1973,
Recalling further th~ agr~ed conclusions ado[Jtcd hy
the Trade and Development Board at the Ilrst part of
its twelfth session, Ill;)
Considering the importance of those multilateral
trade negotiations from the point of view of the trade
and economic intnests of the developing countries,
Recognizing that the negotiations may lead to very
important changes in world economic allairs and that
the intercsb of the developing nations should be taken
fully into account both in the field of trade and ill the
spheres of imernational monetary reform and development financing,
Considering that the summing-up by the Chairman
at the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade at its twenty-eighth session, 011
J 4 November 1972, regarding the objectives of the
developing countries in the multilateral trade negoliations may be considered a stcp forward in so far :IS
it states that the negotiations should aim at securil11~
additional benefits for the internat ional trade of the
developing countries so as to achieve a substantial increase in their foreign exchange earnings, divl'l"sification of their exports and an acceleration of the rate
of growth of their trade, taking into consideration their
development needs,
Taking into account the establishment of a Prepar:ltory Committee tor the Trade Negotiations within the
framework of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade,
1. 1nvites all Contracting Parties to the General
Agreemcnt on Tariffs and Trade to give priority attention to the economic and development needs of developing countries during the preparatory work as well
as in all stages of the multilateral trade negoti:ltions:
2. A Iso invites the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to re-examine,
with a view to their adoption, the objectives of the
developing countries in the multilateral trade negotiations that were not included in the summing-up by the
Chairman at the twenty-eighth session of the General
Agreement, particularly those relating to the economic
development of the developing countries, such as an
increased share for the developing countries in world
trade, an improvement in the conditions of access for
their exports to the markets of the industrialized countries and new rules for the international trade of tho~c
countries;
3. Declares that the multilateral trade negotiations
should contribute effectively to a more equitable international division of labour;
4. Recommmds that the Contracting Parties to the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade should take
full account of the following principles. to serve as
guidelines for the multilateral trade negotiations:
(a) The developing countries, collectively or individually, shall not suffer, directly or indirectly, adverse
or prejudicial effects as a result of these negotiation~:
on the contrary, the negotiations shall provide the developing countries with additional benefits that repre10~ See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyseventh Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/87l5/Rev.l), part one,
annex I.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second (;ommiUec

---

sent a substantial and meaningful improvement of their
position in international trade so that they may secure
an increasing share in the growth in international trade
commensurate with the needs of their economic development on the basis of non-reciprocity, non-discrimination and preferential treatment;
(b) If the preferential advantages enjoyed by developing countries are adversely affected by the results
of these negotiations, the developed countries shall take
additional measures to compensate the developing
countries so affected;
(c) Developed countries shall provide more favourable and acceptable conditions of access to the products
of developing countrics and ensure for these products
a larger share of the markets of developed countries,
and devise measures designed to attain stable, equitable
and remunerative prices for these products;
(d) All developing countries, whether or not contracting parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade, shall be entitled and enabled to participate
fully, effectively and continuously in all stages of these
negotiations so that their interests are fully taken into
account;
(e) All concessions that may be exchanged by developed countries among themselves shall automatically
be extended to all developing countries;
(f) Concessions granted by the developed countries
to developing countries need not be extended to the
developed countries;
(g) In the negotiations among developing countries,
the tariff and other concessions which they may negotiate among themselves shall not be extended to the
developed countries;
(h) The negotiations should, as a matter of priority,
secure significant concessions for the products of particular interest to the least developed countries;
(i) The utmost priority shall be accorded to the
removal of all barriers to the products of export interest to developing countries in the markets of developed countries;
(j) Concessions agreed upon in the negotiations in
favour of developing countries shall be made available
to them immediately and will not be phased, nor will
accession to the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade be a prior condition for the enjoyment of the
benefits of such concessions;
5. Further invites the Contracting Parties to the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to study and
adopt:
(a) New rules fully recognizing the right of developing countries, especially the land-locked countries,
to non-reciprocity, non-discrimination and preferential
treatment for developing countries, and to incorporate
these rules in the General Agreement on Tariffs and
~
Trade;
(b) Objectives aimed at ensuring the acceleration of
the economic development of developing countries;
(c) Objectives aimed at defining in the trade negotiations specific goals, both global and sectoral, and
on a product-by-product basis;
6. Invites the Preparatory Committee for the Trade
Negotiations to study ways and means for economic
and financial compensation for any loss incurred by
developing countries as a result of these negotiations;
7. Recommends that the negotiations should, as a
matter of priority, secure significant concessions for

55

the primary commodities, including processed and semiprocessed products, for the least developed among the
developing countries and for the land-locked developing countries, with a view to improving substantially
their export of these products;
8. Further recommends that the trade negotiations
should seeure the liberalization of tariff and non-tariff
barriers on a preferential basis for the exports of developing countries, whether or not contracting parties
to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade;
9. Requests the Secretary-General or the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
make intensive efforts to assist developing countries in
the preparations for the negotiations and in the negotiations themselves, drawing up and implementing interregional, regional and country programmes. in full
collaboration with the United Nations Development
Programme and the secretariat of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade;
10. Endorses fully section D of resolution 82 (Ill)
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, particularly with regard to co-ordination
between the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development :lI1d the Director-General of the General Al':recment on TarifTs
and Trade;
11. Requests and recommends that in general the
decisions and measures that the Contracting Parties to
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade adopt in
favour of the developing countries should be applicable
to all of them; it also requests and recommends that,
in whatever action or special measures they take in
favour of the least developed countries. they should
ensure that the interests of the other developing countries are in no way harmed or prejudiced.
21 J 5 th plenary meetinR
19 J)pce!llher /9T!

3041 (XXVII). Report of the United Nation8 Conference on Tradp and Dcvt·lopmcllt on its
third session

The General Assclnhiy,
Recalling its resolutions 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964, 2570 (XXIV) of 13 December 1969,
2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970 and 2725 (XXV)
of 15 December 1970,
Recalling further resolution 2820 (XXVI) of 16
December 197], in which it laid down the objectives
for the third session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development and dccidd to consider
the results of that session as a matter of high priority,
Recalling in particular section II of its resolution
2820 (XXVI) on a comprehensive review of the institutional arrangements of the United Nations Confercnee
on Trade and Development with a view to imprm ing
the efficiency of its operations, and on the cssential role
of the Conference to review and appraise, within its
field of competence, the progress achieved in the implementation of the International Development Strategy
for the Second Nations Development Dccadc,104
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development on its third
104 Resolution

2626 (XXV).

56

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

session lOG held at Santiago, Chile, from 13 April to 21
May 1972, and the report of the Trade and Development Board for the period 22 September 1971 to 25
October 1972,lOG
Considering that at its third session the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development was able
to take cognizance of, and to start to act upon, major
developments in the trade and monetary fields and that
the final meaning of that session will depend to a large
extent on follnw-up action to implement the resolutions
adopted and to reach agreement on those important
issues that remained unsolved,
Emphasizing the significant part that the permanent
machinery of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development has to play in the field of trade and
devclopment and that its effectiveness depends considerably upon the pol itical will of the Governments
of all Member States, in particular those of developed
countries, to find solutions to the development problems
of the world,
1. Takes note of the report of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development on its third
session and the report of the Trade and Development
Board for the period 22 September 1971 to 25 October 1972;
2. Welcomes resolution 82 (III) of 20 May 1972
on multilateral trade negotiations and resolution 84
(III) of 21 May 1972 on the international monetary
situation, adopted by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at its third session,107 and
reaffirms that the developing countries should participate fully, effectively and continuously in all stages of
the multilateral trade negotiations and in the decisionmaking process of the international monetary system
and its reform, notably through their participation in
the Ad Hoc Committee on Reform of the International
Monetary System and Related Issues, established by
the Board of Governors of the International Monetary
Fund, and forthcoming multilateral trade negotiations,
to ensure that full consideration is given to their specific interests:

3. Takes note of agreed conclusion 92 (XII) of
23 October] 972 of the Trade and Development Board
on multilateral trade negotiations,108 whereby the Board
agreed, inter alia, that one of the fundamental aims of
the negotiations should be the expansion and the diversification of exports of developing countries in accordance with their trade and development needs and that,
consequently, every effort should be made in the course
of the negotiations to ensure that they result in significant benefits to the developing countries;

4. Invites the Contracting Parties to the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to make adequate
arrangements in order to ensure that aU developing
countries, whether or not contracting parties to the
General Agreement, are given the opportunity to par105 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.DA).
10(; Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/87l5/Rev.I).
107 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.DA),
annex LA.
108 See Official Records of the Gmeral Assembly, Twentyseventh Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/87l5/Rev.l), part one,
annex I.

ticipate fully, effectively and continuously in all stages
of the negotiations, so that their interests are fully taken
into account; such arrangements should be without any
prejudice to their position with regard to their accession
to the General Agreement;
5. Notes the summing-up by the Chairman of the
Contracting Parties to the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade at its twenty-eighth session on the
multilateral trade negotiations, on 14 November 1972,
whereby agreed conclusion 92 (XII) of the Trade
and Development Board was taken into consideration
and it was agreed that the negotiations should aim
at securing addi tional benefits for the international
trade of the developing countries so as to achieve
a substantial increase in their foreign exchange eamings, diversification of their exports and an acceleration
of the rate of growth of their trade, taking into account
their development needs, and, in this eonnexion, invites the States members of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to ensure that these
fundamental aims of the negotiations will be fully
achieved and to continue to pursue their efforts to include other fundamental objectives such as, inter alia,
further improvement of the conditions of access to the
markets of the industrialized countries for the exports
of the developing countries and the solution of the
problems caused by pricing policies;
6. Welcomes the establishment by the Board of
Governors of the International Monetary Fund of the
Ad Hoc Committee on Reform of the International
Monetary System and Related issues, as recommended
in resolution 84 (Ill) of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
7. Endorses the recommendation of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development that
problems in the monetary, trade and finance spheres
should be resolved in a co-ordinated manner, taking
into account their interdependence, with the full participation of developed and developing countries, and takes
note of the decision of the Trade and Development
Board to continue the consideration of this matter
at the second part of its twelfth session;
8. Endorses the request addressed by the Trade
and Development Board to the Secre~ary-General of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to continue and develop further his consultations with the Managing Director of the International
Monetary Fund and the Director-General of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade as required, to
submit reports to members of the Conference when
he considers it necessary and, in the intervals between
sessions of the Board, to utilize fully existing procedures and mechanisms for consultations;

9. Urges the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to report
to the Trade and Development Board at the second
part of its twelfth session with a view to enabling the
Board to consider and reach agreement on ways in
which the Conference can ensure an effective contribution within its competence-before and during the
multilateral trade negotiations and discussions on monetary reform to take place in the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade and the International Monetary
Fund, respectively-to the solution in a co-ordinated
manner of the problems in the monetary, trade and
finance spheres. in pursuance of Conference resolution
84 (III);

ResolutioDll adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

10. Welcomes the conclusion of the International
Cocoa Agreement, 1972, adopted within the framework of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in October 1972, and urges the corning into force of the Agreement as early as possible
in 1973;
11. Endorses agreed conclusion 90 (XII) of 23
October 1972109 of the Trade and Development Board
whereby the Board agreed to give priority attention to
the conditions of international trade in primary commodities, On which the great majority of developing
countries still heavily depend for their export earnings, and draws the attention of the Board to the need
for substantial improvement of the terms of trade by
the middle of the Second United Nations Development
Decade;
12. Urges all States members of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development to take the
necessary steps to ensure their effective participation
in the preparation for, and the work of, the seventh
(special) session of the Committee on Commodities
with a view to reaching concrete and significant results in trade liberalization and pricing policy early
in the 1970s, as called for in Conference resolution 83
(III) of 20 May 1972;110
13. Requests the World Bank Group to undertake,
as a matter of priority and within the limits of its
competence, the measures provided for in Conference
resolution 54 (III) of 19 May 1972110 designed to ensure the stabilization of the prices of raw materials;
14. Invites the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to provide assistance to the developing countries in their
participation in the various stages of the multilateral
trade negotiations and to make the appropriate budgetary allocation to this 'end, without prejudice to the
continuation of its work relative to the expansion of the
trade of developing countries, which shall not be delayed in any way by the forthcoming negotiations, and
invites the regional economic commissions and the
United Nations Economic and Social Office at Beirut,
with the assistance of the United Nations Development
Programme and in accordance with paragraph 8 of
Conference resolution 82 (HI), to give the highest
priority to requests for assistance formulated by their
member States with a view to enabling them to participate effectively in the multilateral trade negotiations;
15. Notes with appreciation that, through the continuous efforts of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, as reflected in resolutions
of the Conference, intergovernmental action is gradually being mobilized in an increasing number of fields.
such as those of the marketing and distribution of
primary products, restrictive business practices in the
manufactures trade, contractual transfers of technology, insurance and reinsurance and the practices of
liner conferem;es, in particular in cases where the activities of transnational enterprises have long controlled, restricted or otherwise ir,fluenceri the intern a··
tional market, interfering with its functioning in a way
that is often detrimental to the full realization of the
development potential of the developing countries;
109 Ibid.

110 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on

Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.D,4),
annex I.A.

57

16. Endorses Trade and Development Board resolution 88 (XII) of 19 October 1972 111 regarding
permanent sovereignty over natural resources;
17. Endorses resolution 62 (III) of 19 May 1972,110
on the special measures in favour of the least developed
among the developing countries and resolution 63 (III)
of 19 May 1972,110 on the special measures related to
the particular needs of the land-locked developing
countries, both of which were unanimously adopted by
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its third session;
18. Calls upon all the States members of the United
Nat~ons Conference on Trade and Development, in
partIcular the developed countries, to take the necessary steps to give effective implementation, through
action at the national and intergovernmental levels, to
the resolutions and decisions adopted by the Conference
at its third session, and also to make every effort to
reach an agreement on the tasks that remain unfinished
and on the large number of important issues remitted
by the Conference to its continuing machinery for
further consideration and action;
19. Recommends that the Trade and Development
Board, at its fifth special session should within its competence review the progress made in and seek further
i~plementation of, the policy measu;es of the InternatIOnal Development Strategy for the Second United
~atio~s pevelopm.ent Decad~ll2 as adopted within the
tIme-lImIts prescnbed therem, reach agreements in
more specific terms on issues that had not been fully
res.olyed, seek new areas of agreement and widen the
eXlstmg ones, and evolve new concepts and seek agreeJ!1ents on additional measures, so as to fulfil the essentIal role and responsibility of the United Nations Conferenc.e on Trade and Development in the review and
appraIsal procedure and to facilitate the attainment of
the goals and objectives of the International Development Strategy, in accordance with Conference resolution 79 (HI) of 20 May 1972;113
20. Further recommends that the Trade and Development Board, in the light of the decisions and recommendations of the United Nations Conference on
~rade and Development at its third session, and partIcularly of paragraph 7 (a) of Conference resolution
80 (lI~) of 20 May 1972,113 and of General Assembly
resolutIOn 1995 (XIX) should select the areas in
which. action can .be initiated for the negotiation and
adoptIOn of multIlateral legal instruments within its
field of competence;
21. Requests the Trade and Development Board
to continue its work:
(a) With a view to the fullest possible effective implementation of principles governing international trade
and economic relations among States as approved both
at the first and the third sessions of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Developmr.nr;
(b) For the further strengthening of the in~tjtutional
machinery of the Conference as recommended in section H, paragraphs 30, 31 and 32, of General Assembly r('solution 19()5 (XIX):
111 See Official Records of the General Assembl\' TwcflIYseve1lth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/87l5/Rev.1 i,' part one
annex I.
'
112 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
In See Proceedings of the United Nations Conferenc~ on
Trade and Development. Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.DA),
annex I.A.

58

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

fullest extent possible the effective implementation of
the resolutions and decisions of the Conference and of
the Board and, to this end, recommends that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations should take
the pertinent decisions for the provision of the needed
financial resources.
2115th plenary meeting
19 December 1972

22. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
carry out the work programme for 1973-1974, as submitted to the Trade and Development Board at the
first part of its twelfth session,114 so as to ensure to the

114 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyseventh Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/8715/Rev.l), part two,
chapter I.

•

•

•

Other decisions
Report of the Economic and Social Council
(Item 12)

At its 2113th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1972, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Second Committee: 115
(a) Decided to defer until its twenty-eighth session further consideration
of the draft resolution entitled "Measures to improve the organization of the
work of the Council", recommended by the Economic and Social Council in its
resolution 1622 (LI) of 30 July 1971, and the amendments submitted thereto
during the consideration of the draft resolution by the Second Committee at the
twenty-sixth session;116
(b) Recognizing the importance of the proposals and suggestions contained
in the draft resolution entitled "Statement by the United Nations on promoting
the development of co-operation in economic, trade, scientific and technological
matters on the basis of equality" in relation to the promotion of comprehensive
co-operation among States for social and economic progress and development,
and considering that, owing to lack of time, it was not possible to discuss adequately and to adopt a decision on this draft statement at the twenty-seventh
session, decided to refer the draft statement, together with the summary records
of the discussion on this matter in the Second Committee,l17 to the Working
Group established under resolution 45 (HI) of 18 May 1972 adopted by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its third session,us for
further consideration;
(c) Took note of the tenth annual report of the United Nations/FAD Intergovernmental Committee of the World Food Programme;ll9
(d) Decided to defer until its twenty-eighth session consideration of the
World Plan of Action for the Application of Science and Technology to Development,l20 at which time it might consider in depth the recommendations made thereon
to the Economic and Social Council by the Committee on Science and Technology
for Development and the Council's comments thereon, in conjunction with the first
review and appraisal of the Second United Nations Development Decade and the
report which the Secretary-General is to prepare under General Assembly resolution 2658 (XXV) on the role of modem science and technology in the development of nations;
(e) Decided to defer until its twenty-eighth session consideration of the
questions entitled "Protein resources" and "Application of computer technology
for development".
1111 Ibid.,

Twenty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 12, document A/8963, para. 59.

116 Ibid., Twenty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 12, document A/8578/Add.l,

paras. 44-46.
117 Ibid., Twenty-seventh Session, Second Committee, 1497th, 1506th and 1510th meetings.
118 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Third
Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.D.4),
annex I.A.
119 See E/5129.
120 United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.71.1I.A.18.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(Item 43)

At its 2115th plenary meeting, on 19 December 1972, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Second Committee: 121
(a) Endorsed the action taken by the Trade and Development Board on
the calendar of meetings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in order that every effort should be made, both by delegations and by the
secretariat, to minimize the cost and reduce the duration of each meeting;
(b) Requested commodity conferences which are convened under the auspices
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to dispense with
summary records, on the understanding that the secretariat would take the necessary steps to ensure that the work of the participants would not be hampered by
this decision.
121 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda
item 43, document A/8824/Add.I, para. 57.

59

General Assembly-Twemy-seventh Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE THIRD COl\llUITTEE
CONTENTS
Resolution
No.

Date of
adoption

Tille

2919 (XXVII)

Programme for the observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (A/8842)
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination

2920 (XXVII)

Exploitation of labour through illicit and clandestine trafficking

2921 (XXVII)

Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimi.
nation (A/8880)
Draft Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime
of Apartheid (A/8880)
Importance of the universal realization of the right of peoples
to self-determination and of the speedy granting of independence
to colonial countries and peoples for the effective guarantee
and observance of human rights (A/8936) ..
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(A/8918)
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.
.
Continuation of the Office of the United Nations High Commis" ..
sioner for Refugees (A/8918)
Assistance to Sudanese refugees returning from abroad (AI 8918 )
Assistance in cases of natural disaster and other disaster situations

2906 (XXVII)

(A/8880)

....

.

.

(A/8880)

2922 (XXVII)
2955 (XXVII)

2956 (XXVII)

2957 (XXVII)
2958 (XXVII)
2959 (XXVII)

(A/8919)

3009 (XXVII)

3010 (XXVII)
3011 (XXVII)
3012 (XXVII)
3013 (XXVII)
3014 (XXVII)
3020 (XXVII)
3021 (XXVII)
3022 (XXVII)
3023 (XXVII)

3024 (XXVII)
3025 (XXVII)

3026 (XXVII)

3027 (XXVII)
3028 (XXVII)

.

Employment of women in senior and other professional positions
by the secretariats of organizations in the United Nations system (A/8928, A/8980, para. 92 (a»
.
International Women's Year (A/8928)
.
Capital punishment (A/8928)
.
Assistance in narcotics control (A/8928)
.
International instruments relating to drug abuse control (A/8928)
United Nations programme for drug abuse control (A/8928)
Principles of international co-operation in the detection, arrest,
extradition and punishment of persons guilty of war crimes
.
and crimes against humanity (A/8939)
Crime prevention and control (A/8940)
.
Channels of communication with youth and international youth
.
organizations (A/8941)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Promotion among
Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and Understand.
ing between Peoples (A/8941)
Increased employment and mobility of young people in the United
.
Nations (A/8941)
Status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (A/8942)
Human rights and scientific and technological developments (A/
8944)
Resolution A
'
.
Resolution B
.
.
Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance (A/8945)
United Nations conference for an international convention on
.
adoption law (A/8951)

Other deci.ion.
Protection of journalists engaged in dangerous missions in areas of armed conflict
Freedom of information
.

61

60

19 October 1972

62

50

15 November 1972

62

50

15 November 1972

62

so

15 November 1972

63

so

15 November 1972

63

51

12 December 1972

63

56
56

12 December 1972
12 December 1972

64
65

56
56

12 December 1972
12 December 1972

65
65

61

12 December 1972

65

12
12
12
12
12

18 December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972

66
66
67
67
67
68

52
53

18 December 1972
18 December 1972

68
68

54

18 December 1972

69

54

18 December 1972

70

54

18 December 1972

70

55

18 December 1972

71

58
58
59

18 December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972

71
71

62

18 December 1972

72

49 (b)

12 December 1972
18 December 1972

73
73

12

57

72

62

Genera I Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

2906 (XXVII). Programme for the observance
of the twenty-fi fth anniversary of the Uni.
ver!lal Declaration of Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling that on 10 December 1973 the world community will celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Recalling its resolution 2860 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971, by which it expressed its conviction of the
historic significance and enduring value of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights as a common standard
of achievement for all peoples and all nations and decided to consider at its twenty-seventh session the
question of the preparation of an appropriate programme to observe the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Declaration,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-GeneraP containing suggestions as to a programme of
suitable activities which could be undertaken for this
purpose,
1. Reaffirms its adherence to the principles, values
and ideals contained in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights;
2. Reiterates the hope that the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
will be celebrated by the world community in a manner befitting the occasion and serving the cause of
human rights;
3. Decides to hold a special meeting on 10 December 1973 at which will be launched the Decade for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
as and when approved;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the suggestions
presented by the Secretary-General in his report;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To transmit his report to Governments, specialized agencies and other intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council
for such action as they may wish to undertake in order
to give effect to the suggestions contained in the report;
(b) To take the necessary measures for the implementation of those suggestions which fall within the
Secretary-General's area of responsibility or which require action by other organs of the United Nations;
(c) To organize as soon as possible seminars on a
regional level under the programme of advisory services
in the field of human rights with the purpose of studying new ways and means for promoting human rights
in the light of the present resolution, with special
attention to the problems and needs of the various
regions of the world;
(d) To submit to the General Assembly at its
twenty-eighth session a progress report on the preparations made and the measures taken in accordance with
the present resolution.
2068th plenary meeting
19 October 1972
2919 (XXVII). Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination
The General Assembly,
Firmly convinced that racial discrimination in all

its forms and manifestations is a total negation of the
1 A/8820 and Corr.!.

purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and that it militates against human progress,
peace and justice,
Believing that the continuation of national, regional
and international action against racial discrimination
in all its forms is a matter of vital importance if the
world is to live in peace and justice,
Noting that a detailed draft programme for a Decade
for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination has been prepared by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities 2
and that it has been submitted to the Commission on
Human Rights for urgent consideration at its twentyninth session,
1. Decides to launch the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and to
inaugurate the activities thereof on 10 December 1973,
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
2. Invites therefore the Economic and Socia~ Council to request the Commission on Human Rights to
give the highest priority to the consideration of the
draft programme for the Decade and to submit it to
the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session for
final consideration.
2085th plenary meeting
15 November 1972
2920 (XXVII). Exploitation of labour throu~h
illicit and clandestine traffi('king

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination,3
Recalling the provisions of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1706 (LUI) of 28 July 1972 concerning illicit trafficking in foreign labour,
Noting that some States have acceded to the Conv~ntion concerning Migration for Employment (ReVIsed 1949),4 adopted by the International Labour
Conference at its thirty-second session,
Noting with interest resolution IV of 27 June 1972,
adopted by the International Labour Conference at its
fifty-seventh session, concerning conditions and equality
of treatment of migrant workers,
Deeply concerned by the de facto discrimination of
which foreign workers are the victims in certain countries of Europe and of other continents, despite the
efforts . ma~e by certain Governments, particularly at
the legIslatIve .level, to prevent and repress it,
1. Calls upon the Governments of the above-mentioned countries to take or supervise the application of
measures to put an end to the discriminatory treatment
of which migrant workers in their territory are the
victims and particularly to ensure the improvement of
arrangements for receiving such workers;
2. Invites all Governments to ensure respect for
the provisions of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
2 A/8805, annex.
3 Resolution 2106 A (XX).
4 International Labour Organisation, Conventions and Recommendations, 1919-1966 (Geneva, 1966), Convention No. 97,
p.743.

63

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Recommends that the Commission on Human
Rights should consider the question of the exploitation
of labour through illicit and clandestine trafficking at
its next session, as provided in Economic and Social
Council resolution 1706 (LIII), as a matter of priority;
4. Invites the International Labour Organisation to
continue the studies it has begun on illicit trafficking
in foreign labour, which is a form of exploitation, and
to strengthen international machinery for the protection
of migrant workers;
5. Urges the Governments which have not yet done
so to give high priority to the ratification of the Convention of the International Labour Organisation concerning Migration for Employment (Revised 1949),
in the context of their efforts to eliminate illicit trafficking in foreign labour.
2085th plenary meeting
15 November 1972

2921 (XXVII). Report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on the third year
of its activities. 5 submitted under article 9, paragraph 2, of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,G
1. Takes note of the report of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
2. Urgently requests all States which are not yet
parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination to ratify
or accede to the Convention, if possible by 10 December 1973, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
3. Welcomes the adoption of the new procedure
for the consideration of reports submitted by States
parties under article 9 of the Convention, which includes an invitation to States parties to be present at,
and take part in. the Committee's discussions when
their reports are under consideration, as suggested in
paragraphs 5 and 6 of General Assembly resolution
2783 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971.
2085th plenary meeting
15 November 1972

2922 (XXVII). Draft Convention nn the Suppres,don and Punishment of the Crime of

AlJarlheid
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2786 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971,
Reaffirming its firm conviction that apartheid constitutes a total negation of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and is a crime
against humanity,
Recognizing the urgent need to take further effective
measures with a view to the suppression and punishment of apartheid,
5 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session. Supplement No. 18 (A/87J8).
6 Resolution 2J06 A (XX).

Reaffirming again that the conclusion of an international convention on the suppression and punishment
of the crime of apartheid would bc an important contribution to the struggle against apartheid, racism, economic exploitation, colonial domination and foreign
occupation,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts made in order
to elaborate an international document on the suppression and punishment of the crime of apartheid,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Special Committee on Apartheid and to States the
revised draft Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid7 and the amendments theret0 8 for their comments and views;
2. I nvites the Economic and Social Council to
request the Commission on Human Rights at its twentyninth session to consider as a priority item the revised
draft Convention on the Suppression and Punishment
of the Crime of Apartheid and the amendments thereto,
and to submit the results of its consideration thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.
2085th plelUlry meeting
15 November 1972

2955 (XXVII).
Importance of the universal
realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination and of the speedy granting
of independence to colonial (~ountries aud
peoples for the effective guarantee and ob·
"ervancc of human rights

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Importance of
the universal realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination and of the speedy granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples for the effective
guarantee and observance of human rights",
Recalling resolution 2787 (XXVI) of 6 December
1971, in which the General Assembly urged the
Security Council as well as States Members of the
United Nations or members of specialized agencies to
take effective steps to ensure the implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all peoples under
colonial and alien domination to self-determination,
freedom and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of ]4 December 1960, and with
Assembly resolutions 2649 (XXV) of 30 November
]970 and 2787 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971,
Disturbed at the continued reluctance of the colonial
and racist Powers, such as Portugal and South Africa,
to recognize and to apply the right to self-determination and independence for the peoples of the Territories
under their control,
Deep1y concerned at the negative attitude of certain
Member States to the implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty.seventh
Session. Annexes, agenda item 50, document A/8880, para. 42.
SIbid., para. 43.

(;cneral Asscmbly-Twcnty-scvcllth Session

64

Assembly on decolonization, racism and self-determination,
Strongly deploring the intensification of armed repre!lsion and wanton slaughter of pcoples under colonial and alien domination and acts of aggression
committed by colonialists and alien forces against a
number of sovereign States and peoples struggling for
their self-determination, which obstruct the full enjoyment of human rights,
Noting the urgent need, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, for providing maximum material, humanitarian and moral
assistance to the peoples of the liberated areas, colonial
territories and territories under alien subjugation,
1. Reaffirms the right of all peoples, notably of
those mentioned in General Assembly resolution 2787
(XXVI), to self-determination, freedom and independence, as well as the legitimacy of their struggle for
liberation from colonial and alien domination and
foreign subjugation by an available means consistent
with the Charter and the resolutions of the United
Nations;
2. Strongly condemns all those Governments, particularly the Governments of Portugal and South Africa,
which persistently refuse to implement General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other pertinent resolutions;
3. Strongly condemns the policies of those States
members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
and other Powers which assist Portugal and other
racist regimes in Africa and elsewhere in their suppression of peoples' aspirations for, and enjoyment of,
human rights;
4. Decides to examine concrete wavs and means of
extending maximum humanitarian and material assistance to the peoples of the liberated areas, colonial
territories and territories under alien subjugation;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session, indicating the present scope and nature of
assistance being provided to colonial countries and
peoples, as well as those in the liberated areas, from
relevant existing voluntary funds and other forms of
assistance by relevant organs of the United Nations,
the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, regional intergovernmental organizations and relevant non-governmental organizations after
consultation with the Council Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations, in order to assist in the
examination of areas and of ways and means of further
promoting humanitarian and material assistance, account being taken of the need for co-ordination;
6. Invites the aforementioned organizations to cooperate with the Secretary-General in the implementation of paragraph 5 above.
2107th plenary meeting
12 December 1972

2956 (XXVII). Report of the United Nations
I1i;dl Commil"sioner for Refu1!l'eii

A
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Vnited Nations

High Commissioner for Refugees concerning his current
activities 9 and having heard his statement,IO
Commending the results obtained by the High COnlmissioner in the accomplishment of his humanit~lfian
task of providing internation:Jl protection to refugees
withlll his mandate and promoting permanent solutions
to their problems,
Noting with appreciation the manner in which the
High Commissioner has, at the request of the SecretaryGeneral and in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly, co-ordinated, or participated in, essential
humanitarian actions undertaken by the organiz:ltions
in the United Nations system,
Recognizing the importance of voluntary repatriatil1n
as a permanent solution to the refugee problem and
the useful role that United Nations bodies and nongovernmental agencies have been playing in facilitating
the rehabilitation of groups of refugees who have voluntarily returned to their countries of origin.
Considering the increasing and fruitful co-operation
between the High Commissioner and other memh'l"
of the United Nations svstem in the field of rural sCIlk-ment, education and training of refugees, particularly
in Africa, which results in better co-ordination of action
and greater efficiency,
Noting with satisfactioll the increasing number of
Governments contributing to the High Commissioner's
assistance programme and the substantial increase in
some of those contributions,
Commending the growing number of accessions to
the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of
195]11 and the Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees of 1967,1~
1. Expresses its deep satisfaction at the emcient
manner in which the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff continue to accomplish their humanitarian task;
2. Requests the High Commissioner to continue to
participate, at the invitation of the Secretary-General,
in those humanitarian endeavours of the United Nations for which his Officc has particular expertise and
experience;
3. Requests the High Commissioner to pursue his
efforts, in co-operation with Governments, United Nations bodies and voluntary agencies, to promote permanent and speedy solutions to the problems of
refugecs who are his concern through voluntary repatriation, integration in countries of asylum or res~,tt1c­
ment in other countries;
4. Requests the High Commissioner tLl continue to
provide international protection and assistance to refugees who are his concern, in accordanel' with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assemblv and the
directives of the Exccutive Committee of' the High
Commissioner's Programme;
5. Urges Governmcnts to continue to [end their support to the High Commissioner's humanitarian action
by:
(a) Facilitating his e/Torts in the tleld of international protection;
Twcllt."-sclcntli
Session. Supplell/ent
Xo.
I~
" Ibid.,
(A/8712) and Supplement No. 12A (A/8712/Add.l).
10 I bid., Twenty-seventh S~ssion, Third Committee, 1954th
meeting.
11 United Nations, Treaty Series. vol. 189, No. 2545, p. 137.
12jbid., vol. 606. No. 8791, p. 2(,7.

-

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
~----~~----

(b) Co-operating in the promotion of permanent
solutions to refugee problems;
(c) Providing the necessary means to attain the
financial targets established with the approval of the
Executive Committee.
2 J07th plenary meeting
12 December 1972

B

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the recommendation of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme, as mentioned in paragraph 169 of the report
of the Cnited Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,13
1. Decides that the Emergency Fund established
under General Assembly resolution 1166 (XII) of 26
November 1957 shall henceforth be maintained at its
ceiling of $500,000 by replenishments from the Working Capital and Guarantee Fund and by voluntary
contributions made for that purpose;
2. A IIthorizes the Onited Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to allocate from the Emergency
Fund, under the general directives of the Executive
Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme, up
to $1 million annually for emergency situations, it
being understood that the amount made available for
one single emergency shall not exceed $500,000 in any
one year.
2107th plenary meeting
12 December 1972

~-

- ---~--~~._---

65

High Commissioner with a view to determining whether
the Ofllce should be continued beyond 31 December
1978.
2107th plenary meeting
12 DCCPlI1her 1972
2958 (XXVII).

As"istml(~e to

rt,tllrllillg

fI'OIIl

SudalH'''c rcfll~ees
ahroaf)

The General Assembly,
Having heard the statement of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees,lr.
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1655 (UI) of 1 June 1972 and 1705 (LlII) of 27
July 1972,
1. Notes with appreciatio!t the efforts of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan in
the peaceful settlement of the southern Sudan question;
2. Commends the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for his efficient role in the coordination of relief and resettlement operations of
refugees and other displaced persons;
3, ReafJirms Economic and Social Council resolutions 1655 (LlI) and 1705 (LlII) in which the Council, inter alia, urgcd the organizations associated with
the United Nations and all Governments to render the
maximum possible assistance to the Government of
the Sudan in the relief, rchabilitation and resettlement
of Sudanese refugees coming from ahroad and other
displaced persons.
2107th plenary meeting
J:; J)ccl'fllber 1972

2957 (X-XVII).

Continuation of the Office of
the Vnited Nation., ni~h Commissioner
for Refu~t'e"

The General A ,\'I'emb(v,
Noting the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,14
Recalling its resolution 2294 (XXII) of II December 1967, in which it decided to review, not later
than at its twenty-seven th session, the arrangements
for the Office of' the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees with a view to determining whether
the Ofllce should he continued beyond 31 December
1973,
Rf'cngnhllg the continuing nccd for international
action on behalf of refugees,
Considering the valuahle work which has been performed bv the Office of the High Commissioner in
providing -international protection~ to refugees and in
promoting permanent solutions to their problems,
Notillt.? 1I'ith appr~ciation the effective manner in
which the Office or the High Commissioner has been
dealing with special emergencies.
1. Decides to continue the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for a further
period of five vear'- from I Jallllary 1974;
2. Decides to review, not later than ;1t its thirtysecond session. the nr r i1lll!ern('nts for the Office of the
1~ Offici,,1 R~eords nf thr General A ssemhly , Twenty-sel'emll

Session, S"l'l'lemcllt No, /l (A/8712).
14 Ibid.SI/l'plement No 7! (1\/8712) and Supplement No.
12,1 (AlP"'!" ''''Id.l)

2959 (XXVII).

A"l'istaJlf'e in cast's of natural
disaPlter anll otlwr (Ji"a"tt'r situations

The General Assembly,
Recalling previous resolutions of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council relating to
disaster relief, in particular Assembly resolution 2816
(XXVI) of 14 December 1971,
Taking 110te witll appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on assistance in cases of natural
disaster and other disaster situations,lft and having heard
the introductory statement made by the Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator before the Third Committee,l,
Noting with appreciation the action already taken
by the Disaster RelicI' Co-ordinator since the establishment of his OlTIce,
Rea{/7rmillg the vital importance, in order to lessen
the impact of disasters, of assistance to disaster-prone
countries in prevcntive mcasmes, disaster contingency
planning and preparedness,
Considering that the Disaster Relief Co-ordinator
should continue to explorc ways of strengthening and
developing national contingency plans and m;lchinery
for disaster relief co-ordination at the national level
and that. therefore, he should be provided with the
means and resomces necessary for him to carry out his
:Jctii ,n in this area of dis;!qer prepared ness,
l:'"i/bid.,
meet i ng,

TlI't'fl!Y·\t"lIUfl:

,\>\"\ir'Jl. Third ('(In/1f1iltee,

195..fth

16 A/8854.
1, Oljicia! R('('oJ'd\~ of (1./' (;,.f/rral A.f\('m"". Th·<'l/ll·~JI'1'etll1r
S<",Sq·llr~. Third ("(I."I"lif r', l l159th mc('tin1!.

66

General Assembly-Twenty.seventh Session

1. Decides, as an interim measure, to authorize the
Secretary-General to draw on the Working Capital Fund
in the amount of $25,000 in 1973 for assistance to Governments, at their request, in co-operation with the organizations of the United Nations system and the League
of Red Cross Societies, where appropriate, in the
elaboration of national preparations to meet natural
disasters;
2. Calls upon the Secretary-General to explore
various means, including support through the United
Nations Development Programme, of making adequate
provision subsequently for this purpose and to report
on this matter to the General Assembly at its twentyeighth session.
2I07th plenary meeting
12 December 1972

3009 (XXVII). Employment of women in senior
and other professional positions by the
secretariats of organizations in the United
Nations system

The General Assembly,
Recalling the declarations and instruments adopted
by the United Nations acknowledging the equality of
status of men and women-inter alia, the Charter of
the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,18 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights18 and the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women l9-and also relevant instruments of the International Labour Organisation and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Recalling its resolution 2715 (XXV) of 15 December 1970, in which it requested the Secretary-General
to include in his report to the General Assembly on
the composition of the Secretariat data on the employment of women at senior and other professional levels,
including their numbers and the positions they occupy,
Noting with appreciation that the report of the Secretary-General on the composition of the Secretariat
submitted to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth
session20 included for the first time some information
on the employment of women, showing the number
of women and the level at which they were employed
in senior and professional positions within the secretariats of organizations in the United Nations system,
and that a further report has been submitted to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session21 which
likewise includes data on the employment of women,
Noting that, as at 30 June 1972, no women were
employed within the United Nations Secretariat at the
Under-Secretary-General or Assistant-Secretary-General level, that only three of the total of 59 employed
at the D-2 level were women, and that only four of
the total of 181 employed at the D-l level were
women,
Further noting that in the less senior and professional ranks of the Secretariat the percentage of women
is in inverse proportion to the level of the position,
18 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
19 Resolution 2263 (XXII).
20 A/8483.

21 A/8831 and Corr.! and Add.l.

ranging from 6.2 per cent of the staff at the P·5
level to 40.4 per cent at the P-l level in posts subject
to geographical distribution, and from 7.3 per cent
at the P-5 level to 39.8 per cent at the pol level for
the Secretariat as a whole,
Noting as well that in a11 the other organizations
in the United Nations common system there are no
women at the highest levels, only one woman employed
at the D-2 level and only 10 women at the D-l level,
1. Notes with satisfaction the recent appointment
by the Secretary-General of a woman to the rank of
Assistant Secretary-General and hopes that more women
will be appointed to positions at high levels of the
United Nations Secretariat;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
annual report to the General Assembly on the composition of the Secretariat more comprehensive data
on the employment of women in the secretariats of
the organizations in the United Nations system, so as
to show the nature of posts and types of duties performed by women at the professional and policy-making
levels;
3. Urges once again the organizations in the United
Nations system to take or continue to take appropriate
measures, including more extensive publk:izing of the
right of individuals personally to apply for vacant
positions, in order to ensure equal opportunities for
the employment of qualified women at the senior and
professional levels and in policy-making positions;
. 4. Calls upon Member States, when proposing natlO~a.ls for. appointment to the senior and professionnl
posItIons III the secretariats of the organizations in
the United Nations system, to give full c~nsideration to
submitting the candidatures of qualified women for all
positions, particularly at the policy-making level.

2113th plenary meethlR
18 Deccmher 1972
3010 (XXVII).

International WOJl!l>n's Yt'nr

The General Assembly,
Considering that twenty-five years have elapsed since
the first session of the Commission on the Status of
Women was held at Lake Success, New York, from
10 to 24 February 1947, and that this is a period
which makes it possible to take stock of the positive
results obtained,
Bearing in mind the aims and principles of the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women, adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 2263 (XXII) of 7 November 1967,
Recognizing the effectiveness of the work done by
the Commission on the Status of Women in the twentyfive ~ear~ since. its establishment, and the important
contnbutlon whIch women have made to the social
political, economic and cultural life of their countries:
Considering that it is necessary to strengthen universal recognition of the principle of the equality of
men and women, de jure and de facto, and that both
legal and ~ocial measures have to be taken by Member
States whIch have not yet done so to ensure the implementation of women's rights,
Recalling that its resolution 2626 (XXV) of 24
October 1970, containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Develop-

67

Resolutions adopted on the report. of the Third Committee

ment Decade, includes among the goals and objectives
of the Decade the encouragement of the full integration of women in the total development effort.
Drawing attention to .the general objectives and
minimum targets to be attained in the course of the
Second United Nations Development Decade, as defined by the Commission on the Status of Women
and adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 2716 (XXV) of 15 December 1970,
Considering that, with those ends in view, the proclamation of an international women's year would
serve to intensify the action required to advance the
status of women,
1. Proclaims the year 1975 International Women's
Year;
2. Decides to devote this year to intensified action:
(a) To promote equality between men and women;
(b) To ensure the full integration of women in the
total development effort, especially by emphasizing
women's responsibility and important role in economic,
social and cultural development at the national, regional and international levels, particularly during the
Second United Nations Development Decade;
(c) To recognize the importance of women's increasing contribution to the development of friendly
relations and co-operation among States and to the
strengthening of world peace;
3. Invites all Member States and all interested organizations to take steps to ensure the full realization
of the rights of women and their advancement on the
basis of the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women;
4. Invites Governments that have not yet done so
to ratify as soon as possible the Convention concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women Workers
for Work of Equal Value, 1951,22 adopted by the
International Labour Conference at its thirty-fourth
session;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, in
consultation with Member States, specialized agencies and interested non-governmental organizations,
within the limits of existing resources, a draft programme for the International Women's Year and to submit it to the Commission on the Status of Women at
its twenty-fifth session in 1974.
2I 13th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
30ll (XXVII).

Capital punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2393 (XXIII) of 26 November 1968 and 2857 (XXVI) of 20 December
1971,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1656 (LII) of 1 June 1972,
Noting with interest that, in implementation of the
aforementioned resolutions, additional information on
capital punishment has been provided by several Member States,%!
22 International Labour Organisation, Conventions and Recommendations, 1919-1966 (Geneva, 1966), Convention No.
100, p. 795.
23 ST/SOA/118 and Add.1.

1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare the
report to be submitted to the Economic and Social
Council at its fifty-fourth session in such a way as to
update the reports on capital punishmentU provided in
1962 and 1967 and to inform the Council of the progress made in collecting the information requested in
paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 2857
(XXVI);
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council to consider at its fifty-fourth session the present situation
and trends with regard to capital punishment.

2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3012 (XXVU).

Assistance in narcotics control

The General Assembly,
Recalling that assistance to developing countries is
a concrete manifestation of the will of the international community to honour the commitment contained
in the Charter of the United Nations to promote the
social and economic progress of all peoples,
Recalling the special arrangements made by the General Assembly under its resolution 1395 (XIV) of
20 November 1959 with a view to the provision of
technical assistance in narcotics control,
Reaffirming its resolution 2719 (XXV) of 15 December 1970, in which it welcomed the establishment
of the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control,
Further recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1664 (LII) of 1 June 1972, in which the
Council urged States, institutions and individuals to
contribute to the Fund in any form and according to
their capacity,
1. Welcomes the fact that the Economic and Social
Council expressed satisfaction with the successful result of the United Nations Conference to Consider
Amendments to the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961, particularly that a new article 14 bis2f>
was adopted concerning technical and financial assistance to promote more effective execution of the
provisions of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs,
1961;26
2. Declares that, to be more effective, the measures
to fight drug abuse must be co-ordinated and universal;
3. Declares further that the fulfilment by the developing countries of their obligations under the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, calls for adequate technical and financial assistance from the international community.
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3013 (XXVII). International instruments
relating to drug abu8e control

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1658 (LII) and 1665 (LII) of 1 June 1972,
24 Capital Punishment (United Nations publication, Sales
No.: E.67.1V.lS).
all See E/CONF.63/8, p. 10.
U United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 7515, p. 151.

General Assembly-Twenty-sevenlh Session

68

Deeply concerned over the threat to human dignity
and to society posed by the flow of illicit drugs,
Gratified by the adoption by international conferences of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances27
and the Protocol Amending the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs, 1961,28
Convinced that the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances would result in the necessary international
regulation of these substances,
Further convinced of the importance of the Protocol in strengthening the enforcement provisions of
the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,29
Calls upon all States, provided they have not already done so, to adhere to:
(a) The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs,

1961;
(b) The Protocol Amending the Single Convention
on Narcotic Drugs, 1961;
(c) The Convention on Psychotropic Substances.

2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3014 (XXVII). United Nations programme for
drug abuse control

The General Assembly,
Noting that drug abuse is a continuing problem in
many parts of the world,
Encouraged by the growing interest of Governments in dealing with drug abuse,
1. Welcomes the expanded operations of the United
Nations programme for drug abuse control, and especially the efforts made by the Division of Narcotic
Drugs of the Secretariat in the field of drug abuse
control;
2. Recognizes the importance of the United Nations
programme of action based on short-term and 10ngterm policy, as approved by the General Assembly in
resolution 2719 (XXV) of 15 December 1970, and
affirms the need for more effective and extensive efforts by the United Nations system;
3. Appeals consequently to Governments for sustained support and voluntary contributions to the United
Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control, in any form
and according to their capacity;
4. Invites the Division of Narcotic Drugs, the
specialized agencies and other interested intergovernmental organizations to co-operate fully in the United
Nations programme of action;
5. Further invites the specialized agencies and other
interested intergovernmental organizations to pay
special attention, in the formulation of their own programmes relating to the socia-economic consequences
of drug abuse, to appropriate means of combating this
abuse.
2113 th plenary meetinJ?
18 December 1972
27 E/CONF.58/6 and Corr.t and 2.

28 E/CONF.63/8.

"II United Nations,

Treaty Suies, vol. 520, No. 751 'i, P 151.

3020 (XXVII). Principles of international cooperation in the detection, arrest, extradition amI punishment of persons guilty of
war {'rimes and crimes against humanity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2840 (XXVI) of 18 December 1971 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1691 (LII) of 2 June 1972 concerning the
need to fonnulate principles of international co-operation in the detection, arrest, extradition and punishment of persons guilty of war crimes and crimes
against humanity,
Convinced that the effective punishment of war
crimes and crimes against humanity is an important
element in preventing such crimes and putting an end
to them, as well as ensuring better protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms and promoting cooperation between peoples and international peace and
security,
1. Takes note of the draft principles submitted
to the Third Committee at the current session;110
2. Decides to transmit the above-mentioned draft
principles for further elaboration to the Commission
on Human Rights, together with the records of the
meetings at which the Third Committee debated this
item during the current session;
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
submit to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session, through the Economic and Social Council,
draft principles of international co-operation in the detection, arrest, extradition and punishment of persons
guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Principles
of international co-operation in the detection, arrest,
extradition and punishment of persons guilty of war
crimes and crimes against humanity".
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

302] (XXVII). Crime prevention and ('ontrol

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned by the increasing seriousness and
proportions of the prohlem of crime in many parts of
the world.
Conscious of the threat that crime in its various
forms presents to economic, social and cultural development and to man's quality of life,
Bearing in mind the call of the international community for more effective United Nations action in
crime prevention,
Recalling the Declaration on Social Progress and
Dcv{~lopmcnt,:l1 which stipulates that social progress
and development shall aim equally at the progressive
attainment, inter alia, of the main goal of the provision of social defence measures and the C'limination
(If conditions leading to crime and delinquency. especially j!l\ ,'nile (:clinquency,
:l() Official Records of the General Assllmbly. Twenty-seventh
Session. Annexes, agenda item 52, document A '8939, para 7.
BI Resolution 2542 (XXlV).

Resolutions adopted on the reports of thc Third Committce

Reaffirming Economic and Social Council resolution
1584 (L) of 21 May 1971 on criminality and social
change,
Commending the establishment of the Committee
on Crime Prevention and Control and the first report
of that Committee,:!2
Recognizing the right of each State to formulate
and implement, in accordance with its own conditions
and national requirements, the policies and measures
necessary to prevent crime and control delinquency,
Noting with appreciation the note by the SecretaryGeneral on crime prevention and control,:!:!
]. Endorses the conclusions of the Fourth United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders, held at Kyoto, Japan, from
17 to 26 August 1970,34 and the recommendations of
the Advisory Committee of Experts on the Prevention
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,35 which met
after the Congress;
2. Endorses in particular the recommendation of
the Congress concerning meetings, seminars, training
courses and workshops of experts, at regional and
international levels, for the exchange of information,
knowledge, experience and expertise in the field of
crime prevention and control, taking full advantage of
the programme of advisory services of the United
Nations;
3. Supports the recommendations in the Declaration unanimously adopted by the Fourth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders, which emphasizes, among
other things, the need for strengthening international
co-operation in crime prevention and control;36
4. Invites Member States to inform the SecretaryGeneral of the situation concerning crime prevention
and control in their own countries and the measures
being taken to provide information, not later than the
end of 1974, for a final report to the General Assembly
at its thirty-first session;
5. Urges Governments, organs of the United Nations, the specialized agencies and other international
organizations concerned to strengthen international cooperation in crime prevention and, in particular, to
ensure the availability of effective technical aid to
countries desiring such assistance for the formulation
and adoption of policies, programmes and measures
for the prevention and control of crime and delinquency;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ascertain from
Member States their views concerning the advisability
of holding an international conference of ministers
responsible for social defence or relevant ministers
to review problems of crime prevention and control
and to identify methods of prevention and control
at the international level;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to take
the necessary measures for the preparation of the
Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders;
;l2E/519I.
33 A/8844.
:1\ Fourth United Natiolls Congress 011 the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.71.IV.8).
35 See E/CN.5/457.
36 The text of the Declaration is contained in the annex to
Economic and Social Council resolution 1584 (L).

69

8. Instructs the Committee on Crime Prevention
and Control to submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session, through the Economic
and Social Council, on the methods and ways likely
to be most effective in preventing crime and improving the treatment of offenders, including recommendations on the measures most appropriate in such areas
as law enforcement, judicial procedures and correctional practices;
9. Decides to consider this question at its twentyeighth session, taking into account action by the Commission on Social Development and the Economic
and Social Council.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3022 (XXVII). Channels of communication with
youth and international youth organizations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2037 (XX) of 7 December
1965', 2497 (XXIV) of 28 October 1969, 2633
(XXV) of 11 November 1970, 2659 (XXV) of
7 December 1970 and 2770 (XXVI) of 22 November
1971,
Welcoming the increasing and active awareness of
young people of their potential contribution to the
building of a better society, which requires that they
be more fully integrated into the political, economic
and social life of their countries,
Convinced that youth has an important role to
play in promoting the purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations and the objectives of peace, international security and co-operation among nations, social
and economic progress and universal respect for human
rights,
Emphasizing the responsibility of society to educate
youth in a spirit of national and international service,
as well as the responsibility of youth towards society,
Noting that the existing methods of communication
and co-operation between the United Nations and
youth and youth organizations could be improved
in order to meet the needs and aspirations of youth,
Aware of the need to increase the role of the United
Nations in developing contacts and communications
among national and international youth organizations,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the SecretaryGeneral's report on channels of communication with
youth and international youth organizations;37
2. Endorses the conclusion expressed in the report
that the United Nations should pay particular attention
in the future to involving youth in programmes of national development and international co-operation as
well as in the activities of the United Nations;
3. Encourages the Seoretary-General to continue to
utilize existing channels of communication with youth
and national and international youth organizations and
to seek to establish new channels;
4. Recommends that the Secretary-General evaluate
existing United Nations programmes and projects in
order to enable youth to participate fully at appropriate
levels of policy formulation and project implementation
and evaluation;
5. Recommends further that the Secretary-General
should take appropriate administrative action, with the
37 A/8743.

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

70

means and personnel available, to co~ordinate activities
of the United Nations system in which youth may participate;
6. Expresses its appreciation of the recommendations submitted by the Secretary~General in his report;38
7. Approves the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to convene an Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Youth to advise him on activities that should be undertaken by the United Nations to meet the needs and
aspirations of youth, including the following:
(a) Concrete measures for the implementation of
the proposals contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral;
(b) Assistance to Governments and United Nations
organs, especially the regional economic commissions,
to prepare systematic programmes and series of projects
to increase the involvement of youth in national development and in the promotion of human rights, with
particular reference to the implementation of the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade;39
(c) Exchanges among bodies having special social
and scientific knowledge of, and competence in, concerns related to youth, with a view to sharing their experience in matters regarding the needs and aspirations
of young people
(d) Elaboration of programmes for seminars and
symposia on youth within the framework of the programme of advisory services of the United Nations;
8. Considers that the United Nations University40
will serve as one of the important channels of communication with youth and will provide a free forum
for the teaching and for the discussion among young
people of subjects relating to international law, human
dignity and human rights, and also to the role of youth
in promoting economic and social progress, world
peace, understanding and co-operation among peoples;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
conclusions and recommendations of the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group On Youth, with his comments, to the
Economic and Social Council at its fifty-sixth session,
which is to consider, among other things, the continuation of the Group;
10. Decides to re-examine when necessary, but
not later than at its thirtieth session, the question of
channels of communication with youth and youth organizations;
11. Decides to examine at its twenty-eighth session
the report of the Secretary-General on the world social
situation of youth, to be submitted in accordance with
Economic and Social Council resolution 1407 (XLVI)
of 5 June 1969.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3023 (XXVII). Implementation of the Dedaration on the Promotion among Youth of the
Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding between Peoples

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2037 (XX) of 7 December
1965, 2445 (XXIII) and 2447 (XXIII) of 19 De38 Ibid., paras. 35-42.
39 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
40 See resolution 2951

(XXVII).

cember 1968, 2497 (XXIV) of 28 October 1969 and
2770 (XXVI) of 22 November 1971, regarding the
education of youth in the spirit of the ideals of peace,
mutual understanding between peoples and universal
respect for human rights,
Reaffirming the principles inscribed in the Declaration on the Promotion among Youth of the Ideals of
Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding between
Peoples,41 and the importance of their universal implementation,
Aware that the education of youth in the spirit of
the ideals of peace, mutual understanding between peoples and universal respect for human rights must be
accomplished by measures to encourage youth to participate actively in all spheres of social life,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General 42 regarding the implementation of
the Declaration on the Promotion among Youth of the
Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding
between Peoples;
2. Requests Member States, the United Nations
organs concerned and the specialized agencies to give
greater attention to the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration, especially when establishing
their policy and programmes regarding youth;
3. Addresses a solemn appeal to all States, as well
as to international governmental and non-governmental
organizations having consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, to take appropriate action,
to foster among youth respect for all peoples, irrespective of nationality, race, sex or religion, regard
for human values, and devotion to the ideals of peace,
freedom and progress and to the cause of human
rights;
4. Decides to examine periodically the implementation of the principles of the Declaration on the basis
of further reports submitted by the Secretary-General,
containing such comments and information as he may
receive.
2114tlz plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3024 (XXVII). Increased employment and mobility of young people in the United Nation!!

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2736 (XXV) of 17 December 1970, in which it expressed the need for special
efforts to be made to recruit qualified young men and
women for service with the United Nations through
the development of more objective selection methods,
Noting with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General on channels of communication with
youth and international youth organizations,43
Noting the reference made in the report to the need
for action to encourage and assist youth to play a
greater role in the analysis and solution of problems
affecting all people,44
41 Resolution 2037 (XX).
42 A/8782 and Add.1-3.
43 A/8743.

44 Ibid., para. 18.

71

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Noting also the reference made in the report to
the need to open up the Organization to young people
and to ensure their participation in the planning, implementation and evaluation of United Nations policies
and programmes, 4~
Noting further the reference made in the report
to the fact that only 4.6 per cent of the United Nations professional staff is under 30 years of age,46
1. Endorses the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral that the guidelines for the recruitment of young
staff members to the United Nations Secretariat contained in General Assembly resolution 2736 (XXV)
should be fully implemented;47
2. Requests the Secretary-General to broaden effectively by all available means the base of employment for qualified youth, with equitable geographical
distribution and taking into account the need to secure
the highest standards of efficiency, competence and
integrity;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly, not later than at its thirtieth
session, a progress report on the extent of increased
employment and mobility of young people in the
United Nations, particularly by the opening of specific opportunities whereby communication would best be
realized through participation.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3025 (XXVII). Status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights

The General Assembly,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights,48
Recalling the recommendation addressed to Member States in its resolution 2788 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971, in particular its belief that the coming
into force of the International Covenants on Human
Rights and the Optional Protocol will greatly enhance
the ability of the United Nations to promote and
encourage respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion, and will contribute to the attainment of the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations,
Expresses the hope that Member States will find it
possible to take appropriate action with a view to
accelerating the steps that would enable them to deposit
their instrument of ratification or accession if possible
by 10 December 1973.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
45 Ibid., para. 31.

46 A/8743, annex, para. 51.
47 A/8743, para. 39 (d).
48A/8788.

3026 (XXVII). Human rights and scientific and
technological developments
A

The General Assembly,
Considering that mankind has reached a point where
the acceleration of scientific and technological progress may, depending on its use, either be conducive
to the enhancement and dissemination of artistic and
cultural values, constituting part of the heritage of
mankind, or add to the risk of debasing them,
Conscious of the irreplaceable character of the
cultural environment, which will acquire increasing
importance with the progress of economic and social
development,
Fearing that the world may be impoverished by
succumbing to uniformity and monotony in modes of
life,
Considering that now is the time, before the trend
becomes irreversible, for mankind to save the wealth
and diversity of its cultures and to secure the best
possible conditions for their further development,
1. Invites Governments to make provision, as far
as possible, in their national development plans and
programmes for the preservation and development of
cultural values;
2. Requests the Director-General of the United
~ations Educati<;mal, Scientific and Cultural Organizahon to commumcate to the General Assembly, at its
twenty-eighth session, his views on the problem of the
preservation and further development of cultural
values, on the measures already taken by the international community and on further measures that should
be taken;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the Commission on Human Rights to attach to the
above problem the importance it requires.
2114tlz plenary meeting
18 December 1972

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2450 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 and 2721 (XXV) of 15 December 1970
on human rights and scientific and technological developments,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution
10 (XXVII) of 18 March 1971,49
Expressi!1 g. its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for hiS prelimmary reports on this matter,lIO
Noting with appreciation the report of the Seminar
on Human Rights and Scientific and Technological
Developments 51 organized by the Government of Austria and held at Vienna in J ~.me 1972 which con!ributed considerably to the exploration' of this subJect,
Reaffirming the importance of this matter and the
need to respond urgently to the demand of world publie opinion,
49 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fiftieth Session, Supplement No.4 (E/4949), chap. XIX.
~o E/CN.4/l028 and Add.l and 2, Add.3 and Corr.l,
AddA-6; E/CNA/1084.
51 ST/TAO/HR/45.

72

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

1. Recognizes that the scope of the problem mentioned in paragraph 1 (d) of General Assembly resolution 2450 (XXIII) and Commission on Human
Rights resolution 10 (XXVII) is of such a comprehensive nature as to cover every aspect of this question;
2. Recognizes further the net:d to make a distinction between this subject-matter and other related
matters so as to avoid duplication of work in the United
Nations system;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the specialized agencies concerned, particularly the International Labour Organisation, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Health Organization and the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, to accelerate and complete preparation of
relevant reports on this subject, to be submitted at the
earliest possible date, paying more attention to the
problems of an equitable and just distribution of incomes, the protection of the right to work and to
health, the preparation and retraining of personnel, the
raising of standards of living and the educational and
cultural level of people in the light of scientific and
technological developments;
4. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
proceed with and accelerate its work, making full use
of the reports of the Secretary-General, the report of
the above-mentioned seminar and of any future seminars on the same subject, and any relevant reports
by other institutions, with a view, in particular, to
examining the possibility of preparing draft instruments
designed to strengthen respect for human rights proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
in the light of developments in science and technology;
5. Decides to continue consideration of this item
at its forthcoming sessions with a view to arriving at
conclusions on the item as early as possible.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3027 (XXVII). Elimination of all forms of
religious intolerance

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1781 (XVII) of 7 December 1962, 2020 (XX) of 1 November 1965 and
2295 (XXII) of 11 December 1967,
Affirming the equal importance of both a declaration and an international convention on the elimination of all forms of religious intolerance,
Convinced of the need to give new momentum to
this work by initially concentrating on the completion
of one of these instruments,
Noting that the consideration of this item has been
deferred at each session of the General Assembly
without proper discussion since the twenty-second
session,
1. Decides to accord priority to the completion of
the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Religious Intolerance before resuming consideration of
the International Convention on this subject;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
States Members of the United Nations or members of
specialized agencies:

(a) The preliminary draft of a United Nations
Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Religious Intolerance prepared by the Sub-Commission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities ;52
(b) The report of the Working Group set up by the
Commission on Human Rights at its twentieth session
to prepare a draft Declaration on the Elimination of
All Forms of Religious Intolerance;53
3. Invites Governments to transmit to the Secretary-General their observations on the abovementioned documents;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the
observations received, together with an analytical presentation, to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session;
5. Decides to give priority at its twenty-eighth session to the elaboration of a Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Religious Intolerance with a view
to the adoption, if possible, of such a Declaration as
part of the observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3028 (XXVII). United Nations conference for an
international convention on adoption law

The General Assembly,
Recalling the historical concern of the United
Nations for the problems of minors, as expressed in the
Declaration of the Rights of the Child,M
Realizing that children, in particular, suffer the most
in national disasters, wars and social disruption,
Considering that, owing to both the lack of legislation and the contrasts between the laws of various
countries, ever-increasing juridical and legal problems
arise which may affect the interests of minors or other
persons to be adopted,
Considering further the multiple causes which, in
our modern world, provoke the massive institutionalization of children, thus depriving millions of children
all over the world of the family atmosphere which is
indispensable for their development, and emphasizing
the very grave consequences, often irreparable, that
this implies for their physical, psychological and intellectual development and for their active social integratioo,
~
Mindful that children constitute the future human
resource for each and every nation of the world and
must, therefore, be nurtured and protected,
Regretting that it has been unable at its current
session, owing to the heavy programme of work, to
examine the question of a United Nations conference
for an international convention on adoption law,
Commending the World Conference on Adoption
and Foster Placement 55 for calling attention to the
52 A/8330, annex I. For the printed text, see Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Thirty-seventh Session, Supplement No.8 (E/3873), para. 294.
53 Ibid., annex 11. For the printed text. see Official Records
of the Economic and Social Council, Thirty-seventh Session,
Supplement No.8 (E/3873), para. 296.
M Resolution 1386 (XIV).
55 Held at Milan, Italy, from 16 to 19 September 1971.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

grave problems relating to adoption and foster placement,

(a) Policies, programmes and comparative law concerning the protection of children for adoption and
foster placement;
(b) Comments on the question of sponsoring an
international conference for the purpose of elaborating
an international convention on adoption law.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

Requests the Commission on Social Development
at its twenty-third session to consider this question and
to make recommendations, within the approved work
programme of the Social Development Division, for
the preparation of a report to the General Assembly at
its twenty-ninth session, which would include:

*

73

*

*

Other decisions
Protection of jonrnalists engaged in dangerous missions
in areas of armed conflict
(Item 49 (b»

At its 2107th plenary meeting, on 12 December 1972, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Third Committee,M decided to include the item
entitled "Human rights in armed conflicts: protection of journalists engaged in
dangerous missions in areas of armed conflict" in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session and to consider it as a matter of high priority.~7
Freedom of information
(Item 57)

At its 2114th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1972, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Third Committee,58 decided to include the
item entitled "Freedom of information" in the provisional agenda of its twentyeighth session.
116 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh Sestion, Annexes, agenda
item 49, document A/8917, para. 16.
41 Ibid., document A/L.689.
~8 Ibid., agenda item 57, document A/8943, para. 4.

GeM,al AUlmbly-Twenty-seventh Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FOURTH COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
R••"/..,,-

MtJt"-

Dat.'"

P.,.

14 November 1972
7 December 1972
7 December 1972
14 December 1972

75
77
78
79

63

14 DeceDlber 1972

80

67

14 December 1972

80

68 and
12

14 December 1972

81

69

14 December 1972

83

70
22

14 December 1972
14 December 1972

83
84

22
22
22

14 December 1972
14 December 1972
14 December 1972

85
86
86

22

64
64

14 December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972

87
87
88

22

18 December 1972

90

N".

Til'.

It....

2918 (XXVII)
2945 (XXVII)
2946 (XXVII)
2977 (XXVII)

Question of Territories under Portuguese administration (A/8889)
Question of Southern Rhodesia (A/8933)
.
Question of Southern Rhodesia (A/8933)
.
Papua New Guinea (A/8954)
.

65
66

2978 (XXVII)

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations (A/8956)

2979 (XXVII)

Activ·ities of foreign economic and other interests which are
impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Territories under PortUJ\le5e
domination and in all other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, tJptl1theid and racial
discrimination in southern Africa (A/8958)
.
Implementation of the Declaration on the Grantiq of Independence to Colonial Countries -and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated with the
United Nations (A/8959)
.

2980 (XXVII)

2981 (XXVII)
2982 (XXVII)
2983 (XXVII)
2984 (XXVII)

2985 (XXVII)
2986 (XXVII)
2987 (XXVII)
3030 (XXVII)
3031 (XXVII)

United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa (A/8960)
.
Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories (A/8961)
.
Question of Spanish Sahara (A/8955)
.
Question of American Samoa, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Bronei, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Guam, Montserrat, New Hebrides,
Pitcairn, St. Helena, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Turks and
Caicos Islands and United States Virgin Islands (A/8955)
.
Question of the Seychelles (Al8955)
.
Question of Niue and the Tokelau Islands (A/8955)
.
Question of Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, 51. Kttt.-NevisAnguilla, St. Lucia and 51. Vincent (A/8955)
.
United Nations Fund for Namibia (A/8957)
.
.
Question of Namibia (A/8957)

66
13 and
22

Other deei.ion.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples

2918 (XXVII). Que8tion of Territories under

Special Mission which visited the liberated areas of
Guinea (Bissau) in April 1972,Having examiMd the report of the Secretary-General concerning the present item,S
Having invited, in consultation with the Organization of African Unity and through it, representatives
of the !lationa} liberation movements of Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde and Mozambique to participate in an observer capacity in its consideration
of those Territories, and having heard the statements
of Mr. Amflcar Cabral, Secretary-General of the Partido Africano da Independbcia da Guin6 e Cabo

Portugue8e admini8tration

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Territories under
Portuguese domination,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, l including in particular the report of the
1 Official Records of the General .Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8723/Rev.l), chaps. n, III
and X.

21hid., chap. X, para. 36.

3 A/87.58 and Add.I.

75

76

General Asscmbly-Twenty-seventh Session

Verde,4 and Mr. Marcelino dos Santos, Vice-President of the Frente de Liberta~ao de M~ambique,5
Having heard the statements of the petitioners,6
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other
resolutions relating to the question of Territories under
Portuguese administration adopted by the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Special Committee,
Condemning the persistent refusal of the Government of Portugal to comply with the relevant provisions of the aforementioned resolutions of the United
Nations and, in particular, the continuation by Portuguese military forces of the indiscriminate bombing
of civilians, the wholesale destruction of villages and
property and the ruthless use of napalm and chemical
substances in Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde
and Mozambique, as well as the continued violations
of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of independent African States neighbouring Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde and Mozambique, which seriously disturb international peace and security,
Condemning the continued collaboration of Portugal, South Africa and the illegal racist minority
regime in Southern Rhodesia, designed to perpetuate
colonialist and racialist domination in the region, and
the persistent intervention against the peoples of
the Territories concerned by police and armed forces,
as well as mercenaries from South Africa and Southern
Rhodesia,
Taking note with appreciation of the concrete programmes of assistance to the national liberation movements of those Territories initiated by several Governments and by organizations within the United Nations system as well as a number of non-governmental
organizations,
Noting with satisfaction the progress towards national independence and freedom made by the national
liberation movements in those Territories, both through
their struggle and through reconstruction programmes,
particularly in the liberated areas of Guinea (Bissau)
by the Partido Africano da Independencia da Guine
e Cabo Verde, the sole and authentic representative
of the people of Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde,
1. Reaffirms ·the inalienable right of the peoples
of Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde and
Mozambique and other Territories under Portuguese
domination to self-determination and independence, as
recognized by the General Assembly in its resolution
1514 (XV), and the legitimacy of their struggle to
achieve that right;
2. Affirms that the national liberation movements of
Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde and Mozambique are the authentic representatives of the true
aspirations of the peoples of those Territories and
recommends that, pending the accession of those Territories to independence, all Governments, the specialized agencies and other orgalllizations within the
United Nations system and the United Nations bodies
4 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyseventh Session, Fourth Committee, 1986th meeting.
fj Ibid., 19871h meeting.
f>Ibid., 1980th and 1992nd meetings.

concerned should, when dealing with matters pertaining to the Territories, ensure the representation of
those Territories by the liberation movements concerned in an appropriate capacity and in consultation
with the Organization of African Unity;
3. Deems it imperative that negotiations should be
initiated at an early date between the Government of
Portugal and the national liberation movements referred
to above with a view to the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples with respect
to Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde and Mozambique, particularly in order to bring about as a
matter of priority:
(a) The immediate cessation by Portugal of its
colonial wars and all acts of repression against the
peoples of Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde
and Mozambique, the withdrawal of its military and
other forces and the elimination of all practices which
violate the inalienable rights of those populations, including the eviction and regrouping of the African
populations and the settlement of foreign immigrants
in the Territories;
( b) The just treatment of the freedom fighters of
Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde and Mozambique captured during the struggle for freedom
as prisoners of war, in accordance with the principles
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment
of Prisoners of War, of 12 August 1949,7 and in
compliance with the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949;8
4. Appeals to all Governments, the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system and non-governmental organizations
to render to the peoples of Angola, Guinea (Bissau)
and Cape Verde and Mozambique, in particular the
populations in the liberated areas of those Territories,
all the moral and material assistance necessary to
continue their struggle for the achievement of their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence;
5. Requests all Governments, particularly those
members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
which continue to render assistance to Portugal, to
withdraw any assistance that enables Portugal to prosecute the colonial war in Angola, Guinea (Bissau)
and Cape Verde and Mozambique, and to prevent
the sale or supply of weapons, military equipment and
material to the Government of Portugal, as well as
all supplies, equipment and material for the manufacture or maintenance of weapons and ammunition
that it uses to perpetuate its colonial domination in
Africa;
6. Calls upon all States to take forthwith all possible measures to put an end to any activities that
help to exploit the Territories under Portuguese domination and the peoples therein and to discourage their
nationals and bodies corporate under their jurisdiction from entering into any transactions or arrangements that contribute to Portugal's domination over
those Territories and impede the implementation of
the Deciaration with respect to them;
7. Recommends that, in the event of the non-compliance by the Government of Portugal with the pro7 United Nations, Treaty
8 Ibid., No. 973, p. 287.

Series, vol. 75, No. 972, p. 135.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

VISIOns of paragraph 3 above, the Security Council
should urgently consider taking all effective steps with
a view to securing the full and speedy implementation
of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and of
the related decisions of the Council;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the implementation of the present resolution, in particular
to provide such assistance as may be necessary with
respect to the negotiations referred to in paragraph
3 above, and to report thereon, as appropriate, to the
General Assembly and the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
9. Commends the Special Committee for the work
it has accomplished during the year, particularly
through the dispatch of the Special Mission to Guinea
(Bissau), and requests it to continue to seek the best
ways and means of effectively assisting in the achievement by the peoples of the Territories under Portuguese domination of the goals set forth in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and the Charter of the United
Nations.
2084th plenary meeting
14 November 1972
2945 (XXVII).

Question of Southern Rhodesia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe),
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,1)
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on this item,IO
Having invited, in consultation with the Organization of African Unity and through it, representatives
of the national liberation movements of Zimbabwe to
participate in an observer capacity in its consideration of the situation in the Territory, and having heard
the statements of the representatives of the Zimbabwe
African People's Union and the Zimbabwe African
National Union,ll
Having heard the statement of a petitioner,12
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other
resolutions relating to the question of Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) adopted by the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the Special Committee,
I) Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8723/Rev.l), chaps. II, III
and VIII.
10 A/8759 and Add.I.
11 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyseventh Session, Fourth Committee, 1988th meeting.
12 Ibid., 1990th meeting.

77

Reaffirming the inalienable right of the people of
Zimbabwe to self-determination and independence in
accordance with resolution 1514 (XV) and the legitimacy of their struggle to secure the enjoyment of
their rights, as set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations and in conformity with the objectives of resolution ] 514 (XV),
Bearing in mind that the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as
the administering Power, has the primary responsibility for putting an end to the illegal racist minority
regime and for transferring effective power to the people
of Zimbabwe on the basis of the principle of majority
rule,
Noting with satisfaction the rejection by the African
population of Zimbabwe of the "proposals for a settl,ement" agreed upon between the Government of the
United Kingdom and the illegal regime,13 and mindful
that those "proposals for a settlement" had been negotiated without consulting the genuine political leaders
of the African population of Zimbabwe,
Reaffirming that any attempt to negotiate the future
of Zimbabwe with the illegal regime on the basis of
independence before majority rule would be in contravention of the inalienable rights of the people of
that Territory and contrary to the provisions of the
Charter and of resolution 1514 (XV),
Deeply deploring the arbitrary and unlawful imprisonment and detention of, and the denial of fundamental human rights to, political leaders and other
individuals of Zimbabwe by the illegal racist minority
regime,
Deploring the persistent refusal of the Government
of the United Kingdom to co-operate with the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in
the discharge of the mandate entrusted to it by the
General Assembly,
Deeply disturbed by the continued presence and
intervention of South African forces in the Territory,
which assists the racist minority regime and seriously
threatens the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
neighbouring African States,
Mindful of the conditions necessary to enable the
people of Zimbabwe to exercise freely and fully their
right to self-determination and independence,
1. Reaffirms the principle that there should be no
independence before majority rule in Zimbabwe, and
affirms that any settlement relating to the future of
the Territory must be worked out with the full participation of the genuine political leaders representing
the majority of the people of Zimbabwe and must
be endorsed freely and fully by the people;
2. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland not to
transfer or accord, under any circumstance, to tlK
illegal regime any of the powers or attributes ,If
sovereignty, and requests that Government to ensw,
the country's attainment of independence by a demo
cratic system of government in accordance w;lh the
true aspirations of the majority of the population;
13 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1971,
document S/I0405.

78

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

3. Urges the United Kingdom, as the administering Power, to convene as soon as possibl~ a nat~~nal
constitutional conference where the genume political
representatives of the people of Zimbabwe would be
able to work out a settlement relating to the future
of the Territory for subsequent endorsement by the
people through free and democratic processes;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom to bring about the conditions necessary to enable
the people of Zimbabwe to exercise freely and fully
their right to self-determination and independence, including:
(a) The unconditional release of all political prisoners, detainees and restrictees;
(b) The repeal of all repressive discriminatory legislation;
(c) The removal of all restrictions on political
activity and the establishment of full democratic freedom and equality of political rights;
5. Condemns the continued presence and intervention of South African forces in the Territory in violation of the decisions of the Security Council and calls
upon the administering Power to effect the immediate
expulsion of all such forces from the Territory;
6. Further calls upon the Government of the United
Kingdom to ensure that, in any exercise to ascertain
the wishes and aspirations of the people of Zimbabwe
as to their political future, the procedure to be followed
should be in accordance with the principle of universal
adult suffrage and by secret ballot on the basis of oneman one-vote, without regard to race, colour or
educational, property or income considerations;
7. Requests all Governments, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations
system, in consultation with the Organization of African
Unity, to extend all moral and material assistance to
the people of Zimbabwe;
8. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom to comply with the provisions of the present resolution and to report thereon to the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples and to the General
Assembly at its twenty-eighth session;
9. Requests the Special Committee to keep the
situation in the Territory under review.
2102nd plenary meeting
7 December 1972

29:1,6 (XXVII).

Question of Southern Rhodesia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe),
Gravely disturbed by the further deterioration of
the situation in Zimbabwe, which the Security Coune;1, in its resolution 277 (1970) of 18 March 1970,
fl.;affirmed as constituting a threat to international
peace- and security,
Deploring the fact that measures taken so far have
failed to bring the rebellion in Zimbabwe to an end,
owing primarily to the continued and increasing collaboration which certain States, in particular Portugal
and South Africa, in violation of Article 25 of the

Charter of the United Nations and of the relevant
decisions of the United Nations, maintain with the
illegal regime, thereby seriously impeding the effective
application of sanctions against the illegal regime,
Gravely concerned that, despite the appeals addressed to the Government of the United States of America in General Assembly resolution 2765 (XXVI) of
16 November 1971, that Government continues to
permit the importation of chrome and nickel into the
United States from Southern Rhodesia, in violation
of the relevant provisions of Security Council resolutions 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968, 277 (1970) of
18 March 1970, 288 (1970) of 17 November 1970
and 314 (1972) of 28 February 1972,
Reaffirming its conviction that the sanctions will
not put an end to the illegal racist minority regime
unless they are comprehensive, mandatory, effectively
supervised, enforced and complied with, particularly
by Portugal and South Africa,
1. Deeply deplores the continued refusal of the
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to take effective measures, in
accordance with the relevant decisions of the United
Nations, to put an end to the illegal racist minority
regime in Zimbabwe, and calls upon that Government
to take forthwith all effective measures to bring down
the rebellious minority regime;
2. Strongly condemns the policies of the Governments, particularly those of Portugal and South Africa,
which, in violation of the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations and contrary to their specific obligations under Article 25 of the Charter of the United
Nations, continue to collaborate with the illegal racist
minority regime in its racialist and repressive domination of the people of Zimbabwe, and calls upon those
Governments to cease forthwith all such collaboration;
3. Condemns all violations of, as well as the failure
of certain States to enforce strictly, the mandatory sanctions imposed by the Security Council, as being contrary to the obligations assumed by them under Article
25 of the Charter;
4. Condemns the continued importation by the
Government of the United States of America of chrome
and nickel from Zimbabwe in open contravention of
the provisions of Security Council resolutions 253
(1968), 277 (1970), 288 (1970) and 314 (1972)
and contrary to the specific obligations assumed by
that Government under Article 25 of the Charter,
and calls upon the United States Government to desist
forthwith from further violations of the sanctions and
to observe faithfully and without exception the provisions of the above-mentioned resolutions;
5. Requests all Governments which so far have not
done so to take more stringent enforcement measures
to ensure strict compliance by all individuals and bodies
corporate under their jurisdiction with the sanctions
imposed by the Security Council, and urges all Governments to refrain from taking any action which
might confer a semblance of legitimacy on the illegal
racist minority regime;
6. Draws the attention of the Security Council, in
view of the further deterioration of the situation
resulting from the intensified repressive measures taken
by the illegal racist minority regime against the people
of Zimbabwe, to the urgent need to widen the scope
of sanctions against the iIJegal regime to include all

Re801utions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

the measures envisaged under Article 41 of the
Charter and, having regard to their persistent refusal
to carry out the mandatory decisions of the Council,
to the need, as a matter of priority, to consider imposing sanctions against Portugal and South Africa;
7. Invites all Governments, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations
system, the United Nations bodies concerned and nongovernmental organizations having a special interest
in the field of decolonization to take steps, as appropriate, to give wide!;pread and continuous publicity
through all the media at their disposal to the work
of the United Nations, with particular reference to
the application of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia,
and requests the Secretary-General, having regard to
the mandate entrusted to him in General Assembly
resolution 2909 (XXVII) of 2 November 1972, to
take concrete measures in this connexion, including
the preparation and publication of a special issue of
the periodical Objective: Justice devoted to the efforts
of the Organization in this regard.
2I02nd plenary meeting
7 December 1972
2977 (XXVII).

Papua New Guinea

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning Papua
New Guinea, in particular resolution 2865 (XXVI)
of 20 December 1971,
Having considered the report of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period 19 June 1971 to 16 June
1972,14 the relevant chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples 15
and the report of the United Nations Visiting Mission
to observe the elections to the Papua New Guinea
House of Assembly in 1972,16
Having heard the statement of the representative
of the administering Power,17
Taking into account the conclusions and recommendations of the Trusteeship Council and the Special
Committee regarding developments in Papua New
Guinea,
Noting that the elections to the Third House of
Assembly in 1972 led to the establishment of a National Coalition Government and that in September
1972, on the motion of the Government, the House
of Assembly decided that full self-government for
Papua New Guinea should be attained by 1 December
1973 or as soon as possible thereafter, and bearing
in mind that the Government of Australia has accepted this timing,
14 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No.4 (A/8704).
15 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/8723/Rev.l), chaps. IV and
XX.
16 Official Records of the Trusteeship Council, Thirty-ninth
Session, Supplement No.2 (T/1739).
17 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentysl'venth Session, Fourth Committee, 2002nd meeting.

79

Noting that a Constitutional Planning Committee,
composed of members of the Papua New Guinea House
of Assembly, has been established to make recommendations concerning Papua New Guinea's future constitution,
Noting further with satisfaction that final responsibility in many areas of government has already been
transferred to the Government of Papua New Guinea
and that arrangements have been made for the transfer
of additional powers in the interim before full selfgovernment is attained,
Bearing in mind that the Governments of Papua
New Guinea and Australia have agreed that, while
foreign affairs and defence will remain the responsibility of Australia until independence, the Government
of Papua New Guinea will, until that time, be fully
involved in these matters,
Recalling the affirmation by the Government of Australia, as the administering Power, that the interval
between the attainment of full self-government and of
independence will be determined by the then Government of Papua New Guinea,
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
~o render all help to the people of Papua New Guinea
III their efforts freely to decide their own future,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people
of Papua New Guinea to self-determination and indepen~ence in accordance with General Assembly
resolutIOn 1514 (XV) and the Trusteeship Agreement
of 13 December 1946;
2. Welcomes the establishment of a time-table for
the. attainment of full self-government by Papua New
Gumea and calls upon the administering Power to
prepare, in consultation with the Government of Papua New Guinea, a further time-table for independence;
3. Reaffirms the importance of ensuring that thc
unity of Papua New Guinea is preserved throughout
the period leading to independence;
4. Deems it essential to continue accelerated localization in both the public and private sectors;
5: Emphasizes the importance of continuing an intensive programme of political education in Papua New
Guinea;
6. Stresses the importance of ensuring the preservation o~ the cultural heritage of the people of Papua
New GUinea;
7. Requests the organizations of the United Nations
system to assist in accelerating progress in all sectors
of the national life of Papua New Guinea;
8. Requests the Trusteeship Council to continue
to include non-members of the Trusteeship Council in
its periodic visiting missions on the basis recommended
in General Assembly resolution 2590 (XXIV) of 16
December 1969;
9. Requests the administering Power to report to
the Trusteeship Council and the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples on the implementation
of the present resolution;
10. Requests the Trusteeship Council and the
Special Committee to continue to examine this question and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its twenty-eighth session.
2110th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

80

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

2978 (XXVII). Information from Non-Self·Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it reques~ed the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to study
the information transmitted to the Secretary-General
in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations and to take such information fully
into account in examining the situation with regard
to the implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 2870 (XXVI) of 20
December 1971, ,in which it requested the Special
Committee to continue to discharge the functions
entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with the procedures approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 2109 (XX) of 21 December 1965,
Recalling further the provisions of paragraph 5 of
resolution 2870 (XXVI), in which it requested the
administering Powers concerned to transmit, or continue to transmit, to the Secretary-General the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter,
as well as the fullest possible information on political
and constitutional developments in the Territories
concerned,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter and the
action taken by it in respect of that information,18
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on this item,19
Noting the communication dated 18 September 1972
from the Government of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the Secretary-General
concerning the Territory of Brunei,20
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter
of the United Nations;
2. Deeply deplores that, despite the repeated recommendations of the General Assembly and the
Special Committee, some Member States having responsibilities for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories have ceased to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter, have transmitted
insufficient information or have transmitted information too late;
3. Strongly condemn,.,. the Government of Portugal
for its continued refusal to recognize the colonial status
of the Territories under its domination and to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter
on those Territories, in complete disregard of the
provisions of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Special Committee;
l8/bid., Twenty-seventh Session,
(A/8723/Rev.l), chap. XXVII.
19 A/8821 and Add.l-3.
20 A/8827.

Supplement

No.

23

4. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by
the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
Territory has attained a full measure of self-government in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter
with respect to that Territory;
5. Requests the administering Powers concerned
to transmit, or continue to transmit, to the SccretaryGeneral the information prescribed in Article 73 e
of the Charter, as well as the fullest possible information on political and constitutional developments in
the Territories concerned;
6. Reiterates its request that the administering
Powers concerned transmit such information as early
as possible and, at the latest, within a maximum period
of six months following the expiration of the administrative year in the Non-Self-Governing Territories
concerned;
7. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance
with established procedures, and, as regards Brunei.
to submit appropriate recommendations for a decision
by the Assembly under paragraph 4 above and other
relevant resolutions of the Assembly.
2110ff! plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2979 (XXVII).

Activities of foreign f'conOlllic
and other interests which are ilUpeding tlU'
implenwntation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and PeOlJles in Sonthern Rhodesia.
Namibia and Territories under Portugut'se
domination and in an other Territories
under colonial domination and efforts to
eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial
discrimination in southern Mrica

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Activities of
foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Territories
under Portuguese domination and in all other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination
in southern Africa",
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this question,21
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other
resolutions adopted by it on the item,
21 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sel'('nth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8723/Rev.1), chap. V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Reaffirming that the administering Powers, in accordance with Chapters XI and XII of the Charter of
the United Nations, have the obligation to ensure the
political, economic, social and educational advanc~­
ment of the inhabitants of the Territories under theIr
administration and to protect the human and natural
resources of those Territories against abuses,
Reiterating its conviction that any economic or other
activity which impedes the implementation of the
Declaration and obstructs efforts aimed at the elimination of colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination
in southern Africa and other colonial Territories violates
the political, economic and social rights and interests of
the peoples of the Territories and is therefore incompatible with the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Deeply disturbed by the increasingly intensified activities of those foreign economic, financial and other
interests in the Territories which, contrary to the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, assist the
Governments of Portugal and South Africa, as well as
the illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia,
and impede the realization by the peoples of the Territories of their legitimate aspirations for self-determination and independence,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
dependent Territories to self-determination and independence and to the enjoyment of the natural resources
of their Territories, as well as their right to dispose of
those resources in their best interests;
2. Reaffirms that the activities of foreign economic,
financial and other interests operating at present in the
colonial Territories of Southern Rhodesia and Namibia,
as well as in those under Portuguese domination, constitute a major obstacle to political independence and
to the enjoyment of the natural resources of those Territories by the indigenous inhabitants;
3. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to this question;
4. Declares once again that any administering
Power, by depriving the colonial peoples of the exercise
of their rights or by subordinating them to foreign
economic and financial interests, violates the obligations it has assumed under Chapters Xl and XII of
the Charter of the United Nations;
5. Condemns the policies of the colonial Powers
and other States which continue to support those foreign economic and other interests engaged in exploiting the natural and human resources of the Territories
without regard to the welfare of the indigenous peoples,
thus violating the political, economic and social rights
and interests of the indigenous peoples and obstructing
the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration
in respect of those Territories;
6. Strongly condemns the continuation of the construction of the Cabora Bassa project in Mozambique
and the Cunene River Basin project in Angola, which
are designed further to entrench colonialist and racialist
domination over the Territories in Africa and are a
source of international tension;
7. Comiemns the policies of those Governments
which have not yet prevented their nationals and bodies
corporate under their jurisdiction from participating in
the Cabora Bassa and Cunene River Basin projects,
and urgently requests the Governments concerned to
take all the necessary measures to terminate this par-

81

ticipation and to have them withdraw immediately from
all activities related to the projects;
8. Calls upon the colonial Powers and States concerned to take legislative, administrative and other
measures in respect of their nationals who own and
operate enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly
in Africa, which are detrimental to the interests of the
inhabitants of those Territories, in order to put an end
to such enterprises and to prevent new investments that
run counter to the interests of the inhabitants;
9. Requests all States to take effective measures to._
end the supply of funds and other forms of assistanc&:
including military supplies and equipment, to those
regimes which use such assistance to repress the peoples of the colonial Territories and their national liberation movements;
10. Calls upon the administering Powers to abolish
every discriminatory and unjust wage system which prevails in the Territories under their administration and
to apply in each Territory a uniform system of wages
to all the inhabitants without any discrimination;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to give the
widest possible publicity to the adverse effects of the
activities of foreign economic and other interests in
Southern Rhodesia, Namibia, the Territories under
Portuguese domination and all other colonial Territories, as well as to the decisions of the Special Committee and the General Assembly on this question;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
study this question and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its twenty-eighth -session.
2110th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2980 (XXVII). Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and People8 hy the sperialized a~encies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples hi the
specialized agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
and the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, contained in its resolution 2621
(XXV) of 12 October 1970, as well as all other
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council,
Taking into account with appreciation the reports
submitted on the item by the Secretary-General,22 the
Economic and Social Councij23 and the Special Committee Oil the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,u
c:- \/8647 and Add.l and 2, A/8862.
~:; See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentysel'/'/1/h S,·.u;nn, Supplement No. 3 (A/8703), chap. XVI.
~.j Ibid, Supplement No. 23 (A/8723/Rev.l). chap. VII.

General Assembly-TwentY-lIeventh Session

82

Bearing in mind the conclusions and recommendations of the Special Mission of the Special Committee
which visited the liberated areas of Guinea (Bissau)
in April 1972,25
Mindful of the views and suggestions put forward by
the representatives of the Organization of African Unity
and the national liberation movements concerned during the meetings of.tbe Seewity Counci126 and the Special Committee27 held in. Africa in 1972, in particular
their request for assistance from the specialized
agencies and other international institutions,
Conscious of the urgent and pressing need of the
peoples in aUi oolonial Territories, particularly of the
national liberation. movements and the populations in
of some of those Territories, for
the liberated
assistance fro1O the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system, especially in the fields of education, training, health and
nutrition,
Having invited, in consultation with the Or$anization of African Unity and through it, representatives of
the national liberation movements of the colonial Territories in Africa to participate in an observer capacity
in its consideration of the Territories concerned, and
having heard the statements of the leaders of those
liberation movemdnts relating, in particular, to the
reconstruction programmes being undertaken by -their
organizations in the liberated areas of the Territories,
Recognizing the urgent need for further and more
effective measures for the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Special Committee by all the organizations of the United
Nations system within their respective spheres of competence,
Noting with growing concern that, while several of
the specialized agencies and organizations within the
United Nations system have provided considerable assistance to refugees from the colonial Territories in
Africa, many of them have not extended their full cooperation to the United Nations in the implementation
of the relevant resolutions relating ·to providing assistance to the national liberation movements and d.
continuing all collaboration with the Governments of
Portugal and South Africa, as well as the illegal regfme
in Southern Rhodesia,
Noting with appreciation that some of the organizations have taken or are taking steps to formulate. ...
consultation with the Organization of African U• •
concrete programmes for providing assistance, witI&\
their spheres of competence, to the peoples o f .
colonial Territories in Africa striving to liberate the~
selves from colonial domination,
Taking into account the views expressed by the
Organization of African Unity on the question of procedures for the participation of representatives of the
national liberation movements of the colonial Territories in Africa in conferences, seminal'S and other
regional meetings convened by the specialized agencies,
Mindful of the necessity to keep under continuous
review the activities of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in the implementation of the various United Nations
decisions relating to decolonization,

N_

211 Ibid., chap. X, para. 36.

26 See OfJU:ial Records 0/ the Security Council, Twentyseventh Year, 1627th to 1639th meetings.
27 See A/AC.109/SR.847 to 870.

1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the item;28
2. Reaffirms that the recognition by the General
Assembly, the Security Council and other United Nations bodies of the legitimacy of the struggle of colonial peoples to achieve freedom and independence
entails, as a corollary, the extension by the United
Nations system of organizations of all the necessary
moral and material assistance to the national liberation
movements of the colonial Territories, including especially the liberated areas of those Territories;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to
the lUnited Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and to those other specialized agencies
and organizations within the United Nations system
which have been co-operating in varying degrees with
the United Nations in the implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
4. Reiterates its urgent appeal to all specialized
a..-ies and other organizations within the United
N8ti8ns system and to all States to render, as a matter
of 1Jl!gency, all possible moral and material assistance
to tie colonial peoples in Africa struagling for their
liberation from colonial rule, to initiate or broaden
conacts 'and co-operation with them in consultation
witft. the Organization of African Unity and, in partiClllhr, to work out and implement, with the active cooperation of the Organization of African Unity and,
through it, of the national liberationtbovements, concrete programmes for such assistanci' to the peoples
of Angola, Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde, Mozambique, Southern Rhodesia and Namibia, including in
particular the peoples in the liberated areas of those
Territories and their national .liberation movements;
5. Reiterates its urgent request t-., the specialized
agencies and other organizations WiCflin the United
Nations system, including in particular the United Nations Development Programme and the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, should
take measures, within their respective spheres of competence, to increase the scope of their assistance to
refugees from colonial Territories, including assistance
to the Governments concerned in the preparation and
execution of projects beneficial to those refugees, and
in that connexion to introduce the greatest possible
measure of flexibility in their relevant procedures;
•. Urges once again the specialized agencies and
ot~r organizations within the United Nations system,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Counci.J, to take
all necessary measures to withhold any financial, economic, technical and other assistance from the Governments of Portugal and South Africa and the illegal
regime in Southern Rhodesia, and to discontinue all
collaboration with them until they renounce their
policies of racial discrimination and colonial oppression;
7. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, in consultation with the Organization of African Unity, to
ensure the representation of the colonial Territories in
28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8723/Rev.1), chap. VII.

Rc_olulions arlopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Africa by the national liberation movements concerned, in an appropriate capacity, when dealing with
matters pertaining to those Territories;
8. Recommends that all Governments shoull.! intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
of which they are members to ensure the full and effective implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations, and in that
connexion should accord priority to the question of
providing a:,sistance, on an emergency basis, to peoples
in the colonial Territories and to their national liberation movements;
lJ. Rccommcnds that the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system,
with a view to facilitating the implementation of paragraph 8 above, should request their executive heads to
formulate and submit to their respective governing
bodies or legislative organs, as a matter of priority and
with the act,ive co-operation of the Organization of
African Unity, concrete proposals for specific programmes of all possible assistance to the peoples in
colonial Territorics and their national liberation movements, together with a comprehensive analysis of the
problems, if any, confronted by these agencie~; and
organizations;
10. Requests the Economic and Socia.] Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system in implementing the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare for submission to the relevant bodies
concerned with related aspects of the present item.
with the assistance of the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system, a rcport on the action taken since the circulation of his
previous report in implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, including the present
resolution;
11.

(b) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the present resolution and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question and to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.
2110th plenary meeting
J 4 December 1972

2981 (XXVII). United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2349 (XXll) of 19 December 1967, whereby it established an integrated educational and tr-aining programme for Namibians, South
Africans, Southern Rhodesians and persons from Territories under Portuguese administration,
Recalling its decision, contained in paragraph 7 of
resolution 2349 (XXII), that the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa

83

should be financed from a trust fund made up of
vlllunl ary contribut ions,
J'aAing nute of the report of the Secretary-(Jl'ncral
on the Programme for 1lJ7l /T2,~"
Tiding note with satisfaction of the increase in eontrihuliuns during the period under review and the
ClllTc'spoIllling increase in assistance, in the form of
individual awards, to persons from the Territories eoncerl1l'd to further their education,
Rccogni::ing, however, that the funds made available
have thereby been expended to provide such assistance
and that :Idditional funds are n:quired if the Programme is to continue in nperation,
L.\pressing its finn CO/lvictiO/l that the provision of
assi,tance for the educat ion and training of persons
fnllll the Territories concerned is as esscntial as ever
and . ; llOUld not only continue, but also be expanded,
1. Etprc.I'ses its appreciation to all those who have
rnadl' voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa;
2. Once again urgently appeals to all States, organizatiuns and individuuls to make generous contributions
tu thl' Programme so that it might not only continue
in operation, but a1sn be strengthened and expanded;
3. Ikcides that, as a further transitional measure,
provi,ion shall be made, under the regular budget of
the United Nations for the financial year 1973, for an
amount of $IOO,OO() to ensure continuity of the Programme pending the receipt uf adequate voluntary contribUl ions:
4. [aAes no/e Ivith ap!Jwval o[ the further efforts
made to strengthen co-operation between the Programme :Illd the United Nations High Commissioner
for Rdugees, the specialized agencies, the Organization
of African Unity and other agencies assisting persons
from southern Africa, and hopes that these efforls will
be continued with a view to the co-ordination of their
activities in the field of education and training for persons from the Territories concerned;
5. lc'xpresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General and to the members of the Advisory Committee on
the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa, established in pursuance
of paragraph 2 of General Assembly resolution 2431
(XXIlI) of 18 December 1968, for the work they have
aceomplished during the period under review in connexion with the Programme;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
activity and progress of the Programme.
21 J Oth plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2982 (XXVII). Offers hy Memher Slales of study
and ll'ainin~ facilities for inhahitants of
Non.Sf'lf-G()vt'rnin~ Terrilories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2876 (XXVI) of 20 Decem ber 1971,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,:lO
~11 A/8850
30 A/8855.

and Add.I.

84

General AsseJnbly-Twenty-sevenlh Session

prepared under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mi1Ul the need to provide increased educational and training facilities, at all levels, for the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made scholarships available to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. Requests those States offering scholarships to
inform the Secretary-General of the details of the offers
made under this programme and, whenever possible, to
provide travel funds to prospective students;
5. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
intensify widespread and continuous dissemination in
the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and training facilities
made by States and to provide aU the necessary facilities
to enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
7. Draws the attention of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
2110th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2983 (XXVII).

Que8tion of Spani8h Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Spanish Sahara,31
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also the relevant provisions of its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 containing the
programme of action for the full implementation of
the Declaration,
Taking into consideration the relevant resolutions
adopted by the Ninth Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity, held
at Rabat, Morocco, from 12 to 15 June 1972, and by
the Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Georgetown, Guyana, from 8 to 12
August 1972,
Having regard to the decision of the Heads of State
of the countries concerned, adopted at the Conference
held at Nouadhibou, Mauritania, on 14 September
1970, to intensify their co-operation in a positive manner in order to hasten the liberation of so-called Spanish
Sahara,
'Jl.OfJiciaI Records of the G"n"ral Assembly, Twenty-seventh
SeSSIOn, Supplement No. 23 (A/8723/Rev.l), chap. XII.

Reaffirming its resolutions 2072 (XX) of 16 December 1965, 2229 (XXI) of 20 Dccember 1966,
2354 (XXll) of 19 December 1967, 2428 (XXIII)
of 18 December 1968,2591 (XXIV) of 16 December
1969 and 2711 (XXV) of 14 December 1970,
Deploring that the admini~tering Power has not provided sufliciently clear information on the conditions
and time-table it intends to apply in bringing about the
complete decolonization of the Territory,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Sahara to self-determination and indepcndence in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
2. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of colonial peoples and its solidarity with, and support for,
the people of the Sahara in the struggle they are
waging in order to exercise their right to self-determination and independence, and requests all States to give
them all necessary moral and material assistance in
that struggle;
3. Declares that the continued existence of a colonial
situation in the Territory is endangering stability and
harmony in north-west Africa;
4. Expresses its support for, and solidarity with,
the people of the Sahara, and calls upon the Government of Spain, in conformity with its obligations and
its re.sponsibility as the administering Power, to take
effective measures to create the necessary conditions
for the free exercise of their right to self-determination
and independence;
5. Repeats its invitation to the administering Power
to determine, in consultation with the Governments of
Mauritania and Morocco and any other interested
party, the procedures for the holding of a referendum
under l!nited Nations auspices to enable the indigenous
populatIOn of the Sahara to exercise freely its right to
self-determination and independence and to this end
invites the Government of Spain:
'
,
(a) To create a favourable political climate for the
referendum to be conducted on an entirely free, democratic and impartial basis by permitting, inter alia, the
return of political exiles to the Territory;
(b) To take all the necessary steps to ensure that
only the indigenous inhabitants exercise their right to
self-determination and independence, with a view to
the decolonization of the Territory;
(c) To receive a United Nations mission and provide it with all the necessary facilities so that it can
participate actively in the implementation of measures
making it possible to put an end to the colonial situation in the Territory;
6. Invites all States to comply with the resolutions
of the ~eneral Asse~bly on the activities of foreign
economIc and finanCIal lI1terests and to refrain from
helping to perpetuate the colonial situation in the Territory by means of investments;
7. Reaffirms the responsibility nf the United Nations in all consultations intended ii', lead to the free
expression of the wishes of the pLople;
. 8. Urges the administering Power to respect and to
Implement scrupulously, under the auspices and guarantee of the United Nations, the provisions ~,[ the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly relating
to the decolonization of so-called Spanish Sahara;
9. Requests thc Secretary-General, in consultation
wi.th the administering Po\ver and the Special CommIttee on the Situation '11, "egan l Ie) the Implementa-

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

--------------

tion of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, to appoint
immediately the special mission provided for in paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 2229 (XXI)
and to expedite its dispatch to the Sahara in order to
recommend practical steps for the full implementation
of the relevant resolutions, and, in particular, to confirm United Nations participation in the preparation
and supervision of the referendum and to submit a
report to the Secretary-General for transmission to the
Assembly at its twenty-eighth session;
10. Calls upon the Special Committee to continue
its consideration of the situation in the Territory and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
twenty-eighth session.
2110th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2984 (XXVII). Question of American Samoa,
Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands,
Brunei, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, Gilhert and Ellice Islands, Guam,
Montserrat, New Hehrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Turks
and Caicos Islands and United States Virgin
Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Brunei,
Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Gilbert and
Ellice Islands, Guam, Montserrat, New Hebrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Turks
and Caicos Islands and United States Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,a2
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to those
Territories, in particular resolution 2869 (XXVI) of
20 December 1971,
Deploring the intransigent attitude of the Governments of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and France, in contravention of the
provisions of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, and their persistence in refusing to co-operate
with the Special Committee in its examination of the
Territories under their administration,
Deeply deploring the policy of those administering
Powers which continue to maintain military bases in
some of the Territories under their administration, in
contravention of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly,
Deeply deploring also the attitude of those administering Powers which continue to refuse to allow
United Nations missions to visit the Territories under
their administration,
82 Ibid.,

chaps. XI, XV, XVII, XVIII and XX to XXlIJ.

85

Bearing in mind in particular the positive results
achieved as a consequence of the visits by United
Nations missions to other colonial Territories and
reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of visiting
missions to the above-mentioned Territories is indispensable for securing adequate and first-hand information in regard to political, economic and social conditions in the Territories and to the views, wishes and
aspirations of the peoples therein,
Deeply concerned about the adverse effects of continued nuclear atmospheric testing in the South Pacific
on the life, welfare and environment of the peoples of
the Non-Self-Governing Territories situated therein,
and affirming that those peoples have the right to be
free of the hazards to their lives, welfare and environment caused by such tests,
Mindful that the Territories listed above require the
continued attention and assistance of the United Nations in the achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied in the Charter of the United Nations
and in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and the economic conditions of those
Territories,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territories listed above;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
those Territories to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned
to take all the necessary steps, without further delay,
to ensure the full and speedy attainment of the goals
set forth in the Declaration with respect to the Territories and, in that regard, to establish, in consultation
with the freely elected representatives of the people, a
specific time-table for the free exercise by the peoples
of those Territories of their right to self-determination
and independence;
4. Reaffirms its conviction that the questions of
territorial size, geographical isolation and limited resources should in no way delay the implementation of
the Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
5. Strongly deprecates any attempt aimed at the
partial or total disruption of the national unity and
territorial integrity of colonial Territories and the
establishment of military bases and installations in
those Territories, as being incompatible with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
6. Once again calls upon the administering Powers
concerned to reconsider their attitude towards the receiving of United Nations visiting missions to the abovementioned Territories and to permit access by such
missions to Territories under their administration:
7. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned to
participate in the relevant proceedings of the Special
Committee relating to the Territories under their
administration and, in particular, to report to the Special Committee on the implementation of the present
resolution;

(;cncral AssembIy-Twenty-seventh Session

86

8. Requests the organizations of the United Nations
system to assist in accelerating progress in all sectors
of the national .life of those Territories;
9. Calls upon the administering Power concerned,
in view of its responsibility towards the welfare of the
peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the
region, to discontinue any further nuclear atmospheric
testing in the South Pacific area, in order not to endanger the life and environment of the peoples of the
Territories concerned;
10. Invites the Secretary-General, having regard to
the mandate entrusted to him in General Assembly
resolution 2909 (XXVII) of 2 November 1972, to
pay particular regard to the need to intensify widespread dissemination of information on the process of
decolonization in respect of the Territories listed above;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
give full consideration to this question, including in
particular the dispatch of visiting missions to those
Territories, and to report to the General Assembly at
its twenty-eighth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
211Oth plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2985 (XXVII).

Question of the Seychelles

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Seychelles,
Having considered the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,33
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 2866 (XXVI) of 20
December 1971 concerning the question,
Reaffirming that the Seychelles should accede to independence without any prejudice to their territorial
integrity,
Expressing its deep regret that it has not been possible to send a special mission of the United Nations
to the Territory, as envisaged under resolution 2866
(XXVI),
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Seychelles to self-determination and independence
in conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), and calls upon the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as
the administering Power, to take all necessary measures to enable the people to exercise that right without
further delay;
2. Requests the administering Power, in accordance
with the provisions of the reJcvant resolutions of the
General Assembly, to receive the special mission of
the United Nations envisaged under resolution 2866
(XXVI) and to make the necessary arrangements, in
consultation with the special mission, for the holding
of a referendum on the future status of the Territory;
3.~ Ibid., chaps. IV, VI and Xl.

3. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to continue its examination of the question, including in particular the dispatch of the special
mission referred to above, and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.
2110tlz plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2986 (XXVII). Question of Niue and the
Tokelau Island..

The General Assembly.
HGI'ing considered the question of Niue and the
Tokelau Islands,
Noting that, at the invitation of the Government of
New Zealand, the administering Power, a United Nations mission visited Niue in June 1972,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,31 including in particular the report of the
United Nations Visiting Mission to Niue, 1972,35
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
lndepcndence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resolution 2868 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
Having heard the statements of the representative of
the administering Power,:l6
Noting with satisfaction that, following the visit of
the United Nations Visiting Mission to Niue, the Select
Committee on Constitutional Development, established
by the Niue Island Legislative Assembly, concluded
popular consultations on measures for the further constitutional advancement of the Territory of Niue, including the establishment of a time-table for the attainment of self-government,
Stressing the special responsibility of the Government of New Zealand, as the administering Power, to
continue to assist the peoples of Niue and the Tokelau
lslands freely to decide their own future,
Mindful that Niue and the Tokelau Islands require
the continued attention and assistance of the United
Nations in the achievement by their peoples of the
objectives embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of colonial peoples
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Approves the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Commends the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the United Nations
Visiting Mission to Niue, 1972, to the Government of
,14 Ibid., chaps. IV and XVI.

35 Ibid., chap. XVI, annex l.
36 Ibid., Twenty-seventh Session, Fourth Committee, 2005th
meeting; Ale .4/757.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

-------------

New Zealand, as the administering Power, and to the
Niue Island Legislative Assembly for consideration;
4. Expresses its appreciation of the co-operation
extended to the United Nations by the Government of
New Zealand in connexion with its special study of the
question of Niue and the Tokelau Islands;
5. Takes note of the decision of the Niue Island
Legislative Assembly concerning the future status of
the Territory;
6. Expresses the hope that the forthcoming constitutional talks between the administering Power and
the representatives of the people of Niue will result in
an early realization of the aspirations of the Niuean
people regarding their future status in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
7. Requests the administering Power to continue its
assistance to the Territories in order to promote their
economic, social and educational development and, in
that connexion, to avail itself of assistance from the
specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system, as well as from competent regional and intergovernmental organizations;
8. Requests the administering Power to take the
necessary measures to intensify programmes of political
education as well as to preserve the cultural heritage
of the people of these Territories;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.
2110th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2987 (XXVII). Question of Antigua, Dominica,
Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia
and St. Vincent

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Antigua,
Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia
and St. Vincent,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its re'solution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling further its previous resolutions relating to
the question, in particular resolutions 2593 (XXIV)
of 16 December 1969 and 2867 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,37
Reaffirming the inalienable right of the peoples of
Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla,
St. Lucia and St. Vincent to achieve independence in
conformity with the provisions of resolution 1514
(XV),

37 Ibid., Twenty-seventh Session,
(A/Sn3/Rev.l), chap. XXIV.

87

~~-------------

Supplement

No.

23

1. Takes note of the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-NevisAnguilla, 51. Lucia and St. Vincent:
2. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
give consideration to this question in accordance with
the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the GeneralAsscmbly, and to report thereon to the Assembly
at its twenty-eighth session.

:: II Oth plenary meeting
14 Decem her 197::

3030 (\.\.VII). ljnited Nations Fund for Namibia

TIle General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, by which the United Nations decided to
terminate the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia
~nd. assume direct responsibility for the Territory until
Its llldepcndence,
Reaffirming its resolve to discharge that responsibility
in regard to the Territory,
Mindful that, hy assuming direct responsibility for
~amibia. t~e United Nations incurred a solemn obligatIOn to assIst and prepare the people of the Territory
for self-determination and independence,
Recalling further its resolutions 2679 (XXV) of
9 December 1970 and 2872 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 concerning the establishment of the United
,Nations Fund for Namibia for the purpose of putting
mto effect a comprehensive programme of assistance
to N amibians, as outlined in the report of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its twentysixth session,38
Recognizing that South Africa's continued illegal
occupation of Namibia at present prevents the United
Nations from furnishing needed, large-scale assistance
within the Territory,
Hal'ing examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the operation of the Fund during 1972,39
Bearing in mind that the scope of the programme,
as. well as its financing and administrative machinery,
Will be subject to review by the General Assembly
when South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia is
terminated,
Noting that the Secretary-General, owing to lack of
funds, has not been able to carry out the programme in
all its parts as envisaged in his report submitted to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session in accordance with its resolution 2679 (XXV),
Noting further that the Secretary-General has, for
the above-mentioned reasons, found it necessary, inter
alia, to defer implementation of the preparation and
investigation of the long-term measures described in
par<igraph lOR of his report to the General Assembly
at its twenty-sixth session,
Recognizing the importance of undertaking a detailed investigation of the human and natural resources
of Namihia, with a view to preparing proposals for a
eo-ordinated plan of international economic and technical assistance, including manpower training, to be
::R A '8473.
:10 A'X841

and Curr.1.

88

(;.'neral A,scmbly-Twcnly-scventh Session

----------------

implemented in Namibia after the withdrawal of South
Africa from the Territory,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the report of the
Secretary~General on the operation of the United Nations Fund for Namibia during 1972 and endorses
the conclusions and recommendations contained
therein;
2. Decides, as a transitional measure, to allocate
to the Fund the sum of $100,000 from the regular
budget of the United Nations for 1973;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to continue to
appeal to Governments for voluntary contributions to
the Fund;
4. Invites Governments to appeal nnce more to their
national organizations and institutions for voluntary
financial contrihutions to the Fund;
5. Urges the Secretary-General to implement the
long-term measures and studies outlined in his report to
the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session as
soon as the necessary funds become available;
6. A uthorizes the Secretary-General to implement
the arrangements for the administration and supervision of the Fund, with the advice of the United Nations Council for Namibia and of the Ad Hoc SubCommittee on Namibia;40
7. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to render all
necessary assistance to the Secretary-General in carrying out the tasks assigned to him under the present
resolution;
8. Decides, pending the entry into full operation of
the comprehensive programme, that Namibians shall
continue to be eligible for assistance through the
United Nations Educational and Training Programme
for Southern Africa and the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3031 (XXVII). Question of Namihia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia,41
Having examined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the question of Nal1lihia,~:'
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General concerning the enlargement of the United Nations
Council for Namibia,43
40 Established by the Security Council under resolution 28\
(1970).
41 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session. Supplement No. 24 (A/8724).
42 [bid., Supplement No. 23 (A/8723/Rev.\), chaps. II, nr
and IX.
4,3 A/8934.

Noting with satisfaction the courageous and manifest
will of the Namibian people to achieve freedom and
independence as a single unified entity,
Having invited, in consultation with the Organization of African Unity and through it, representatives
of the national liberation movement of Namibia, the
South West Africa People's Organization, to participate in an observer capacity in its consideration of
the Territory, and having heard the statement of the
rcpresen tati ve of the national liberation movemenV'
Having heard the statements of the petitioners,4~
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27
October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967 and
subsequent resolutions relating to the question of
Namibia, as well as the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
Recalling further the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971,46 delivered in response to the request addressed to it by
the Security Council in its resolution 284 (1970) of
29 July 1970,
Bearing in mind the direct responsibilities of the
United Nations with regard to the Territory of Namibia and its people,
Deeply deploring the continued illegal occupation
of the international Territory of Namibia by South
Africa, in defiance of resolution 2145 (XXI) and in
flagrant violation of its obligations under the Charter
of the United Nations,
Deeply concerned at the efforts of South Africa
to consolidate and perpetuate its occupation of the
Territory by repressive means, including the extension
[0 Namibia of its policies of apartheid and the further
creation of so-called "homelands" against the wishes
of the majority of the inhabitants,
Deploring the use of the Territory of Namibia by
South Africa as a base for taking actions which violate
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of independent
African States,
Affirming that the basic condition for the fulfilment
of the responsibility of the United Nations towards
Namibia is the removal of South Africa's presence
from the Territory,
Mindful of the obligations of all Member Slates
under Article 25 of the Charter,
Expressing its satisfaction at the success of the Namibia International Conferenoe, held under the auspices of the South West Africa People's Organization
in May 1972, and commending the declaration and
n:commendations adopted by that Conference,47
H Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Sessio/l. Fourth Commil/t'<!, 2018th meeting.
1;; Ibid., 2014th and 2018th meetings.
41; Lef?al Consequt'/lces for States of the Continued Presence
,'I South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Cou/lri! Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion,
IF.J. Reports 1971, p. 16.
47 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty5cventh Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/8724), vol. n, appendix II.

89

Resolutions adopted on the repOl·ts of the F'ourth Committee

Aware of the urgent need for the participation of
Namibians in the activities of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
Mindful also that the direct responsibility of the
United Nations for the Territory of Namibia includes
the solemn obligation to protect and safcguard the
rights and interests of the pcople of the Territory
pending their exercise of self-determination and attainment of independence,
Noting with appreciation the recognition by a large
number of States of the identity certificates and travel
documents issued to Namibians' by the United Nations
Council for Namibia,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people
of Namibia to self-determination and independence,
as recognized in General Assembly resolutions 1514
(XV) and 2621 (XXV) and subsequent resolutions,
and the legitimacy of their struggle by al1 means
against the illegal occupation of their Territory hy
South Africa;
2. Affirms that any solution with regard to the question of Namibia must enable the people of the Territory to achieve self-determination and independence
as a single territorial and political entity;
3. Condemns the Government of South Africa for
its continued refusal to terminate its illegal occupation
and administration of the Territory of Namibia and
to comply with the pertinent resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly;
4. Calls once again upon the Government of South
Africa to withdraw forthwith from the international
Territory of Namibia;
5. Condemns the Government of South Africa for
its continued efforts to destroy the unity of the people
and the territorial integrity of Namibia through the
establishment of separate "homelands" based on racial
and tribal distinctions, including the eviction, displacement and transfer of the Namibian people to other
areas, and for its continued extension to Namibia of
the policies of apartheid;
6. Deeply deplores any support given to South
Africa by any State, and by any financial, economic
and other interests operating in Namibia, which enables South Africa to pursue its repressive policies
in the Territory, and calls for the termination of such
support;
7. Calls once again upon all States:
(a) To respect strictly the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council concerning
Namibia, and to take fully into account the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21
June 1971;
(b) To refrain from all direct or indir;ect relations,
economic or otherwise, with South Africa, when it
purports to represent Namibia;
(c) Not to recognize as legally valid any rights
or interests in Namibian property or resources purportedly acquired from the Government of South
Africa after 27 October 1966;
(d) To take effective economic and other measures
designed to ensur;e the immediate withdrawal of the
Sout? Afric~n admini.stration from Namibia, thereby
makmg pOSSIble the Implementation of General Assembly resolutions 2]45 (XXI) and 2248 (S-V);
8. Commends the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia to all States and the subsidiary

organs of the General Assembly and other competent
organs of the United Nations, as well as 10 the specializ,'d agencies and other organi/,ations within tJ1C
lJ nited 'N:ltions Systl'lll, for appropriate actinn in conformity with the relevant resolutinns of the General
Assen1bly and the Security Council;
9. Requests the United Nations Cnuncil for Namibia to continue to discharge its fUlIctions and respunsibilitics in accordance with the pruvisions of the
rekvant resolutions or the Gcnna1 Asscmbly. and in
particular:
(al To represent Namihi:t in intcrnational Off.:aniDI ..
tions, :11 conferences and on any other occa~ion as
may he required;
(h) To cnsurc tlt\_~ participation in :1T1 appropriate
e:lpa\:itv of the re.presentatives of the Namihian people
ill if'; :\ctivities;
(c) To continue its consultations at United Nations
Headquarters, in Africa nr elsewhere with the rcpr.:
sentatives nf the N:tl1lihian p("(lpJc and the Organi/;j-·
tion of African Unitv:
(d) To continue to assume responsibility for the
U1',f!ent establishment of short-term and lnng-term co-ordin:ltcd programmes of fechnical and tlnancial assi,s~ance to Namibia in the light of the relevant pro·VISIons of resolution 224S (S-V) and t;jkin~ into
accollnt resolution 2372 (XXVI) of 20 Decemher

1971;

,

(e) To continue to expand the existing scheme for
issuing identity certificates and travel d~ocuments to
Namihians by concluding :1ppropriate agreements with
Governments of Member States;
To continue to promote publicity with regard
to the q~estion o~ Namibia and to assist the SecretaryGeneral 111 the discharge of the task entrusted to him
under paragraph 14 below;
(g) To undertake a study on the compliance of
Memher States with the relevant United NatiollS resolutions. taking int,) account the advisory opinion
of, t.he International Court of Justice relating to NamIbIa;
(h) To examine the question of foreign economic
interests operating in Namibia, and to seek effective
means to regulate such activities as appropriate;
(i) To continue to examine the question of bilateral
and multilateral treaties which explicitly or implicitly
include Namibia, and to seck to r,'place South Africa
as the party representing Namibia in all relevant bilateral and multilateral treaties;
10. Requests all States, United Nations organs and
the specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system, as well as the non-governmental organizations concerned. to co-operate fully
with the United Nations Council for Namibia in the
discharge of the mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly, and in p a r t i c u L n : '
(a) To refrain from any action which may confer
a semblance of legitinncy 'upon South Africa\ illegal
occupdtion of Namibia;
, (II). To render to the Namibian people. in co-operatJOn With the Organi7Ution of Afriew Unity. all moral
and material assistance necessarv to continue their
struggle for the restoration of the(r inalienable right to
self-determination and indepcndence, and to work Ollt,
in active coo-operation with the United Nations Council
for Namihia and thl' Org:mization of African Unity.
concrete progr~mlmc, of assistance to Namibia:
.

(n

90

(c) To take effective steps to assist the SecretaryGeneral in disseminating relevant information on this
question under paragraph 14 below:
11. Invites the Security Council to take effective
measures, in conformity with the relevant provisions
of the Charter, to secure the withdrawal by South
Africa of its illegal administration from ~amibia and
the implementation of the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council designed to enable
the people of Namibia to exercise their right to selfdetermination;
12. Decides to enlarge the memhershi p of the
United Nations Council for Namibia and requests the
President of the General Assembly, in the light of the
relevant report of the Secretary-General;!4 to nominate
additional members during the current session of the
Assembly;
13. Urges the Secretary-General, in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 2871 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 and in view of the recommendations of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, to undertake
the necessary consultations to nominate as soon as
possible a full-time United Nations Commissioner fnr
Namibia;49
14. Requests the Secretary~General, having regard
to the suggestions of the United Nations Council for
Namibia concerning the widespread and continuous
publicity on this question, to take effective steps, including the publication of a regular bulletin on Namibia
and the issue of a series of United Nations commemorative postage stamps, to publicize as widely as
possible, in particular:
(a) The work of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and of other organs on the question of Namibia;

(b) The grave situation in the Territory created
by the further repressive measures taken by the South
African r':gillle against the people of Namibia in violation of the relevant decisions of the United Nations;
(c) The legitimate struggle of the people of Namibia
for self-determination and independence;
(d) The need fllr increased 111oral, political and
material assistance to the people of Namihia and their
liheration 111ovel1lcnl;
15. IlIl'iles the various organs of the United Nations
concerned tll effect the greatest possible co-ordination
of their respective activities relating to Namibia;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the necessary assistance and facilities to the
United Nations Council for Namibia and to the United
Nations Commissioner for Namibia for the discharge
of their respective duties and functions;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.

C

:: 114t1l plenary meeting
18 Decem ber 1972

*

At its 2114th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1972, the
General Assembly, pursuant to paragraph 12 of the above
resolution, confirmed the nomination by its President of
BURUNDI, CHINA, LIBERIA, MEXICO, POLAND, ROMANIA and the
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS as members of the
United Nations Council for Namibia.
As a result, the Council will be composed of the following
IHember Staf<'s: BURUNDI, CHILE, CHINA, COLOMBIA, EGYPT,
GUYANA, INDIA, INDONESIA, LIBERIA, MEXICO, NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, POLAND, ROMANIA, TuRKEY, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS, YUGOSLAVIA and ZAMBIA.

48A/8934.

49 For the appointment of the United Nations Commissioner

for Namibia by the General Assembly, see above, p. 10.

*

*

•

*

Other decisions
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples

(hem 22)
At its 2114th pl~nary meeting, on 18 December 1972, the General Assembly,
on the recommendatIOn of the Fourth Committee, 50 decided to defer until its
twenty-eighth session consideration of the questions of British Honduras, the
Falkland Islands (Malvinas), French Somaliland and Gibraltar.
50 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda
item 22, document A/8955, para. 26.

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
Resolution
No.

Dale of
ItClII

Title

ad{!tt£(~H

2990 (XXVII)
3006 (XXVII)

Financial reports and accounts for the year 1971 and reports of
the Board of Auditors (A/8873)
Resolution A
Resolution B
Resolution C
Resolution D
Resolution E
Resolution F
Enlargement of the Committee on Contributions: amendment
to I ule 160 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly
(A/8861)
.
Joint Inspection Unit (A/8895)
Resolution A
Resolution B
Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
(A/888!)
Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of the Committee on Contributions (A/8882)
Resolution A
Resolution B
Resolution C
Appointment to fill a vacancy in the membership of the Board
of Auditors (A/8883)
.
Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of the United
Nations Administrative Tribunal (Aj8885)
Appointment to fill a vacancy in the membership of the United
Nations Staff Pension Committee (A/8886)
Report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board (A/8923)
Supplementary estimates for the financial year 1972 (A/8931)
Resolution A
Resolution B
Pattern of conferences (A/8947)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations (Aj8952)
Resolution A
Resolution B
Resolution C
Resolution D
.
Confirmation of the appointments made by the Secretary-Genera,l
to fill vacancies in the membership of the Investments Committee (A/8884)
.
Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations
with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (A/8732)
United Nations International School (A/8971)
United Nations Juridical Yearbook (A/8978)l

3007 (XXVII)

Composition of the Secretariat (Aj8980)

81

18 December 1972

101

3008 (XXVII)

Amendments to the Staff Regulations and Staff Rules of the
United Nations (A/8980)

81

18 December 1972

101

3042 (XXVII)

United Nations salary system (A/8979)

83

19 December 1972

102

2912 (XXVII)

2913 (XXVII)

2924 (XXVII)

2939 (XXVII)

2940 (XXVII)

2941 (XXVII)
2942 (XXVII)
2943 (XXVII)
2944 (XXVII)
2947 (XXVII)

2960 (XXVII)
2961 (XXVII)

2988 (XXVII)

2989 (XXVII)

.

.

92
92

71
71
71
71
71
71

9 November 1972
9 November 1972
9 November 1972
9 November 1972
9 November 1972
9 November 1972

92
92
93
93

93

9 November 1972

93

79
79

24 November 1972
24 November 1972

93
93

76 (a)

4 December 1972

94

76 (b)
76 (b)
76 (b)

4 December 1972
4 December 1972
4 December 1972

94
94
94

76 (c)

4 December 1972

95

76 (e)

4 December 1972

95

76 (f)

82

4 December 1972
4 December 1972

95
95

72
72
75

8 December 1972
8 December 1972
13 December 1972

96
98
99

77
77
77
77

13 December 1972
13 December 1972
13 December 1972
13 December 1972

99
99
100
100

76 (d)

15 December 1972

100

78
84
80

15 December 1972
15 December 1972
18 December 1972

100
101
101

1 Resolution adopted on the recommendation of the Sixth Committee, as set forth in the report of the Fifth Committee
(A/8978).

91

92

General Assembly-Twenty.""...-nlh Session
Resolu,tion
No.

3043 (XXVlI)
3044 (XXVII)

3045 (XXVII)
3046 (XXVII)
3047 (XXVII)
3048 (XXVII)
3049 (XXVII)

Vate of

Tit/e

adopti01f

Form of presentation of the United Nations budget and duration
of the budget cycle (A/8985)
Budget for the financial year 1973 I A /8985/Add.1 )
Resolution A
Resolution B
Resolution C
Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the financial year 1973
(A/8985/ Add.l)
.
Working Capital Fund for the financial year 1973 (A/8985/Add.l)
Revenue-producing activities (A/8985/Add.l)
.
Use of travel funds (A/8985/Add.J)
The financial situation of the United Nations (A/8985/Add.l)
Resolution A
Resolution B
Resolution C

Page

73

19 December 1972

102

73
73
73

19 December 1972
19 December 1972
19 December 1972

103
104
105

73
73
73
73

19 December 1972
19 December 1972
19 December 1972
19 December 1972

105
106
106
107

73
73
73

19 December 1972
19 December 1972
19 December 1972

107
107
108

12
73
73
1.
50 J
74

15 December 1972
19 December 1972

108
108

15 November 1972

109

4 December 1972

109

76 (d)

15 December 1972
13 December 1972

110
110

15 December 1972
24 November 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972

110
110
110
110

Other decisions
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Budget estimates for the financial year 1973
Budget estimates for the financial year 1973
Elimination of all forms of racial discrimination
Planning estimate for the tlnancial year 1974
Confirmation of the appointments made by the Secretary-General to fill vacancies
in the membership of the Investments Committee
Scale of a:isessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations
Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations with the special.
ized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency
Joint Inspection Unit
.
Publications and documentation of the United Nations
Personnel questions
.

2912 (XXVII). Financial reports and accounts
{or the y.':1'" J 97 I and reports of the Board
of Auditor,;

A
UNJTED NATIONS

77
78

79
80
81

ended 31 December 1971 and the audit opinion of the
Board of Auditors;4
2. Takes note of the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as sC't forth in its report. 5
20Blst plenary meeting
9 November 1972

c

The General Assembly
1. Accepts the financial report and accounts of

the United N at,ions for the year ended 31 December
1971 and the audit opinion of the Board of Auditors;2
2. Concurs in the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its report;:~

3. Requests the Secretary-General to take such
remedial action as lIlay b-: required by the comments
of the Board of Auditors.
2081st plenary meeting
9 November 1972

UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN'S FUND

The General Assembly
1. Accepts the financial report and accounts of the
United Nations Ch11dren's Fund for the year 1971 and
the audit opinions of the Board of Auditors;6
2. Takes note of the observations of the Advisory
Committee all Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its report. 7
208151 plenary meeting
9 Nov€mber 1972
I)

B

UNITED NATIONS RELIEF AND WORKS AGENCY FOR
PALESTINE REFUGEES IN rHE NEAR EAST

UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME

The General Assembly
1. Accepts the accounts of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Rcful::ecs in

The General Assembly
1. Accepts the financial report and accounts of the
United Nations Development Programme for the year
2 Official Records of the Gem'ral Assembly. Twenty-seventh
Session. Supplement No.7 (A/8707).
3 A/88JO, pams. 3-10

4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twcnty-scl'enth
Sessioll. Sl/ppll'/ll<!nt No.7A (A/8707.· '\dd.I).
G A/8810, paras. 12-16.
6 Official Records of the General A Sl"embly, Twenty-seventh
Scssion, Supple!lZmt N(> 7/1 (AR707.'Add.2).
7 A/S8LO, p.uas. 18?!!.

93

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

the Near East for the year ended 31 December 1971
and the audit opinion of the Board of Auditors;8
2. Takes rwte of the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its report. 9
2081 st plenary meeting
9 November 1972

"Rule 160
"The General Assembly shall appoint an expert
Committee on Contributions consisting of thirteen
members."
2081st plenary meeting
9 November 1972

E

2924 (XXVII). Joint InSp('clion Unit

UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTE FOR TRAINING
AND RESEARCH

The General Assembly
1. Accepts the financial report and accounts of the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research
for the year ended 31 December 1971 and the audit
opinion of the Board of Auditors;10
2. Takes rwte of the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its report. 11
2081 st plenary meeting
9 November 1972

A
REPORT OF THE JOINT INSPECTION UNIT

The General Assembly
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Joint Inspection Unit on its activities covering t~e
period from 1 July 1971 to 30 June 1972,14 as transmitted by the Secretary-General.
2088th plenary meeting
24 November 1972
B

F
VOLUNTARY FUNDS ADMINISTERED BY THE UNITED
NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES

The General ASofembly
1. Accepts the accounts of the voluntary funds
admindstered by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for the year ended 31 December 1971 and
the audit opinion of the Board of Auditors;12
2. Takes note of the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its report. 13
2081 st plenary meeting
9 November 1972

2913 (XXVII). Enlargement of the Committee on
Contributions: amendment to rule 160 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assemhly

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2390 (XXIII) of 25 November 1968, by which the membership of the Committee
on Contributions was increased from ten to twelve,
Recalling its resolution 2758 (XXVI) of 25 October 1971 on the restoration of the lawful rights of the
People's Republic of China in the United Nations,
1. Decides to increase the membership of the
Committee on Contributions from twelve to thirteen;
2. Decides to amend, with effect from 1 January
1973, rule 160 of its rules of procedure to read as
follows:
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session. Supplement No. 7C (A/8707 I Add.3).
9 A/8810, para. 22.
10 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 7D (A/8707/Add.4).
11 A/8810, para. 24.
12 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twcnty-sewmth
Session, Supplement No. 7E (A/8707/Add.5).
13 A/88lO, paras. 26 and 27.

CONTINUATION OF THE JOINT INSPECTION UNIT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2150 (XXI) of 4 November 1966, 2360 (XXII) of 19 December 1967 and
2735 A (XXV) of 17 December 1970 relating to the
Joint Inspection Unit,
Having considered the views submitted in ,response
to resolution 2735 A (XXV) on the future of the
Joint Inspection Unit,15
Bearing in mind the report submitted by the Secretary-GeneraP6 in compliance with General Assembly
resolution 2537 B (XXIV) of 11 December 1969 on
the machinery of the United Nations system for administrative and budgetary control, investigation and
co-ordination,
Noting the concern expressed by the SeoretaryGeneraP 7 and the Advisory Committee on Administrativeand Budgetary Questions,18 as well as the vie'Ys
stated in the Fifth Committee about the need to aVOid
a duplication of effort and a waste of resources in the
activities of the bodies and organs comprising that
machinery,
A ware of the need to re-examine and eventually
restructure that machinery with a view to improving
and streamlining it in the interests of economy and
greater efficiency,
Recognizing that the question of the Joint Inspection
Unit should be considered in the context of the reexamination mentioned above and its conclusions,
]. Decides that the Joint Inspection Unit should
continue in being for a further period of four years
beyond 31 December 1973;
2. Decides to review, at its thirty-first session, the
machinery of the United Nations and of its system
AIC.511433.
and CarLI: AIC.S/l432. A/C.51 1434. AIC5.'
1437 and AIC.S/1438.
H

15 A/~~35

II; AI793~.

Official Records of thc GClleral Assl'mbly. 1'1I'1'I/t.\'fourth Sessiol/, A IlI/CXcs. agenda item 74, document AIC.5/
1233.
18 Ibid., Twcl/ty-fourth Scssioll. Supplement No.8 (A17608
and CarLl), para. 80.
17 See

94

(;eneral Assemhly-Twenty-seventh Session

for administrative and budgetary control, investigation
and co-ordination, and for this purpose requests the
views of the Secretary~General as chief administrative
officer of the United Nations and as Chairman of the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, the relevant views of the governing bodies of the specialized
agencies, the Economic and Social Council, the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and the Joint
Inspection Unit, as wen as the comments and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Quest,ions~
3. Further decides to evaluate, at its thi,rty-first
session, the work of the Joi-nt Inspection Unit, in
conjunction with the over-all review provided for in
paragraph 2 above;
4. Reaffirms the terms of reference of the Joint
Inspection Unit, as set out in the second report of the
Ad Hoc Committee of Experts to Examine the F,inances
of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies;19
5. Reaffirms the procedures and criteria for the
composition and appointment of the Joint Inspection
Unit, as similarly set out in the second report of the
Ad Hoc Committee;20
6. Decides that the term of office of Inspectors
should be four years. with the possibility of reappointment;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit annually to the General Assembly a succinct report on
those major recommendations of the Joint Inspection
Unit, as set forth in reports affecting the United
Nations, which havc not been implemented, together
with the reasons therefor;
8. Directs that the guidelines for the functioning
of the Joint Inspection Unit and for the handling of
its reports shall be those now in effect pursuant to
decisions of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social CounciVl as modified by those set out in
paragraphs g to 16 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;22
9. R('commends that the other participating organizations in the United Nations system take appropriate
action for the continuation of the Joint Inspection
Unit and the use of its services on the basis set out
in the present resolution.
2088th plenary meeting
24 November 1972

2939 (XXVII). Appointments to fill vacancies in
the membership of the Advisory Committee
on Administrativp amI Bm1Il:etar)' Questions

The General Assembly
Appoints the following persons as members of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
TWl'Illy-first Sessioll. A rllleXeS, agenda item RO.
document Ai6343. para. (,7. B. Ie).
20 Ibid .. para. 67, B, (h).
21/~id., para. 67, B, (d); conclusions reached by the
CommIttee for Programme and Co-ordination and the Ad!Uinistrative Committee on Co-ordination at their joint meetings
In 1967 (Official Records of thc Ecollomie alld Social COllncil,
Forty-third Sessioll, A linneI', agcnda item 17, document
E/4404); supplementary .arrangements for handling the
reports of the Jomt InspcctlOn Unit adopted by the Economic
and Social Council in its resolution 1457 (XLVII) of 8 Au"ust
1~69, and furl her arrangements 1a this end endorsed bv -the
FIfth Commitl(:e at its 1332ml meeting (Official Recor;is of
the Ge.neral A sst'fllh Il" , Twcntv-follrth :'iessiull, Annexes,
agenda Item 81. document Ai7R49, para. 2Jl
~:! Ai8R35 ;IIlJ Carr I.
19 Ibid.,

Questions for a three-year term. beginning on 1 January
1973:
Mr. Lucio Garcia del Solar,
Mr. Anatoly V. Grodsky,
Mr. Mario Majoli,
Mr. David L. Stottlemyer.
2097tlz plenary meeting
4 December 1972

•

•

*

As a result of the above appointments, the Advisory Committee Oil Administrative and Budgetary Questions will be
composed as follows Mr. Mohamed ALWAN (Iraq),"
Mr. Paulo Lopes CORREA. (Brazil),* Mr. Mohsen S. EsFANDIARY (lran),** Mr. Lucio GARciA DEL SOLAR (Argentina).· ..
Mr. Anatoly V. GRODSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics),*** Mr. HSING Sung-yi (China),** Mr. Ahmed Tewfik
KHALIL (EgYf't),* Mr. Mario MAJOLI (Italy),·" Mr. C. S. M.
MSELLE (United Republic of Tanzania),* Mr. Andre NAUDY
(France)," Mr. John I. M. RHODES (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland),·· Mr. David L. STOTTLEMYER (United States of America)"· and Mr. J6zsef
TARDOS (Hungary).*

* Term of otllce cxpires on 31 December 1973.
** Term of otllL'C expires on 31 Decemher 1974.

",. I'crm I)l" oflic"c expires on 31 December 1975.

294-0 (XXVII). Appointments to fill vacancies in
the tlIpmhership of the Commiltee on ContI,iblltiolls

A
The General Assembly
Appoints the following persons as members of the
Committee on Contributions for a three-year term
beginning on 1 January 1973:
Mr. Amjad Ali,
Mr. Santiago Meyer Picon,
Mr. Michel Rouge,
Mr. Vasil)' S. Safronchuk,
Mr. Wang Wei-tsai.
2097th plenary meeting
4 December 1972
B

The General Assembly
A ppoints the following person as a member of the
Committee on Contributions for a period beginning on
1 January 1973 and ending on 31 December 1973:
Mr. Richard V. Hennes.
2097th plenary meeting
4 December 1972

c
The General Assembly
Appoints the following person as a member of the
Committee on Contributions for a period beginning
on the datc of the present resolution and ending on
31 Dccember 1974:
Mr. Hussein Nur Elmi.
2097th plenary meetillg
4 December 1972

'"

•

'"

As a result of the abol'" o:'pI,i,,:ments, the Committee on
Contributiorls will be compos,'a:' .foll,,, ,': Mr. Amjad ALI

Resolutions adopted on the reports of th" Fifth Commith'"

95

--------------

(Pakistan),*** Mr. Joseph Quao CLELAND (Ghana),**
Mr. Richard V. HENNES (United States of America),*
Mr. Angus J. MATHESON (Canada),** Mr. Santiago MEYER
PIc6N (Mexico),*** Mr. Takeshi NAITO (Japan),* Mr. Hussein NUR ELMI (Somalia),** Mr. Stanislaw RACZKOWSKI
(Poland),* Mr. Michel ROUGE (France),*" Mr. Vasily S.
SAFRONCHUK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics), * * *
Mr. David SILVEIRA DA MOTA (Brazil),** Mr. WANG Wei-Tsai
(China) * ** and Miss Kathleen WHALLEY (United Kingdom ot
Great Britain and Northern Ireland). **
* Term of office expires on 31 December 1973 .
.. * Term of office expires on 31 December 1974.
*'"* Term of office expires on 31 December 1975.

2941 (XXVII). Appointment to fill a vacancy in
the membership of the Board of Auditors

The General Assembly
Appoints the Auditor-General of Pakistan as a
member of the Board of Auditors for a three-year term
beginning on 1 July 1973.
2097th plenary meeting
4 December 1972

•

•

2943 (XXVII). Appointmenl to fill a vacancy in
the memhership of the United ~ations
~taff Pen~i()n Committee

The General Assembly
Appoints the following person as a member of the
United Nations Staff Pension Committee for a oneyear term beginning on 1 January 1973:
Mr. Richard V. Hennes.
2097111 plenary meeting
4 December 1972

*

*

As a result of the abore appointment, the members alld
alternate members elected l,y the Gelleral Asscmblv to the
United Nations Statl Pension Committee, whose terms of
office expire on .'II December 1973, will be the following:
Memf'ers
Mr. Richard V. HENNES (United States ot America),
Mr. Guillermo 1. McGou(il! (Argentina),
Miss Kathleen WHALLEY (United Kingdom ot Great Britai"
and iVorthern Irelalld)
Alternate members
Mr. Harry L. MORRIS (Liberia),
Mr. Takcshi NAITO (Japan),
Mr Svenn RFTSHAL (Norway) .

•

As a result at the above appointment, the Board of Auditors
will be composed as follows: the Auditor-General of CANADA,·
the Auditor-General of COLOMBIA·* and the Auditor-General
of PAKISTAN.***
* Term of office expires on 30 June 1974.
** Term of office expires on 30 June 1975.
*** Term of office expires on 30 June 1976.

294,1· (XXVII). Report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board to the General Assembly
and to the member organizations of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund for 1972,23 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,24

2942 (XXVII). Appointments to fill vacancies in
the membership of the United Nations Ad·
ministrative Tribunal

The General Assembly
Appoints the following persons as members of the
United Nations Administrative Tribunal for a threeyear term beginning on 1 January 1973:
Mr. Francisco Forteza,
Mr. Zenon Rossides.

2097tlz plenary meeting
4 December 1972

•*•
As a result at the above appointments. the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal will be composed as tallows: Mrs. Paul
BASTID (France), * Mr. Francisco FORTEZA (Uruguay) ,***
Mr. MUTUALE-TsHIKANTSHE (Zaire), * Mr. Francis T. P.
PLIMPTON (United States ot America),*" Mr. Zenon RosSIDES (Cyprus),**· Sir Roger Bentham STEVENS (United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Nc:rlhern Ireland) ** and Mr. R.
VENKATARAMAN (India). *
* Term of office expires on 31 December 1973.
** Term of office expires on 31 December 1974.
*** Term of office expires on 31 December 1975.

I
AD.JUSTMENT OF BENEFITS IN RESPECT OF
COST-QF-LIVING CHANGES

Decides:
(a) To extend for a further period of three years
from 1 January 1973 the system of adjustments to
benefits in payment contained in General Assembly
resolution 2122 (XX) of 21 December 1965, as
amended by resolution 2887 (XXVI) of 21 December 1971:
(b) To apply the above system, with effect from
1 January 1973, ,to all benefits payable in periodic
form previously excluded therefrom, with the exception
of benefits derived ffllm voluntary deposits in the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, provided
that, fllr the purpose of adjustments under this paragraph, benefits shall be deemed to have commenced
in 1972;
(c) To vary the system further, with effect from
1 January 1973, in such manner that benefits resulting
from separation during the first quarter of a calendar
year shall be adjustcd by three quarters of the rate
applicable to that year. benefits resulting from separa::~ OfTiciaf Records of til/' Gen/'1'II1 Assembly. Twenty-sCI'enth
Sessi, ,Il. Supplement No. ') (A / 8709 and Corr. [ ).
~I

A/88('O.

96

General Assembl,·-Twenly-seventh SCi;sion

tion during the second quarter by one half of such
rate and benefits resulting from separation during the
third quarter by one quarter thereof;

II
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
Approves expenses totalling $1,386,400 (net) for
1973 and supplementary expenses totaJIing $260,861
(net) for 1972 for the administration of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, as estimated by the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board in its report
to the General Assembly for 1972;25

(d) To apply, as a transitional measure during 1973,
1974 and 1975, the following additional adjustments
to periodic benefits in payment:
Additional annual
index adjustment

Date of separation

Prior to 1973
1 January-31 December 1973
1 January-31 December 1974

1973

1974

1975

9

6
6

3

III
Endorses the understanding contained in paragraph
20 and the suggestions contained in paragraphs 15
and 40 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions.~4
2097th plenary meeting
4 December 1972

3

3

provided that these additional adjustments shall be
limited to benefits not exceeding $3,000 per year, and
to the first $3,000 of any higher annual benefit, and
that the total payment for any year shall not be less
than that applicable in the previous year;

~"Official Rccords of thc Gcncral Assembly, Twcnty-scvcnth
Session, Suppleml'nt No.9 (A/8709 and CarLl), annex III.

2947 (XXVII). Supplementary estimates for the financial year 1972

A

BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1972

The General Assembly
Resolves that for the financial year 1972:
1. The amount of SUS 213,124,410 appropriated by its resolution 2899 A (XXVI) of 22 December
1971 shall be decreased by SUS 4,474,210 as follows:
Amount appropriated by
resolution
2899 A (XXVl)n

Increase
or
(decrease)

Revised
appropriation

(US dollars)

Section

PART 1. Sessions of the General Assembly, the
councils, commissions and committees; special
meetings and conferences
1. Travel and other expenses of representatives and
members of commissions, committees and other
subsidiary bodies
2. Special meetings and conferences

1,449,900
2,846,600

(49,500)
(23,600)

1,400,400
2,823,000

TOTAL, PART I

4,296,500

(73,100)

4,223,400

PART II. Staff costs and related expenses
Salaries and wages
Common staff costs
.
Travel of staff
.
Payments under annex I, paragraphs 2 and 5,
of the Staff Regulations; hospitality

95,676,160
21,857,100
2,656,100

(3,003,160)
(686,100)
166.100

92,673,000
21,171,000
2,822,200

159,000

(10,000)

149,000

TOTAL, PART II

120,348,360

(3,533,160 )

116,815,200

PART III. Construction, alteration, improvement
and major maintenance of premises
7. Construction, alteration, improvement and major
maintenance of premises

9,614,000

(44,600)

9,569,400

TOTAL, PART III

9,614,000

(44,600)

9,569,400

1,413,300
6,897,900

(100,300)
451,300

1,313,000
7,349,200

3.
4.
5.
6.

PART IV. Equipment, supplies and services
8. Permanent equipment
9. Maintenance, operation and rental of premises

Resolutions adopted on the reports of th .. Fifth Commi",'"

Amount appropriated by
resolution
2899 A (XXVI)8

Revised
appropriation

(US dolfars)

Section

1O. General expenses
11. Printing

Increase
or
(decrease)

97

.

IV

TOTAL, PART

6,037,000
3,039,700

474,200

6.511,200
3,039,700

17,387,900

825,200

18,213,100

PART V. Technical programmes
12. Regional and subregional advisory services
13. Economic development, social development and
public administration; human rights advisory
services; narcotic drugs control
14. Industrial development

1,825,000

(306,000)

1,519,000

5,408,000
1,500.000

(822,000)
(107,500)

4,586,000
],392,500

V

8.733,000

( 1.235,500)

7,497,500

VI. United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development
15. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

12.362,900

( 183,200)

12,179,700

VI

12.362,900

(183,200)

]2,179,700

VII. United Nations Industrial Development Organization
16. United Nations Industrial Development Organization

14.332,100

(232,200)

14,099,900

VII

14,332,100

(232,200)

14,099,900

8,370,700

(66,300)

8,304,400

VIII

8,370,700

(66,300)

8,304,400

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
18. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees

5,398,500

5,398,500

IX

5,398,500

5,398,500

TOTAL, PART
PART

TOTAL, PART
PART

TOTAL, PART
PART VIII. Special missions
17. Special missions
TOTAL, PART
PART IX.

TOTAL, PART
PART X. International Court of Justice
19. International Court of Justice

1,706,]50

(6,250)

1,699,900

1,706,150

( 6,250)

1,699,900

10,574,300

74.900

10,649,200

XI

10,574,300

74,900

10,649,200

GRAND TOTAL

213,124,410

(4,474,210)

208,650,200

TOTAL, PART X
PART XI. Special expenses
20. Special expenses

.
TOTAL, PART

------------------------_._-------~-----------------_._--_._----~---8 The global reduction of $1,250,000, applied to the appropriations as a whole for the purpose of restricting the credits
made available for the production of United Nations documenta tion, was subsequently distributed by the Secretary-General
among the various relevant sections of the budget as follows: section 2 ($57,000), section 3 ($513,000), section 4 ($94,GOO),
section 11 ($337,000), section 15 ($162,100) and section 16 ($86,900).

2. The Secretary-General shall be authorized to transfer credits between scotions of the budget with the
concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;

General Assembly-T"en[y.~eH>l1thSession

98

--------

3. The appropriations for technical assistance programmes under part V shall be administered in accordance with the Financial Regulations of the United Nations, except that the definition of obligations and the
period of validity of obligations shall be in accordance with the procedures and practices established for the
Technical Assistance component of the United Nations Development Programme;
4. The provisions under sections 1, 3, 5 and 11, in a total amount of $309,630 relating to the International Narcotics Control Board, shall be administered as a unit;
5. In addition to the appropriations voted under paragraph 1 above, an amount of $19,000 is appropriated from the accumulated income of the Library Endowment Fund for the purchase of books, periodicals,
maps and library equipment and for such other expenses of the Library at the Palais des Nations as are in
accordance with the objects and provisions of the endowment;
6. In the assessment of the contributions of Member States for 1973, the provisions of regulations 5.2 (d),
4.3 and 4.4 of the Financial Regulations of the United Nations shall be suspended in respect of the decrease
of $4,474,210 in the appropriations approved for 1972 by paragraph 1 of resolution 2899 A (XX VI), compared with the revised appropr,iations for that year approved by paragraph 1 of the present resolution; this
amount shall be entered in a separately identified account of the United Nations and held in suspense pending
a fUI'ther decision by the General Assembly at a later date.
2104th plenary meeting
8 December 1972

B
INCOME ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1972

The General Assembly
Resolves that for the financial year 1972:
1. The estimates of income approved by its resolution 2899 B (XXVI) of 22 December 1971 shall be
revised as follows:
. _ ~ - ~

--------------~ . .

Amount approved
by resolution
2899 B (XXVI)

_--------_._----

Income section

Increase
or
(decrease)

Revised
appropriatioll
-

~----------~-~----

(US dol/aI'S)

PART 1. Income from staff assessment
1. Income from staff assessment

.

25.313.650

(403,650)

24,910,000

I

25,313,650

(403,650)

24,910,000

.

2,499,400
4,910,000
3,198,600

(7,900)
( 148,500)
23,800

2,491,500
4,761,500
3,222,400

II

10,608,000

( 132,600)

10,475,400

GRAND TOTAL

35,921,650

(536,250)

35,385,400

TOTAL, PART
PART II. Other income
2. Funds provided £rom extra-budgetary accounts
3. General income
4. Revenue-producing activities
TOTAL, PART

- _ ..

_._-_._.~._-_

...

_-

2. The [ncome from staff assessment shall be credited to the Tax Equalization Fund in accordance with
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955;
3. Direct expenses of {he United Nations Postal Administration, services to visitors, catering and related
services, and the sale of publications shall be charged against the income derived from those activities;
4. In the assessment of the contributions of Member States for 1973 and of their respective credits for
that year in the Tax Equalization Fund, the provisions of regulations 5.2 (b) and (e) of the Financial Regulations of the United Nations shall be suspended in respect of the net decrease of $132,600 in the estimates of
miscellaneous income and the decrease' of $403,650 in the e~timates of income from staff assessment approved
for 1972 by paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 2899 B (XXVI), compared with the revised estimates
of income from these sources approved by paragraph 1 of the present resolution; these amounts shall be entered
in the separately identified account of the United Nations referred ,to in paragraph 6 of resolution A above,
and held in suspense pending a further decision by the General Assembly at a later date.
2104th plenary meeting
8 December 1972

99

2960 (XXVII). Pattern of conferences

The General Assembly
1. Approves the calendar of conferences and meet-

ings as set forth in the addenda 2G to the report of the
Secretary-General;
2. Reaffirms the applicability of paragraphs 8 to
12 of General Assembly resolution 2609 (XXIV) of
16 December 1969, which relate to the pattern of
conferences and meetings;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the Advisory Committee on Administr~­
tive and Budgetary Questions, to continue to submIt
programmes of meetings and conferences to the General
Assembly at each session for its approval;
4. Approves the comments and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;27
5. Requests the Joint Inspection Unit, in particular,
to prepare the study requested in paragraph 6 of
resolution 2609 (XXIV), including a model pattern
of conferences for New York, Geneva and Vienna as
recommended by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in paragraph 9
of its report and taking into account the views expre~sed
in the Fifth Committee at the twenty-seventh seSSIon,
and to submit that study to the General Assembly at
its twenty~ninth session.

2108th plenary meeting
13 December 1972

2961 (XXVII). Scale of assessments for the. apportionment of the expenses of the Dmted
Nations

A

The General Assembly
Resolves that:
(a) The rates of assessment for the following States,
which were admitted to membership in the United
Nations at the twenty-sixth session of the General
Assembly, shall be as follows:
Member State

Bahrain
Oman ..
Qatar
.........
United Arab Emirates

Per cent

0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04

These rates shall be added to the scale of assessments
for 1973 contained in subparagraph (a) of General
Assembly resolution 2654 (XXV) of 4 December 1970
and subparagraph (a) of resolution 2762 (XXVI)
of 8 November 1971;
(b) For the financial year 1972, Bahrain, Oman,
Qatar and the United Arab Emirates shall each contribute at the rate of 0.04 per cent, these rates to be
applied to the same basis of assessment for 1972 as
for other Member States;
(c) For the financial year 1971, the four new
Member States shall each contribute an amount equal
to one ninth of 0.04 per cent applied to the same
26A/8790/Add.l and 2.
27 A/8868 and Add.I.

basis (If assessment for 1971 as for other Member
States;
(d) The contributions payable by Bahrain, Oman,
Qatar and the United Arab Emirates for 1971 and
1972 shall be used far the financing of the budget for
1973 under regulation 5.2 (c) of the Financial Regulations of the United Nations;
(e) The advances to the Warki~g Capital Fu~d by
Bahrain, Oman, Qatar and the Umted Arab EmIrates
under regulation 5.8 of the Financial Regulations of
the United Nations shall for each of these States be
0.04 per cent of the authorized . level of t~~ Fund,
and thcse advances shall be carned as additIOnal to
the amount of the Fund;
(f) Switzerland, which under Economic and Social
Council resolution 1600 (LI) of 20 July 1971 became
a me III ber of the Economic Commission for E~rope
on 24 March 1972, sh;]ll be called upon to contnbute
towards the expenses of the Commission for the financial
years 1972 and 1973 at the rate of 0.84 per cent.

2108th plenary meeting
13 December 1972
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 14 (l) of 13 February 1946,
23S (III) of 18 November 1948, 665 (VII) of
5 December 1952 and 1137 (XII) of 14 October
1957 relating to the apportionment of the expenses. of
the United Nations among its Members and the fixmg
of the maximum contribution of anyone Member
State,
Affirming that the capacity of Member States to contribute towards the payment of the ordinary. e~penses
of the United Nations is a fundamental cntenon on
which scales of assessment are based,
Noting that, when it was decided by the G~neral
Assembly in 1957 that, in principle, the maxl~1Um
contribution of anyone Member State to the ordmary
expenses of the United Nations should not exceed
30 per cent of the total, the United Nations consisted
of eighty-two Member States,
Noting further that, since the General Assembly
decision of 1957, fifty States have been admitted to
membership in the United Nations,
Recalling that, since the General Assembly decision
of 1957, there has been a reduction in the percentage
contribution of the State paying the maximum contribution from 33.33 per cent to 31.52 per cent;
Decides that:
(a) As a matter of principle, the maximum contribution of anyone Member State to the ordinary
expenses of the United Nations shall not exceed 25 per
cent of the total;
(b) In preparing scales of assessment for future
years, the Committee on Contributions shal} implement
subparagraph (a) above as soon as practIcable: so. as
to reduce to 25 per cent the percentage contnhutwn
of the Member State paying the maximum contribution,
utilizing for this purpose to the extent necessary:
(i) The percentage contributions of any newly
admitted Member States immediately upon their
admission;
(ji) The normal triennial increase in the percentage
contributions of Member States resulting from
increases in their national incomes;

100

(;ent'ral Asst'lIIbly-Twenty-seventh Session

(c) Notwithstanding subparagraph (b) above, the
percentage contribution of Member States shall not
in any case in the United Nations, the specialized
agencies or the International Atomic Energy Agency
be increased as a consequence of the present resolution.
2108th plenary meeting
/3 December /972

c
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 582 (VI) of 2 I December
1951,665 (VII) of 5 December 1952, 876 A (IX)
of 4 December 1954, 1927 (XVIII) of 11 December
1963 and 2118 (XX) of 21 December 1965 relating
to the additional recognition to be given to the low
per capita income countries and to the attention to be
given to the developing countries in the calculation of
their rates of assessment,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Contributions on its thirty-second session,28
Noting the views of the Committec on Contributions
on the question of allowance for low per capita income,
expressed in paragraph 21 of its report,
1. Reaffirms its previous directives to the Committee on Contributions regarding the additional recognition to be given to the low per capita income
countries and the attention to be given to the developing
countries in the calculation of their rates of assessment;
2. Requests the Committee on Contributions, at
its next review of the scale of assessments, to change
the elements of the low per capita income allowance
formula so as to adjust it to the changing world
economic conditions.
2108tlz plenary meeting
13 December 1972

D
Tlze General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 582 (VI) of 21 December
1951, 665 (VII) of 5 December 1952, 876 A (IX)
of 4 December 1954,1927 (XVIII) of 11 December
1963 and 2118 (XX) of 21 December 1965 relating
to ,the attention and recognition to be accorded by the
Committee on Contributions to the countries with low
per capita income when calculating the rates of their
assessment, in view of their economic and financial
problems,
Noting that the ceiling for the highest contribution
has been lowered twice and that the per capita ceiling
principle has been fully implemented since 1956, but
that the floor for minimum contribution set at 0.04 per
cent has not been lowered since 1946, in spite of the
increase in the membership of the United Nations
and other factors,
Taking into consideration that the allowance formula
was benefiting mainly those developing countries with
assessments higher than the floor and that the countries
with the lowest per capita income, including the least
developed among the developing countries, were not
benefiting from any recommendations in favour of the
developing countries in this respect, because of the
rigidity of the fixed floor,
1. Reaffirms that due regard should be accorded to
the developing countries, especially those with the
28 Official Records of the Gcncral Assembly. Twcnty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. ] I (A/8711 and Corr.l and Add.I).

lowest per capita income, to help them meet their
priorities at home and to help them offset the inflationary trends continuously affecting their payments
in dollar terms;
2. Requests the Committee on Contributions, in
formulating the coming scale of assessment, to lower
the !loor from 0.04 per cent to 0.02 per cent to allow
the adjustments necessary for the developing countries,
in particular those with the lowest per capita income.
2108th plenary meeting
13 December 1972

2988 (XXVII). Confirmation of the appointment8
mad., In' the Secretarv-General to fill "aeancies in thp memhcrsl~ip of the Investments
Committee29

The General Assembly
Confirms the appointment by the Secretary-General
of the following persons as members of the Investments Committee for a three-year term beginning on
I January 1973:
Mr. R. Manning Brown,
Mr. Jean Guyot.
2111 tlz plenary meeting
15 December 1971

•

• •
A s a result of the ahove appointments. th~ ]nvestm~nts
Committce will be composed as follows: Mr. Eugene Bl.ACK,··
Mr. R. Manning BROWN,"H Mr. Jean GUYOT,"· the
Honourable David MONTAGU,·· Mr. George A. MURPHY·
alld Mr. B. K. NEHRU.·

* Term of office expires on 31 December 1973.

** Term of office expires on 31 December 1974.
*** Term of office expires on 31 December 1975.

2989 (XXVII). Administrative and hurlgt"tary eo·
ordination of the United Nations with the
specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency

Tlze General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on
administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the
United Nations with the specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency;SO
2. Requests the Secretary-General to refer the
report, as well as the comments made in the Fifth
Committee on this subject,31 to the executive heads of
the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agcncy, through the consultative machinery of
the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, and to
the members of the Committee for Programme and
Co-ordination for their information and comments,
and also to the members of the Board of Auditors
and the Joint Inspection Unit for their information.
2111 tlz plenary meeting
15 December 1972
ell See

aha "Other decisions", p.

::0 A/8874.

11~.

:ll Sec Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyse\'cnt!t SrssiOIl, Fifth Commillee, 1536th, 1537th, 1540th,
1541st, 1544lh and 1545th meetings.

.__ ~ __.

Resolutions adoptt·d on the reporls of th .. Fifth Commit'-'·,,

-------------

--_.- - - - - - -

ANl\EX

2990 (XXVII). Uniterl Nations International
~chool

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,32
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations
International School in providing international education facilities of a high academic and cultural standard
for children of the United Nations community in New
York and the need to preserve the international
character of the School,
Noting that this international character is being
endangered by the diminishing percentage of the enrolment of children of United Nations staff members,
1. Decides, subject to review by the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session, to increase the. maximum
of the education grant provided in regulatIon 3.2 of
the Staff Regulations of the United Nations from $1,000
to $1,500, effective 1 January 1973, and to amend that
regulation accordingly;
2. Urges, as increased funds become available in
future years through the operation of the United
Nations International School Development Fund, that
consideration should be given to increasing bursaries,
to the extent practicable, and using them as a means
of attracting additional children from members o.f the
diplomatic and consular corps who do not receIve a
substantial education grant from their Governments;
3. Appeals to Governments to continue to assist the
United Nations International School to the extent possible, especially by providing scholarships and making
available qualified teachers.
2111 th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

101

Ollilin.. of the United Nations Juridical Yearbook

Part One. Legal staWs of the United Nations and related
intergo\'ernmcntal orl:al1i~(lti'>lls

Chapter I. Legislative texts concerning the legal status of
the United Nations and related intergovernmental organizations
Chapter II. Treaty provisions concerning the legal status of
the United Nations and related intergovernmental organizations
Part Two. Legal aetil'ilies of the United Nations and relatcd
ill(<'I'gOl·,'ml11el1/(1t organi~ations

Chapter III. General review of the legal activities of the
United Nations and reJ~lted intergovernmental organizations
Chapter IV. Treaties concerning international law concluded under the auspices of the United Nations and
related intergovernmental organizations
Ch"ptcr V. Decisions of administrative tribunals of the
Unit~d Nations and related intergovernmental organizations
Chapter VI. Selected legal opinions of the secretariats of
the United Nations <lnd related intergovernmental organiz<ltions
Part Three. Judici(ll deei"iolls on questions relating to the
lJllited Nations and refated intergovemmental organizations
Ch~lpter vrr. Decisions of intern<ltional tribunals
Ch"pter VIII. Decisions of nation<l] tribunals

/Jart Four. Legal bihliography of the United Nations and
related illtcrgOl'crnllu'ntal ()rg(lni~a!ions

3007 (XXVII). (;ompositioll of the Secretariat

n/(' General Asscmblr,
3006 (XXVII).

United Nations Juridical
Yearbook s:1

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by its resolution 1814 (XVII) of
18 December 1962, it decided that the United Nations
Juridical Yearbook should contain the documentary
materials listed in the annex to that resolution,
Having considered, at its twenty-sixth session, the
comments concerning the United Nations Juridical
Yearbook set forth in the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the programme of recurrent publications
of the United Nations 34 and, at its twenty-seventh session, the views concerning the Yearbook contained in
the report of the Secretary-General on the programme
of recurrent publications,S5
Decides that the United Nations JuridicaL Yearbook
shall contain henceforth the documentary materials
listed in the annex to the present resolution.
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
32 A/8856.
S:1 At its 2037th plenary meeting,

on 23 September 1972, the
General Assembly decided to refer to the Sixth Committee,
for prior consideration, the part of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on recurrent publications which dealt with publications in the legal field. The present resolution was adopted on
the recommendation of th~ Sixth Committee, as set forth in
the report of the Fifth Committee (A/8978).
34 See A/8362, paras. 59-70.
3~ See A/8851, para. 9.

Having considered the composition of the Secretariat:\'; and the long-term recruitment plan,37
J)(,lirous of ensuring that, in accordance with Article R of the Charter o[ the United Nations, no restriction, arc placed on the eligibility of men and women
to participate in any capacity and under conditions of
equality in the work of the Secretariat,
Desirous fltrther of avoiding any discrimination between staff members on grounds of sex,
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Gem'ral Assembly at its twenty-eighth session a study
on those provisions of the Staff Rules and Staff Regulations of the United Nations whose application might,
in certain cases, give rise to discrimination between
stafT mcmhers on grounds of sex.
2 I 13th plmary meeting
18 December 1972

;·HHI& (XXVn). Anwlldments to the Staff Regulati(lll~ and Staff Rulps of the Pnited Nations

Th(' General Assemhlr,
Ilaving considered the note by the SccretaryGcnerar;x on a proposed <!mendment 10 the Staff Regulati()lls or the United Nations,
I; Sec
7 Sec

;\! R8~ I and Corr, I and

A/8R36.
,; A/C511439.

Add.l.

102

General Assembl)'-Twenty-seventh Session

1. Decides that, wilh effect from I January 1973,
regulation 1.10 of the Staff Regulations of the United
Nations shall be amended to read as follows:
"The oath or declaration shall be made orally by
the Secretary-General at a public meeting of the
General Assembly. All other members of the Secretariat shall make the oath or declaration before the
Secretary-General or his authorized representative."
2. Takes note of the changes made by the Secretary-General in the Staff Rules of the United Nations
in the year ending on 31 ~ ugu~t 1972, as set forth in
his report.: lfl
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3042 (XXVII). United Nations salary system

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2743 (XXV) of 17 December 1970, by which it establi~hed the Special Committee for the Review of the United Nations Salary
System,
Recalling further its resolution 13 (I) of 13 Fehruary 1946, on the basis of which the International Civil
Service Advisory Board was established in 1948, and
recalling that the terms of reference of the Board were
subsequently extended by resolution 1981 (XVIII) of
17 December 1963.
Noting the report of the Special Committee for the
Review of the United Nations Salary System,40 the
eommcnts thereon by the lnternational Civil Service
Advisory Board,tl the Secretary-General 42 and the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,oJ:J and the statement of the Federation of
International Civil Servants' Associations,44
Noting that, in its report, the Special Committee
for the Review of the United Nations Salary System
recommended the establishment of a new organ for the
regulation and co-ordination of the conditions of service
of the United Nations common system,
Noting that the International Civil Service Advisory
Board and the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions recommend the establishment
of an international civil service commission composed
of experts who should be independent of executive
heads, staff associations and Governments, but accountable as a body to the General Assembly,
Noting further that the executive heads of the specialized agencies, as well as representatives of the staff,
believe that such a commission is necessary,
1. Decides to establish in principle, as of 1 January
1974, an International Civil Service Commission consisting of not more than thirteen independent experts
having the requisite qualifications and experience who
would be appointed in their individual capacities by,
and answerable as a body to, the General Assembly;
2. Invites the governing organs of the specialized
agencies in the United Nations common system to offer

such observations as they may have on the proposed
International Civil Service Commission;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, together with
his colleagues in the Administrative Committee on Coordination and after such consultations as he or they
may deem necessary, to submit, through the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session detailed proposals for an International Civil
Service Commission, together with a draft statute covering its terms of reference and procedures, including
conditions and periods of service for the commissioners, methods of selection of the supporting staff of
t he Commission, methods of consultation with representatives of the administrations and staff, and other
necessary administrative, budgetary and financial provisions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General and his colleagues in the Administrative Committee on Coordination to initiate appropriate consultations with a
view to the compilation of a roster of candidates for
appointment to the International Civil Service Commission, selected on the basis of their personal qualifications and experience and of broad geographical
representation, and to consult with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in
time for consideration and decision by the General
Assembly at its twenty-eighth session;
5. Decides to transmit to the International Civil
Service Commission, after it has been constituted, the
report of the Special Committee for the Review of
the United Nations Salary System, the comments of
the International Civil Service Advisory Board and
other related documentation for its consideration and
the submission of recommendations for action at the
earliest possible date;
6. Decides to continue to keep the International
Civil Service Advisory Board in being until such time
as the International Civil Service Commission is constituted and becomes operational.

2116th plenary meeting
19 December 1972

3043 (XXVII). Form of presentation of the
United Nations hudget and duration of the
hudget eycle

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the form of presentation of the United
Nations budget and the duration of the budget cycIe 4fi
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,46
Taking into accollnt the view expressed by the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination at its twelfth
se,sion 47 and by the Economic and Social Council at
its fifty-third session 4R that the new form of presentation constitutes a useful basis for proceeding towards
the introduction of a system of programme budgeting
in the United Nations.

39 A/C.5/143S.

40 Official Records of the General Assemblv. Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 28 (A/R72R and Corr.!).
41/bid., Supplement No. 28A (A/872R/ Add.! ).
4~ A/RR39 and COlT.! :l11d Add.l.
43 A/8914.
44 See A/C.5/1461'i.

4" A/C.S/1429 and CorLI and 2.
46 A/8739.
17 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 10 (E/S!86/Rev.l).
j'See Official Records of the General Assembly. Twentyseventh Session, Supplement No.3 (A/8703).

103

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Commillee

3. Requests the Secrct:lry-General to implement the
new procedures for the regular hudget of the United
Nations, including those items for which additi(lllal
provision is made from extra-budgetary sources. !:lking
into account for this purpose the vil'ws expressc'd in
the Fifth Comll1ittel' at thl' current session;
4. Decides to kl'ep under contil1lH1US review the
progress achieved ill the impiementatioll hy thl' SC'C[l'tary-GcneLtI of these Ill'W procedures on 1he ha,is nr
reports to be submitted by him to the General Assembly.

Noting the views expressed in the Fifth Committee
at the current session,
1. Approves on an experimental basis the new form
of presentation of the United Nations budget, as proposed by the Secretary-General and as modified by the
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and taking into
account the revised time-table considered by the Fifth
Committee;

2. Approves on an experimental basis the introduction of a biennial budget cycle;

2116/11 plcnary !IIec/ing
19 Dccl'lI/her 1117.!

3044. (XXVII). lludget for the finan('ial yem' J 973
A
BUDGET

APPROPRIATIONS

FOR THE

IIN,\NCIAL

YEAR

1973

The General Assembly
Resolves that for the financial year 1973;
1. Appropriations totalling $US 225,920,420 arc herl'by voted for the f(lllowing purp(lses:
- - - - - - - - - - - - .. _~-~-~-_._~--_ .._--- --- -

( (' S .follars)

Section
PART I.

Sessions of the General Assembly. the councils, COli/missions and
committees; special meetings and conferences
1. Travel and other expenses of representatives and members of commissions,
committees and othcr subsidiary bodies
2. Special mcctings and conferences
TOTAL, PART I
Staff costs and related expenses
Salaries and wages
Common staff costs
Travel of staff
Payments under annex J, paragraph,; 2 and 5, of the Staff Regulations;
hospitality

1.519.570
1.922.600
3,442,170

PART II.

3.
4.
5.
6.

II
PART III. Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance
of premises
7. Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance of premises

99,9X9,S00
23.441,300
2.646,350
150,000
126.227.1 SO

TOTAL, PART

TOTAL, PART

11,649,400
11,649,400

III

PART IV.

8.
9.
10.

11.

Equipment, supplies and services
Permanent equipment
Maintenance, operation and rental of premises
General expenses
Printing

1.246,800
7,850,200
6.318.900
3,155,200

TOTAL, PART IV
Technical programmes
12. Regional and subregional advisory services
13. Economic development, social development and public administration;
human rights advisory services; narcotic drugs control
14. Industrial development

18,57 L1 00

PART V.

TOTAL, PART
PART

1.825,000
5,408.000
J ,500.000

V

8,733,000

VI. United Nations Conference on Trade and Dcvefopment

15. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

13.252.600
TOTAL, PART

VI

13,252.600

General Assernbly-Twenty-seventh Session

104

(US dollars)

Section
PART VII.

United Nations Industrial Development Organization
16. United Nations Industrial Development Organization
TOTAL, PART

14,634,700
14,634,700

VII

PART VIII.

Special missions
17. Special missions

8,959,100

TOTAL, PART VIII
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
18. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

8,959,100

PART IX.

5,925,900
5,925,900

IX

TOTAL, PART
PART X.

International Court of Justice
19. International Court of Justice

1,714,900
1,714,900

X

TOTAL, PART
PART XI.

Special expenses
20. Special expenses

10,810,400
TOTAL, PART

10,810,400

XI

PART XII. United Nations Environment Programme
21. United Nations Environment Programme

2,000,000

XII

2,000,000

GRAND TOTAL

225,920,420

TOTAL, PART

--------- -------

2. The Secretary-General shaH be authorized to transfer credits bctween sections of the hudgct with the
concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrativc and Budgetary Questions;
3. The appropriations for technical assistance programmes under part V shall be administered in accordance with the Financial Regulations of the United Nations, except that the definition of obligations and the
period of validity of obligations shall be subject to the following procedures:
(a) Obligations for personal services established in the current financial year shall be valid for the succeeding financial year, provided that appointments of the experts concerned are effected by the end of the current
financial year, and that the total period to be covered by ohligations established for these purposes 3gainst the
resources of the current financial yem shall not exceed twelve man-months;
(b) Obligations established in the current financial year for fellowships shall remain valid until liquidated,
provided that the fellow has been nominated by the requesting Government and accepted by the Organization, and
that a formal letter of award has been issued to the requesting Government;
(c) Obligations in respect of contracts or purchase orders for supplies or equipment recorded in the current year will remain valid until payment is effected to the contractor or vendor, unless they are cancelled;
4. The provisions under sections 1, 3, 5 and 11, in a total amount of $438,300 relating to the International Narcotics Control Board, shall be administered as a unit;
5. In addition to the appropriations voted under paragraph 1 above, an amount of $19,000 is appropriated from the accumulated income of the Library Endowment Fund for the purchase of books, periodicals,
maps and library equipment and for such other expenses of the Library at the Palais des Nations as are in
accordance with the objects and provisions of the endowment.
2116th plenary meeting
19 December 1972

B
INCOME ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1973
The General Assembly
Resolves that for the financial year 1973:
1. Estimates of income other than assessments on Member States totalling SUS 35,958,800 are approved
as follows:

Income section

(US dollars)

1. Income from staff assessment
1. Income from staff assessment
PART

27,383,000
TOTAL, PART

I

27,383,000

105

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(US dollars)

Income section

PART II. Other income
2. Funds provided from extra-budgetary accounts
3. General income
4. Revenue-producing activities

734,000
4,934.000
2,907,800
TOTAL, PART II

8,575,800

GRAND TOTAL

35,958.800

2. The income from staff assessment shall be credited to the T<lx Equalization Fund in accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 973 (X) of l:'i December 1955.
3. Direct expenses of the United Nations Postal Administration, services to visitors, catering and related
services, television services and the sale of publications, not provided for under the budget appropriations, shall
be charged against the income derived from those acti vilies.
2116th plenary lIleeting
19 December 1972

FINANCING OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1973

The General Assembly
Resolves that for the financial year 1973:
1. Budget appropriations totalling $US 225,920,420 shall be financed in accordance with regulations
5.1 and 5.2 of the Financial Regulations of the United Nations as follows:
(a) As to $8,575,800, by income other than staff assessment for 1973 approved under resolution B ahove;
(b) As to $1,238,198, by the amount available in surplus account for the financial year 1971;
(c) As to $311,032, by contribution of new Member States for the financial years 1971 and 1972;
(d) As to $215,795,390, by assessment on Member States in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 2654 (XXV) of 4 December 1970, 2762 (XXVI) of 8 November 1971 and 2961 A (XXVII) of 13 December 1972 on the scale of assessments for the financial year 1973;
2. There shall be set off against the assessment on Member States, in accordance with the provisions of
General Assembly resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, their respective shares in the Tax Equalization
Fund in a total amount of $27,897,264 comprising:
(a) $27,383,000, being the estimated staff assessment income for 1973;
(b) $514,264, being the excess of actual income from staff assessment over the approved estimate for
1971.
2116th plenary meeting
19 December 1972
3045 (XXVII). Unforeseen and extraordinary
expenses for the financial year 1973

The General Assembly
1. Authorizes the Secretary-General, with the prior
concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and subject to the
Financial Regulations of the United Nations and the
provisions of paragraph 3 below, to enter into commitments to meet unforeseen and extraordinary expenses in the financial year 1973, provided that the
concurrence of the Advisory Committee shall not be
necessary for:
(a) Such commitments, not exceeding a total of
$US 2 million, as the Secretary-General certifies relate
to the maintenance of peace and security;
(b) Such commitments as the President of the International Court of Justice certifies relate to expenses
occasioned by:
(i) The designation of ad hoc judges (Statute of
the Court, Article 31), not exceeding a total
of $37,500;

(ii) The appointment of assessors (Statute, Article 30), or the calling of witnesses and the
appointment of experts (Statute, Article 50),
not exceeding a total of $25,000;
(iii) The holding of sessions of the Court away
from The Hague (Statute, Article 22), not
exceeding a total of $75,000;
(c) Such commitments to authorize the SecretaryGeneral to draw on the Working Capital Fund in the
amount of $200,000 for emergency assistance in any
one year, with a normal ceiling of $20,000 per country
in the case of anyone disaster;
(d) Such commitments made in accordance wilh
paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 2959
(XXVII) of 12 December 1972, not exceeding a total
of $25,000. as the Secretary-General certifies relate to
assistance 10 Governments at their request in the
elaboration of national preparations to meet natural
disasters;
2. Resolves that the Secretary-General shall report
to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions and to the General Assembly

106

Gencl'al Assembl)'-Tw<,nty-seventh Session

at its twenty-eighth session all commitments made
under the provi,ions of the present respJulion, together
with the circumst:lI1ces relatin~ thereto. and shall submit suppkmen!<lry estilllates tl~ the Assl'lllbly in respect
of stich cOlllmitments;
J. Decides that if, as a result of a decision of the
Security Council, commitmL'l1ts relating to the maintenance of peaee and seeUlity should arise in an estimated
total exceeding $10 million before the twenty-eighth
session of the G.'neral Asscmbly, a special session of
the Assembly shall be convened by the Secretary·
General to consider thL~ matter.
2 J 16th plenary //leeting
19 Dece til bel' 1972

3046 (XXVII). Working (~apital Fund for the
finant'ial ,.'al' 197:~
The General Assemhh
Resolves that:
I. The Working Capital Fund ,h,lll he established
for the year emling 31 Deccmhn 1973 in the amount
of SUS 4U million;
2. Member States shall make advances to the
Working Capital Fund in dccordance with the scale
adopted by the General Assembly for contributions of
Members to the budget for the financial year 1973;
3. There shaH be sct off against this allocation of
advances:
(a) Credits to Member States resulting from trans-

fers made in ] 959 and 1960 from surplus account to
the Working Capital Fund in a tot<ll amount of
$1,079,158;
(b) Cash advances paid by Member States to the
Working Capital Fund for the financial year 1972
under General Assembly resolution 2901 (XXVI) of
22 December 1971;
4. Should the credits and advances paid by any
Member State to the Working Capital Fund for 1972
exceed the amount of that Member State's advance
under the provisions of paragraph 2 above, the excess
shall be set off against the amount of the contribution
payable by the Member State in respect of the financial
year 1973;
5. The Secretary-General is authorized to advance
from the Working Capital Fund:
(a) Such sums as may be necessary to finance budgetary appropriations pending the receipt of contributions; sums so advanced shall be reimbursed as soon
as receipts from contributions are available for the
purpose;
(b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance commitments which may be duly authorized under the
provisions of the resolutions <ldopted by the General
Assembly, in particular resolution 3045 (XXVII) of
19 December 1972 relatinc to unforeseen and extraordinary expenses; the Secretary-General shall make
provi,ion in the budgct estimates for reimbursing the
Working Capital Fund;

(c) Such sums as, together with net sums olltstanding for the same purpose, do not exceed $150,000, to
continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous
self-liquidating purchases and activities; advances in
excess of the total of $ 150,000 may be made with the

prior coneurrL'nce of the Advisory Committee on Administrative :lI1d Budgetary Questions;
(d) With the prior concurrcnce of thc Advisory
Committce on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,
such SUIllS as Illay be rcquired to finance payments of
:ldvance insurance premiums where the period of
Insurance extends beyond the end of the financial year
ill which payment is made; the Secretary-General shall
make provision in the budget estimates of each year,
during the 1ik of t he related policies, to cover the
charges applieahle to each sueh year;
(e) Such sums :IS may he necessary to enable the
rax Equaliz~llion Fund to meet current commitments
pending the accumulation of credits; such advances
shall be repaid ~l' soon as credits arc available in the
Tax EqualizatIon Fund;
6. Should the provision in paragraph 1 above
prove inadequate to meet the purposes normally related
ill the Working Capital Fund, the Secretary-General is
'LUthoril.ed to utilize, in 1973, cash from special funds
and accounts in his custody, under the conditions approved in General Assembly resolution 1341 (X III)
of 13 DL'eemhcr 195~, or the proeL'l'ds of loans authorized by the A,sL'mbly
2/1 (j/ II plc/lon' lIleeting
/9 Decelllher 197::

;l047 (XXVII). Hen·nue-produeing aelivitil's
The General A sselllbly,
Having exa//lined the report of the Secretary-General
on revenue-producing activities,41l especially paragraph 26 thereof on services to visitors, and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Ouestions/'Il
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General on
revcnue-producing activities submitted to the General
Assembly at its tenth session,ol in which he indicated
that the revenue is not, nor should it be, the sole
justification for such activities and that regard must
he paid to ot her, and often overriding, purposes of
thc activities which arc not always consonant with a
purely fmancial approach to management questions,

Convinced of the public information value of the
United Nations guided tours,
Mindful that the Ollice of Public Information is at
present engaged in a serious effort to help build a
positive public image of the United Nations,

Convinced that the guided tours play an important
public relations role in the success of this operation,
Aware that thousands of visitors taking the guided
tours every year acquire a better understanding of the
United Nations and, in turn, spread a spirit of goodwill which is essential for the reinforcement of confidence in the Organization,
Concerned about the reduced public interest in the
United Nations, as reported by the Secretary-General,
and the .,teady decline in the number of visitors to
the United .I\' ations,
49 A/C.5i\479.
oil Offici"f Records of ,!Ie Gelleraf Assemblv. Twenty-scvellth
Sessioll. S/I(l(lfcmcllt No. 8A (A/8708/Adcl.I-30), document
A/8708/ Add.22.
01 Ihid .. 1'('1/111 Sessioll, Annexes, agenda items 38 and 47.
document A/C.S 623.

107

Re.olution. adopted on the report. of the Filth Committee

1. Affirms the view of the Secretary-General that
the guided tours are conceived primarily as a public information service and as a means of informing visitors
of the aims and activities of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures to strengthen the operation of the
public services of the Office of Public Information in
order to increase their effectiveness.
2116th plenary meeting
19 December 1972
3048 (XXVII). Use of travel funds

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit on the use of travel funds in the United Nations,1I2
and the comments thereon by the Secretary-General1l3
and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,1I4
1. Confirms its resolution 2245 (XXI) of 20 December 1966 in connexion with recommendations 1
and 2 contained in chapter VII of the report of the
Joint Inspection Unit;1I11
2. Concurs with the observations and conclusions
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative aad
Budgetary Questionsll6 with regard to recommendations
3 to 10 contained in that chapter;
3. Decides that the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions with respect to sea travel on home leave ll1
should be implemented as from 1 January 1974.
2116th plenary meeting
19 December 1972
3049 (XXVII). The financial situation of the
United Nations

A

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the consensus adopted by the General
Assembly at its nineteenth sessionll8 states that the
financial difficulties of the Organization should be solved
through voluntary contributions by Member States,
Recalling the urgent appeal by the Secretary-General
at the 1331st plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
on 1 September 1965, that voluntary contributions be
so made and recalling that, subsequently, the SecretaryGeneral established the United Nations Special
Account, into which substantial voluntary contributions were received and credited,
Conscious of the background a~ainst which the Special Committee on the Financial Situation of the United
Nations was established, namely, the growing recog':'
nition that the finances of the United Nations must
be placed on a sound footing and that more than a
112 See A/8900.
lIS See A/8900/Add. I.
114 A/8900/Add.2.
5:1 See also A/8900/Add.2, paras. 4-8.
56A/8900/Add.2, paras. 9-18.
111 Ibid., para. 16.
118 Official Records of the General Assembly. Nineteenth
Session, Annexes, annex No. 21, document A/5916, para. 2;
and ibid., Plenary Meetings, 1331st meeting, paras. 3 and 4.

decade had elapsed without that desired objective
having been achieved,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee
on the Financial Situation of the United Nations,59
especially paragraph 11, in which the Special Committee requested the Secretary-General to ask Member States to review their payments pattern with a view
to paying future contributions on time, and paragraph 19, which states that there was general agreement
in the Special Committee that the major part of the
deficit could be eliminated only by voluntary contributions from Member States or by the cancellation of
obligations included within the short-te~m deficit,
1. Urges all Member States to review their payments pattern on contributions to the r«:iP.~r budget of
the United Nations with a view to paYi»&"future contributions on time;
,
2. Requests the Secretary-General to solicit suggestions from Member States for amendments to the Financial Regulations of the United Nations or to other
instructions and procedures, which would have as their
objective the achieving of a steady and timely cash
flow in the payment of assessed contributions to the
Organization, and to submit a report thereon for consideration by the General Assembly at its twentyeighth session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to establish a
special account under regulation 6.6 of the Financial
Regulations into which voluntary contributions may
be paid and used for the purpose of clearing up the
past financial difficulties of the United Nations and
especially for resolving the short-term deficit of the
Organization referred to in the report of the Special
Committee on the Financial Situation of the United
Nations, and to merge into this account the United
Nations Special Account referred to above;
4. Requests all Member States and invites nonmember States, as a matter of urgency, to make voluntary contributions to this special account in cash or
through the cancellation of obligations due from the
United Nations or as the result of claims accepted
by it;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to consider, in
consultation with Member States, ways and means of
obtaining voluntary contributions;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to devise modalities for the purposes set forth in paragraphs 4 and 5
above, which in his opinion may be effective;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report the
resu,lts achieved to the General Assembly at its twentyeighth session.
2116th plenary meeting
19 December 1972

B

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee
on the Financial Situation of the United Nations,eo
Conscious of the urgent need to place the finances of
the United Nations on a sound footing,
Endorsing the conclusion of the Special Committee
that a comprehensive solution is required for the financial problems of the United Nations and that the re1111 Ibid..

(A/8729).
60 Ibid.

Twenty-seventh

Selsion,

Supplement

No.

29

108

General Assembly-Twenty-seyenth Session

sponsibility for seeking a final over-all solution rests
with all Member States and not solely with any single
category of Member States,
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore all possibilities for an over-all solution of the
financial difficulties of the United Nations, taking into
consideration the results of the examination of the
problems undertaken by the Special Committee on the
Financial Situation of the United Nations.
2116th plenary meeting
19 December 1972

at the United Nations and in all the organizations
related to it.",
Recalling further that this General Assembly action
did not deal with the matter of the unpaid assessed
contributions for China recorded in the accounts of the
United Nations as of that date,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to retain, as of
25 October 1971, as unpaid assessed contributions for
the regular budget for China on the accounts of the
United Nations only such amount as equals a pro rata
share of the 1971 assessed contributions for China
based on the period from 25 October 1971 to 31 December 1971 inclusive;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to compute and
transfer to a special account, after the application of
paragraph 1 above, the balances of all unpaid assessed
contributions for 1971 and prior years as were shown
on the accounts of the United Nations for China; of
the amount so transferred, the balance arising from
regular budget assessments shall be included as a part
of the short-term deficit of the Organization for the
purpose of computing that deficit.
2116th plenary meeting
19 December 1972

C

The General:4ssembly,
Recalling its resolution 2758 (XXVI) of 25 October
1971, which in its operative paragraph reads:
"Decides to restore all its rights to the People's
Republic of China and to recognize the representatives of its Government as the only legitimate representatives of China to the United Nations, and to
expel forthwith the representatives of Chiang Kaishek from the place which they unlawfully occupy

*

Other

*

*

decisions

Report of the Economic and Social Council
(Item 12)

At its 211lth plenary meeting, on 15 December 1972, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee,61 took note of chapters XVII,
XVIII, XIX (section B) and XXI (sections Band C) of the report of the
Economic and Social Council. 62
Budget estimates for the financial yt'ar 1973
(Item 73)

At its 2116th plenary meeting, on 19 December 1972, thc General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee:
(a) Decided to request the Secretary-General to submit at the twenty-eighth
session of the General Assembly a progress report on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Administrative Management Service on those units which
had already been surveyed, and the reasons for the delay in taking action in some
areas;63
(b) Took note of the report of the Secretary-General and of the observations in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions on the progress made by the Administrative Management Service in
conducting a survey of manpower utilization in the Secretariat;"l
(c) Took note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General and
of the comments continued in paragraphs 2 to 7 of the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the review and reappraisal of United Nations information policies and activities;65
(d) Decided to request the Secretary-General to undertake an evaluation of
a world-wide United Nations lottery as a potential source of revenue, on the
understanding that such a study should include the political, cultural, legal and
administrative problems involved and should be subject to the provisions of
paragraph 11 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions. 66
611bid.• Twenty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 12, document A/8731. para. 3.
621bid., Twenty-seventh Session, Supplement No.3 (A/8703).
6ll Ibid., Twenty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 73, document A/8985. para. 58.
M Ibid., para. 59.
651bid., para. 76.
66 Ibid., document A/898S1 Add. 1, para. II.

ResolutioDs adopted on the reporte of the Fifth Committee

(e) Taking into consideration paragraph 5 (d) of document A/C.5/1458
and Corr.1 and 2, and paragraphs 8 and 9 of document A/8708/Add.17,
approved the suggestions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in paragraphs 23 and 24 of
document A/8708/Add.17, and requested the Secretary-General to submit a
complete report on the various proposals of Member States-including the developing countries-<:oncerning the location of offices of the Secretariat in their
cities; the said report should be prepared in accordance with General Assembly
resolutions 2618 (XXIV) of 17 December 1969 and 2895 (XXVI) of 22 December 1971, so as to comply with the requests to the Secretary-General in those
resolutions and to provide Member States with a sufficient number of options,
including all available information, in order to facilitate a decision. The present
decision is taken without prejudice to the Secretary-General's proposal regarding
the transfer of the personnel of the Division of Human Rights in 1973 ;87

(f) Endorsed the suggestions and recommendations contained in paragraphs 6, 13 to 15, 25 and 26 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions concerning office accommodation at Headquarters ;68
(g) Took note of the reports of the Secretary-General and of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the programme of
major maintenance of and improvements to the Palais des Nations, Geneva, and
extension of the Palais des Nations, and endorsed the comments and recommendations contained in paragraphs 3 to 6 of the report of the Advisory Committee;"
(h) Took note of the reports of the Secretary-General and of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the United Nations
accommodation in Addis Ababa, Bangkok and Santiago, Chile;70
(i) Decided to defer until its twenty-eighth session consideration of the
report of the Joint Inspection Unit on trust funds of the United Nations;71
(j) Decided to defer until its twenty-eighth session consideration of the
report of the Secretary-General on electronic data processing and information systems in the United Nations family of organizations, on the understanding that the
report would be brought up to date at that time. 72

At the same meeting, the General Assembly approved the decisions of the
Fifth Committee contained in paragraphs 47 and 51 of part I of its report. 78
Budget estimate8 for the financial year 1973
(Item 73)
Elimination of all forms of racial discrimination
(Item 50)

At its 2085th plenary meeting, on 15 November 1972, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee,74 decided that the eighth
session of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination should be
held in New York.
Planning e8timate for the financial year 1974
(Item 74)

At its 2097th plenary meeting, on 4 December 1972, the General Assembly,
on the recpmmendation of the Fifth Committee,711 decided to defer again the
implementation of paragraphs 2 and 7 of its resolution 2370 (XXII) of 19 December 1967.
67 Ibid., document A/8985/Add.I, para. 33 and document A/L.697 and Add.1.
68 Ibid., document A/8985/ Add.I, para. 34.

611 Ibid., para. 37.
70 Ibid., para. 39.

71 Ibid., para. 41.
72 Ibid., para. 42.
73 Ibid., document A/8985.

74 Ibid., document A/889I, para. 9.
71S Ibid., agenda item 74, document A/8922, para. 4.

109

110

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

Confirmation of the appointments made by the Secretary-General to fill
vacancies in the membership of the Investments Committee76
(Item 76 (d) )

At its 2111th plenary meeting, on 15 December 1972, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee,77 took note of the ad hoc
arrangements proposed by the Secretary-General with respect to Mr. Roger
DE CANDOLLE for the year 1973.
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the
United Nations
(Item 77)

At its 2108th plenary meeting, on 13 December 1972, the General Assembly
took note of the decision of the Fifth Committee, contained in paragraph 25 of
its report,78 by which it requested the Committee on Contributions, in granting
relief to countries with low per capita income, to give additional attention to
the less developed of the developing countries.
Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations with
the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(Item 78)

At its 2111th plenary meeting, on 15 December 1972, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee,79 approved the suggestion of the
Secretary-General in his report on the study of the methods of financing by the
International Atomic Energy Agency of certain meetings and conferences of the
Agency held away from its headquarters that the information set out in that report
be referred to the Joint Inspection Unit for its use in its review of the pattern of
conferences.
Joint Inspection Unit
(Item 79)

At its 2088th plenary meeting, on 24 November 1972, the General Assembly
took note of the decision of the Fifth Committee, contained in paragraph 2 of its
report,80 by which it approved the suggestions of the Secretary-General concerning
the submission of the various reports of the Joint Inspection Unit under the
relevant agenda items of the twenty-seventh session of the Assembly.
At the same meeting, the General Assembly endorsed the views of the Fifth
Committee, as set forth in paragraphs 13, 18 and 20 of its report, concerning
the continuation of the Joint Inspection Unit.
Publications and documentation of the United Nations
(Item 80)

At its 2113th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1972, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee,81 decided that, apart from the
matters dealt with in the Sixth Committee concerning the contents of the United
Nations Juridical Yearbook,R2 consideration of this ag~nda item should be deferred
until the twenty-eighth session.
Personnel questions
(Item 81)

At its 21 13th pienary meeting, on ] 8 December 1972, the General Assembly
approved the decisions of the Fifth C(Jmmi~tcc contained in paragraphs 64, 65 and
90 of its report. 83
76 See also resolution 2988 (XXVII).
77 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Twenty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda
item 76, document A/8884, para. 3.
78 Ibid., agenda item 77, document A/8952.
79 Ibid., agenda item 78, document A/8732, para. 11.
80 Ibid., agenda item 79, document A/8895.
81 Ibid., agenda item 80, document A/8978, para. 4.
82 See resolution 3006 (XXVIl).
83 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda
item 81, document A/8980.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

At the same meeting, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the
Fifth Committee,84 took note of:
(a) The reports of the Secretary-General on the composition of the Secretariat and on long-term recruitment planning;
(b) The note by the Secretary-General on the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit on personnel problems in the United Nations, pending a full submission by
the Secretary-General on the substance of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit
to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.
841bid., para. 92 (b).

III

General A ssembly- -Twenty-seventh Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE 1

CONTENTS
nate of
odopri,m

Resol,";Off,
No.

Title

Item

2926 (XXVII)
2927 (XXVII)

Report of the International Law Commission (A/8892)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of the International Law Commission

85

28 November 1972

113

85

28 November 1972

114

2928 (XXVII)

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law (A/8896)
.
.
United Nations Conference on Prescription (Limitation) in the
International Sale of Goods (A/8896)
.
International conference of plenipotentiaries on the representation
of States in their relations with international organizations

86

28 November 1972

114

86

28 November 1972

115

87

14 December 1972

116

88

14 December 1972

116

89
49 (ai

14 December 1972

116

18 December 1972

117

91

18 December 1972

118

92

18 Decem bel' 1972

119

90

18 DecL'mlwr 1972

119

(A/8892)

2929 (XXVII)
2966 (XXVII)

.

(A/8796)

.

2967 (XXVII)

Report of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining
.
Aggression (A/8929)

2968 (XXVII)

Need to consider suggestions regarding the review of the Charter
of ,the United Nations (A/8798, A/L.691) .....
Respect for human rights in armed conflicts (A/8966)
Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country

3032 (XXVII)
3033 (XXVII)

(A/8968)

3034 (XXVII)

.

Measures to prevent international terrorism which endangers or
takes innocent human lives or jeopardizes fundamental freedoms,
and study of the underlying causes of those forms of terrorism
and acts of violence which lie in misery, frustration, grievance
and despair and which cause some people to sacrifice human
lives, including their own, in an attempt to effect radical changes
(Al8969, AlL.696)
.

Other decisions
Review of the role of the International Court of Justice

lFor the resolution relating to the United Nations Juridical Yearbook, sec "RL'Soltlliom adopted
Fifth Committee", resolution 3006 (XXVII).

2926 (XXVII). Report of the International Law
Commission

011

the reports of the

Recalling that, in its res,)!ution 2780 (XXVI) of
3 December 1971, it recommended that the Internaotional Law Commission should study as soon as
possible, in the light of the comments of Member
State?, the qyestion of the protection and inviolability
of ~Iplomatlc. agents and other persons entitled to
speCIal protectIOn under international law with a view
to preparing a set of draft articles dealing'with offences
committed against such persons.
. Belie~'illg that t~e need to pmt:ct the means by which
mternatlOna! rebtlOns are carr~I_'d on requires the most
c~refu! consideration by.States in view of the continuing
VIOlent attacks upon <.bp10I1lats, embassies and other
persons. and places entitkri to special protection under
mternatlOnal law,

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its twenty-fourth
session,2
Emphasizing the need for the further codification
and progressive development of interna;tional law in
order to make it a more effective means of implementing the purposes and principles set forth in A,rticles 1
and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations and to
give increased importance to its role in relations among
nations,
Welcoming the draft articles prepared by the International Law Commission on succession of States in
respect of treaties,s

Noting with. satisflictio~ the .d~aft articles prepared
by the Internatlona! Law CommissIOn on the prevention
and punishment of crimes against diplomatic agents
and other iutcl nationally protected persons,4

2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/8710/Rev.l).
3 Ibid., chap. II, sect. C.

4 Ibid.

Il3

chap. III, sect. B.

114

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

Considering that since its first session in 1949 the
International Law Commission has included the question of State responsibility in its agenda and that so far
it has received six reports from its first Special Rapporteur and four reports from its second Special
Rapporteur, in addition to various studies prepared
by the Secretariat of the United Nations,
Noting with appreciation {hat the United Nations
Office at Geneva organized, during the twenty-fourth
session of the International Law Commission, an eighth
session of the Seminar on International Law,
I

1. Takes note of the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its twenty-fourth
session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the work it accomplished at that
session;
3. Recommends that the International Law Commission should:
(a) Continue its work on State responsibility, taking
into account the v,iews and considerations referred to
in General Assembly resolutions 1765 (XVII) of
20 November 1962, 1902 (XVIII) of 18 November
1963 and 2400 (XXIII) of 11 December 1968, with
a view to the preparation of a first set of draft articles
on ,the topic;
(b) Proceed with further consideration on succession
of States in respect of treaties in the light of comments
received from Member States on the present draft;
(c) Continue its work on succession of States tin
respect of matters other than treaties, taking into
account the views and considerations referred to in
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
(d) Continue its study of the most-favoured-nation
clause;
(e) Continue its consideration of the question of
treaties concluded between States and ,international
organizations or between two or more international
organizations;
4. Approves the programme and organization of
work of the twenty-fifth session of the International
Law Commission, to be held in 1973, including the
decision to place on the provisional agenda of that
session an item entitled "Review of the Commission's
long-term programme of work: 'Survey of International
Law' prepared by the Secretary-General";
5. Notes that the International Law Commission
intends, in the discussion of its long-term programme
of work, to decide upon the priority to be given to
the topic of the law of the non-navigational uses of
international watercourses, as requested by the General
Assembly in resolution 2780 (XXVI);
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, as
soon as possible, the study on the legal problems
relating to the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses requested by the General Assembly in
resolution 2669 (XXV) of 8 December 1970, and to
present to the International Law Commission at its
twenty-fifth session an advance report on such study;
7. Expresses the wish that, in conjunction with
future sessions of the International Law Commission,
other seminars might be organized, which should continue to ensure the participation of an increasing number
of jurists of developing countries;

8. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the International Law Commission the records of the
discussion on the report of the Commission at the
twenty-seventh session of the General Assembly;

II
1. Invites States and also the specialized agencies
and interested intergovernmental organizations to submit, as soon as possible, their written comments and
observations on the draft articles prepared by the
International Law Commission concerning the prevention and punishment of crimes against diplomatic
agents and other internationally protected persons;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
comments and observations referred to in paragraph 1
above in order to facilitate consideration of the draft
articles by the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session in the light of those comments and observations;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session an item entitled "Draft convention on the prevention and punishment of crimes
against diplomatic agents and other internationally
protected persons" with a view to the final elaboration
of such a convention by the General Assembly;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session all
relevant documentation which may be required for the
discussion of that item.
2091sf plenary meeting
28 Novemha ]972

2927 (XXVII). Twenty-fifth anniversary of the
International I,aw <:olllmissioll

The General Assembly,
Recalling that on 21 November 1947 the General
Assembly adopted resolution 174 (II) by which it
established the International Law Commission and
approved the Statute of the Commission,
Noting that the twenty-fifth anniversary of the opening of the first session of the International Law Commission will be marked on ] 2 April 1974,
1. Commends the International Law Commission
and all the distinguished lawyers who have participated
in its work for the outstanding contribution made to
the codification and progressive development of international law;
2. Recommends that the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the International Law Commission should be observed in an appropriate manner by the General
Assembly during its twenty-eighth session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the
present resolution to the attention of international
organizations concemed with questions of international
law.
209]sf plenary meeting
28 Novemher 1972
2928 (XXVlI). Report of tilt' Uni ....) Nations
<:ommission on Intl'rnational TraIl., Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
nf its fifth session,5
~ Ibid .• Supplement No.

17 (A 'R7171.

lIS

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966 by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law and defined
the object and terms of reference of the Commission,
Further recalling its ,resolutions 2421 (XXIII) of
18 December 1968, 2502 (XXIV) of 12 November
1969, 2635 (XXV) of 12 November 1970 and 2766
(XXVI) of 17 November 1971 concerning the reports
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its first, second, third and
fourth sessions,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law,
in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting the developing countries, would significantly contribute to
universal economic co-operation among all peoples on
a basis of equality and, thereby, to their well-being.
Bearing in mind that the Trade and Development
Board, at its twelfth session,6 took note of the report
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifth session;
2. Commends the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law for the progress made in its
work and for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of
its working methods;
3. Notes with satisfaction the completion of draft
articles for a convention on prescription (limitation) in
the international sale of goods;7
4. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law should'
(a) Continue in its work to pay special attention
to the topics to which it has decided to give priority,
that is, the international sale of goods, international
payments, international commercial arbitration and
international legislation on shipping;
(b) Accelerate its work on training and assistance
in the field of international trade law, with special
regard to developing countries;
(c) Continue to collaborate w.ith international organizations active in the field of international trade
law;
(d) Continue to give special consideration to the
interests of developing countries and to bear in mind
the special problems of land-locked countries;
(e) Keep its programme of work and its worki'ng
methods under constant review;
5. Invites the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law to seek from Governments and
interested international organizations information relating to legal problems presented hy the different kinds
of multinational enterprises, and the implications
thereof for the unification and harmonization of international trade law, and to consider, in the light of this
information and the results of available studies, including those by the International Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the Economic and Social Council, what
further steps would be appropriate in this regard;
6 Ibid.• Supplemem No. 15 (A/8715/Rev.I l,
para. 239.
7 Ibid., Supplement No. 17 (A/8717), para. 21.

6. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law the records of the discussions at the twentyseventh session of the General Assembly on the Commission's report on the work of its fifth session.
2091st plenary meeting
28 November 1972

2929 (XXVII). United Nations Conference on
Prescription (Limitation) in the International Sale of Good"

The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter II of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifth session,S which contains
draft articles for a convention on prescription (limitation) in the international sale of goods,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966 by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law and defined
the object and terms of reference of the Commission,
Noting that at its fourth and fifth sessions, held in
1971 and 1972, the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law, in the light of observations
and comments submitted by Governments, considered
and revised provisional draft articles on prescription
(limitation) in the international sale of goods that had
been prepared by the Commission's Working Group on
Time-Limits and Limitations (Prescription) in the International Sale of Goods, and that the Commission, at
its fifth sess,ion, approved the draft articles as set
forth in paragraph 21 of its report,
Bearing in mind that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law at its fifth session
recommended that the General Assembly should convene an international conference of plenipotentiaries to
conclude, on the basis of the draft articles adopted
by the Commission, a convention on prescription
(limitation) in the international sale of goods,9
Convinced that conflicts and divergencies among the
existing national rules governing prescription (limitation) in the international sale of goods constitute
obstacles to the development of world trade and that
the harmonization and unification of such rules would
promote the flow of world trade,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law for its valuable
work on prescription in the international sale of goods;
2. Dedides that an ,international conference of
plenipotentiaries shall be convened in 1974, in New
York or at any other suitable place for which the
Secretary-General receives an invitation, to consider
the question of prescription (limitation) in the international sale of goods and to embody the results of
its work in an international convention and such other
j'nstruments as it may deem appropriate;
3. Further decides to oonsider at its twenty-eighth
session any other matters requiring decision in conncxion with the conference and to inolude in the
provisional agenda of that session an item entitled
"United Nations Conference on Prescription (Limitation) in the International Sale of Goods";

part one,
q

Ibid.. Supplement No. 17 (A/8717).
para. 20.

H lhid.,

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

Il6

4. Refers to the conference the draft articles contained in chapter II of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its fifth session, together with the oommenta,ry
thereon and the analytical compilation of comments
and proposals to be prepared by the Secretary-General
pursuant to the decision of the Commission,9 as the
basis for consideration by the conference.
2091st ple1Ulry meeting
28 November 1972

2966 (XXVII). International conference of plenipotentiaries on the representation of States
in their relations with international organizations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Representation
of States in their relations with international organizations",
Having noted the report of the Secretary-Generapo
containing the comments and observations received
from Member States, Switzerland, the Secretary-General, specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, submitted in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 2780 (XXVI) of 3 December
1971,
Recalling that in its resolution 2780 (XXVI) the
General Assembly noted with satisfaction that at its
twenty-third session, in 1971, the International Law
Commission, in the light of the observations and comments of Member States, Switzerland and the secretariats of various international organizations and taking
into account the relevant resolutions and debates of
the Assembly, revised the provisional draft articles on
the representation of States in their relations with international organizations, prepared at its twentieth, twentyfirst and twenty-second sessions, and adopted a final
set of draft articles as the basis of a convention,
Recalling further that in its resolution 2780 (XXVI)
the General Assembly expressed its appreciation to
the International Law Commission for its valuable
work on the question of representation of States in
their relations with international organizations and to
the Special Rapporteur on the topic for his contribution to this work,
1. Decides that an international conference of
plenipotentiaries shaH be convened as soon as practicable to consider the draft articles on the representation of States in their 'relations with international
organizations and to embody the results of its work
in an international convention and such other instruments as it may deem appropriate:
2. Further decides to include in the provisional
agenda of its twenty-cighth session an item entitled
"Internat,ional confercnce of plenipotentiaries on the
representation of States in their relations with international organizations" in order that the General
Assembly may consider the question of participation
in the conference. the dale and place' of the conference
and other rebted matters~
10 A/8753 ,'riel

,\<101 11,

3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session a memorandum on the methods of work of the conference
so that the Assembly may consider the matter with
a view to reducing the costs of the conference.
2109th ple1Ulry meeting
14 December 1972
2967 (XXVII). Report of the Special Committee
on the Question of Defining Aggression

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression on the
work of its fifth session, held in New York from
31 January to 3 March 1972,11
Noting the progress so fa,r achieved by the Special
Committee in its consideration of the question of
defining aggression and on the draft definition, as
reflected in its report,
Considering that it was not possible for the Special
Committee to complete its task at its fifth session,
Considering that in its resolutions 2330 (XXII) of
18 December 1967, 2420 (XXIII) of 18 December
1968, 2549 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969, 2644
(XXV) of 25 November 1970 and 2781 (XXVI) of
3 December 1971 the General Assembly recognized
the widespread conviction of the need to expedite the
definition of aggression,
Considering the uraency of bringing the work of the
Special Committee to a successful conclusion and the
desirability of achieving the definition of aggression as
soon as possible,
Noting also the common desire of the members of
the Special Committee to continue their work on the
basis of the results achieved and to arrive with due
speed at a draft definition in a spirit of mutual understanding and accommodation,
1. Decides that the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression shall resume its work at
Geneva, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2330 (XXII), as early as possible after 1 April
1973;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and
services;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Report of
the Special Committee on the Question of Defining
Aggression".
2109th ple1Ulry meeti"g
14 December 1972
2968 (XXVII). Need to consider suggestions reo
~arding the review of the Charter of the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2552 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969 and 2697 (XXV) of 11 December 1970
entitled "Need to consider suggestions regarding the
'review of the Chapter of the United Nations",
11 Official Records of the General Assembly. Twenty-sel'cnth
Session, Supplement No, 19 (A/8719).

Resolutions adopted on the report. of the Sixth Committee

Taking note of the observations which were submitted by Governments in response to the inquiry
made pursuant to resolution 2697 (XXV) and which
are set out in the report of the Secretary-General,12
Observing that less than a quarter of the Governments of Member States have replied to the SecretaryGeneral's inquiry and that no general trend of opinion
in the United Nations can be deduced from these
replies,
Recognizing that a review of the Charter which was
not generally supported would militate against the
desired result, that is, the strengthening of the effectiveness of the United Nations,
Considering that the effectiveness of the United
Nations depends in the fir9l: place on the conduct of
Member States,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member
States that have not already done so to communicate
to him, before 1 July 1974, their views on the desirability of a review of the Charter of the United
Nations and their actual suggestions in this re&pect;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General AS&embly at its twenty-ninth session a
report setting out the views and suggestions of Member
States which have been communicated to him in accordance with paf'agraph 1 above;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to bring up to
date as quickly as possible the Repertory of Practice
of United Nations Organs;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-ninth session the item entitled "Need to
consider suggestions regarding the review of the Charter
of the United Nations".
2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
3032 (XXVU). Respect for human rights in
armed conflict8
The General Assembly,
Conscious that only complete respect for the Charter
of the United Nations and general and complete
disarmament under effective international control can
bring about full guarantees against armed conflicts
and the suffering caused by such conflicts, and determined to continue all efforts to these ends,
Conscious that the development of many weapons
and methods of warfare has made modem armed
conflicts increasingly cruel and destructive of civilian
lives and property,
Reaffirming the urgent need to ensure full and
effective application of existing legal rules relating to
armed confticts and to supplement these rules by new
ones in order to take into account the modern developments in methods and means of warfare,
Noting with concern that the existing legal rules and
obligations relating to human rights in armed conflicts
are frequently being disregarded,
Recalling the successive resolutions adopted by the
United Nations relating to human rights in armed conflicts, in particular General Assembly resolutions 2852
(XXVI) and 2853 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
and resolution XIII adopted by the twenty-first Inter12 A/8746 and Carr. I and Add. 1-3.

117

national Conference of the Red Cross, held at Istanbul
in 1969,13 concerning the reaffirmation and development of the laws and customs applicable in armed
conflicts,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneralH on the results of the seoond session of the
Conference of Government Experts on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian
Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, which was held
at Geneva from 3 May to 3 June 1972 at the invitation
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Having taken cognizance of the report prepared by
the International Committee of the Red Cross on the
work of the Conference of Government Experts, Iii
Expressing appreciation to the International Committee of the Red Cross for its dedicated efforts to
promote the reaffirmation and development of international humanitarian law applicable in armed conflicts,
Emphasizing the importance of continued close
collaboration between the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross,
Welcoming the progress achieved at the second
session of the Conference of Government Experts,
Noting with concern, nevertheless, that agreement
has not emerged among government experts on drafts
concerning a number of fundamental issues, such as:
( a) Methods to ensure a better application of existing
rules relating to armed conflicts,
(b) Definitions of military objectives and protected
objects, in order to counter the tendency in armed
conflicts to regard ever growing categories of objects
as permissible targets for attack,
(c) Definitions of protected persons and combatants,
responsive to the need for improved protection of
civilians and of combatants in modern armed conflicts,
(d) The question of guerrilla warfare,
(e) Prohibition of the use of weapons and methods
of warfare which indiscriminately affect civilians and
combatants,
(f) Prohibition or restriction of the use of specific
weapons which are deemed to cause unnecessary suffering,
(g) Rules facilitating humanitarian relief in armed
conflicts,
(h) Definition of those armed conflicts of a noninternational character which should be subject to rules
additional to those contained in the Geneva Conventions of 1949,18
Considering that substantial progress on fundamental
issues such as those enumerated above is indispensable
if the efforts to supplement international humanitarian
law by new rules are to become significant for the
alleviation of the suffering brought about by modem
armed conflicts,
Welcoming the readiness of the Swiss Federal Council,
as communicated to the Secretary-General, to convoke
a diplomatic conference on the reaffirmation and development of international humanitarian law applicable
in armed conflicts,
Believing that the further preparations for that conference as well as its organization must be such that
13 See A/7720. annex I. sect. D.
14 AI8781 and Corr.l.
Iii Report on the Work of the

Conference (Geneva. July
1972).
16 United Na~ions, Treaty Series. vol. 75, Nos. 970.973.

lI8

General AlIIembly-Twenty-seventh Session

substantial progress is achieved on fundamental issues
which are as yet unresolved,
Expressing its appreciation to the International Committee of the Red Cross for undertaking a series of
consultations to ensure the complete preparation for
the conference,
1. Urges aU Governments and invites the International Committee of the Red Cross to continue to
seek through consultations to achieve a rapprochement
in the positions of Governments to ensure that the
diplomatic conference envisaged will adopt rules which
will mark substantial progress on fundamental legal
issues connected with modern armed conflicts and
which will contribute significantly to the alleviation of
the suffering brought about by such conflicts;
2. Calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to
observe the international humanitarian rules which are
applicable, in particular the Hague Conventions of
1899 and 1907,17 the Geneva Protocol of 1925 18 and
the Geneva Conventions of 1949, and, to this end, to
provide instruction concerning these rules to their armed
forces and information concerning the same rules to
the civilian population;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to encourage
the study and teaching of principles of respect for
international humanitarian rules applicable in armed
confliots;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on
relevant developments concerning human rights in armed
conflicts and to prepare, as soon as possible, a survey
of existing rules of international law concerning the
prohibition or restriction of use of specific weapons;
S. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Human
rights in armed conflicts: respect for human rights in
armed confliots".
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3033 (XXVII). Report of the Committee on
Relations with the H08t Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country, ill
Drawing attention to its resolutions 2747 (XXV) of
17 December 1970 and 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971, in which it urged the Government of the
host country to make certain that the measures taken
to ensure the protection and security of permanent
missions to the United Nations and their personnel
were adequate to enable those missions to perform
properly the functions entrusted to them by their Governments,
Recalling the responsibilities of the Government of
the host country with respect to the United Nations
and the missions accredited to it, their personnel and
their correspondence under the Agreement between
the United Nations and the United States of America
17 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague
Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York,
Oxford University Press, 1915).
18 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, No. 2138,
p. 65.
19 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/8726).

regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations,20
the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations 21 and general international law,
Recalling the duty of missions accredited to the
United Nations to respect the laws and regulations of
the host country,
Considering that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of the United Nations and to the
status of the missions accredited to it are of mutual
concern to Member States, including the host country,
as well as to the Secretary-General,
Noting with satisfaction the ratification by the host
country of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961,22
Taking note of the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country and of the recommendations contained therein,
1. Condemns all acts of violence, terrorist attacks
and harassment directed against the premises of missions accredited to the United Nations or against their
personnel as fundamentally incompatible with the status
of such missions and personnel under international
law and calls upon the host country to take all appropriate preventive measures;
2. Welcomes the adoption, on 24 October 1972, of
the Act for the Protection of Foreign Officials and
Official Guests of the United States 23 and hopes that
this Act will form a basis for the application of effective
measures against acts of violence, terrorist attacks and
harassment directed at the premises of missions accredited to the United Nations or their personnel,
including the application of effective measures against
the organization of demonstrations and picketing where
there is reason to believe that they may be accompanied by acts of violence or may prevent the conduct
of the normal business of missions accredited to the
United Nations;
3. Considers it necessary that active measures
should be taken on the part of the authorities of the
host country, the United Nations Secretariat and all
others concerned to enhance the relations between the
diplomatic community and the local community, in
order to ensure the existence of conditions conducive to
the effective functioning of the United Nations and the
missions accredited to it;
4. Decides that the Committee on Relations with
the Host Country should continue its work in 1973 in
conformity with General Assembly resolution 2819
(XXVI) with the purpose of examining all matters
falling within its terms of reference;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to furnish all
appropriate assistance to the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country and to bring to its attention
issues of mutual concern relating to the implementation
of the Agreement between the United Nations and the
United States of America regarding the Headquarters
of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations;
6. Requests the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country to submit to the General Assembly at
its twenty-eighth session a report on the progress of
its work and to make, if it deems necessary. appropriate
recommendations;
20 See resolution 169 (II).
21 See resolution 22 A (I).
22 United Nations, Treaty Series,
23 See A/8871JRev.1.

vol. 500. No. 7310, p. 95.

Resolutions adopte,! on the reports of the Sixth Committee

-----------------

119

---------_.

5. Invites States to become parties to the existing
international conventions which relate to various aspects
of the problem of international terrorism;
G. Invites States to take all appropriate measures at
the national level with a view to the speedy and final
elimination of the problem, bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3 above;
7. Invites States to consider the subject-matter
urgently and submit observations to the SecretaryGeneral by 10 April 1973, including concrete proposals
for finding an effective solution to the problem;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit an
analytical study of the observations of States submitted
under paragraph 7 above to the ad hoc committee to
be established under paragraph 9;
9. Decides to establish an Ad Hoc Committee on
International Terrorism consisting of thirty-five
members to be appointed by the President of the General Assembly bearing in mind the principle of equitable
geographical representation;
10. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to consider
the observations of States under paragraph 7 above and
submit its report with recommendations for possible
co-operation for the speedy elimination of the problem,
bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3, to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Ad Hoc Committee with the necessary facilities and
services;
12. Decides to include the item in the provisional
agenda of its twenty-eighth session.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Report of
the Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3034 (XXVII). Measures to prevent international
terrorism which endangers or takes innocent
human lives or jeopardizes fundamental
freedoms, and study of the underlying causes of those forms of terrorism and acts of
violence which lie in misery, frustration,
grievance and despair and which cause some
people to sacrifice human lives, including
their own, in an attempt to effect radical
changes

The General Assembly,
Deeply perturbed over acts of international terrorism which are occurring with increasing frequency and
which take a toll of innocent human lives,
Recognizing the importance of international cooperation in devising measures effectively to prevent
their occurrence and of studying their underlying causes
with a view to finding just and peaceful solutions as
quickly as possible,
Recalling the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations,24
1. Expresses deep concern over increasing acts of
violence which endanger or take innocent human lives
or jeopardize fundamental freedoms;
2. Urges States to devote their immediate attention
to finding just and peaceful solutions to the underlying
causes which give rise to such acts of violence;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right to self-determination and independence of all peoples under colonial
and racist regimes and other forms of alien domination
and upholds the legitimacy of their struggle, in particular the struggle of national liberation movements, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and the relevant resolutions of the organs of
the United Nations;
4. Condemns the continuation of repressive and
terrorist acts by colonial, racist and alien regimes in
denying peoples their legitimate right to selfdetermination and independence and other human
rights and fundamental freedoms;

•

•

•

The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-General25 that, 'in pursuance of paragraph 9 of the above resolution, he had appointed the members
of the Ad Hoc Committee on International Terrorism.
As a result, the Ad Hoc Committee will be composed of the
following Member States: ALGERfA, AUSTRIA, BARBADOS,
CANADA,
CONGO, CZECHOSLOVAKIA,
DEMOCRATIC YEMEN,
FRANCE, GREECE, GUINEA, HAITI, HUNGARY, INDIA, IRAN, ITALY,
JAPAN, MAURITANIA, NICARAGUA, NtGERIA, PANAMA, SWEDEN,
SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, TuNISIA, TuRKEY, UXRAINIAN SoVIET
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REpUBLICS,
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,
UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, UNITED STATES OF AMElUCA,
URUGUAY, VENEZUELA, YEMEN. YUGOSLAVIA, ZAIRE and
ZAMBIA.

24 See resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

25 A/8993.

*

*

*

Other decisions
Review of the role of the International Court of Justice
(Item 90)

At its 2114th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1972, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Sixth Committee,26 decided to include in the
provisional agenda of its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Review of the
role of the International Court of Justice".
26 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda
item 90, document A/8967, para. 14.

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

COMPOSITION OF ORGANS
This list provides a reference to the composition of the Security Council, the
Economic and Sooial Council, the Trusteeship Council and the International Court
of Justice, and of organs established by the General Assembly. The composition
of an organ will be found in the volume of resolutions for the session indicated
in roman figures, on the page of that volume given in the right-hand column.
Organ

.')'cssion

Page

Ad Hoc Committee on Co-operation between the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization
.

XXVI
XXVII
XXVII

66, footnote 42
119
20

XXVII
XXVII

29
94

XXIV

7l. footnote 18

XXVI
XXVII

139-140

Ad Hoc Committee on International Terrorism
.
Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean. . . . .. . . . . . .
.
.
Advisory Commission of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (members appointed by
the General Assembly)
.
.
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa
.
Advisory Committee on the United Nations Programme of Assistance
in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law
Board of Auditors
Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa
Committee on Applications for Review of Administrative Tribunal
Judgements·
........
. . . . .. . .....
Committee on Arrangements for a Conference for the Purpose of
Reviewing the Charter
......... .
.
Committee on Contributions

.

Committee on Relations with the Host Country

9S

XX

18

X

30

X
XXVII

49
94·95

XXVI

139

~, vol. I

5
7

Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor
beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction

XXVI

38

Conference of the Committee on Disarmament

XXIV

14

Disarmament Commission

XIV

4

Committee on the P~aceful Uses of Outer Space

.{

Economic and Social Council

XXVII

xiii

Founding Committee of the United Nations University

XXVII

36, footnote 6

Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme

XXVII

45

Industrial Development Board

XXVII

xiv

International Court of Justice

XXVII

xiv

International Law Commission

XXVI

xiv

Investments Committee

XXVlI

100

Peace Observation Commission

XXVI

20

Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference on a Code
of Conduct for Liner Conferences

XXVII

52, footnote 84

Security Council

XXVII

xiii

Specilll Committee for the Review of the United Nations Salary
System

XXV

117-118

• Composed of the Member States represented on the General Committee of the
General Assembly at the twenty-seventh session. See page xii.
121

General AIlIembly-Twenlyoeeveath Seul.OD

122

Organ

Special Committee on Apartheidb
.
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations
.
Special Committee on the Financial Situation of the United Nations .
Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression
.
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
<;~mntries and Peoples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. ..
Special Committee on the World Disarmament Conference
.
Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Population of the Occupied Tenitories
.
Trusteeship Councile
.
United Nations Administrative Tribunal
.
United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of
.
Koread
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
.
United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine
.
United Nations Council for Namibia.
United Nations Scientific Advisory Committee!
.
United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation
.
United Nations Staff Pension Committee (members appointed by the
General Assembly)
.
Warking Group on the Financing of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
.

S'IIUno

Pag,

34-35
XXV
26
XXIV
132-133
XXVI
XXII, vol. II
9

XXVII
XXVII

10
15

XXIV

S5, footnote 12
51

XXII
XXVII
V
XXV
III,part I
XXVII
IX

9S

9
xiv

25
90
5

X

5

XXVII

95

XXV

30-31

b By a letter of 24 November 1972, which was brought to the attention of the General
Assembly by a note of the Secretary-General (A/8988), the Permanent Representative of
Guatemala informed the Chairman of the Special Committee that his Government had decided to withdraw from the Committee from 1973 onwards. The President of the General
Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-General (A/8994) that he had appointed
Peru as a member of the Special Committee.
e Liberia should be deleted from the list of members of the Council since its term of
office expired on 31 December 1968.
d By letters of 14 November 1970 (A/8168) and 21 November 1972, the Permanent
Representatives of Chile and Pakistan informed the Secretary-General that their respective
Governments had decided to withdraw from the Commission.
e The Council received this designation pursuant to General Assembly resolution 2372
(XXII). It was originally established under resolution 2248 (S-V) as the United Nations
Council for South West Africa.
t The Committee received this designation pursuant to General Assembly resolution 1344

(XIII).

CONVENTIONS AND DEaARATiONS
This list provides a reference to the conventions aDd declarations aDd to
the agreements, covenants and treaties the texts of which appear in the volumes
of resolutions.
Til,.

Came'"

Agreement between the United Nations and the
Pound.doD c0ncerning the use of the premises of the Peace PaJace at 1be Hapae ....
Supplementary Agreement
.
Agreement between the United Nations and the UDited States of America
regarding the Headquarten of the United Natioas .•............
Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Iletura of AItroDauts aDd abe
Return of Objects Launched into OUter Space
.
Convention for the Suppression of the Traftk: in PerIOIII aDd of abe Ex·
ploitation of the Prostitution of Othen
.
Convention on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Ale for MarrIqI _
Registration of Marriages ................•.•....•••..••••••••
Convention on International Liability for Damap Caused by Space Objects
Convention on Special Missions and Optional Protocol conceraiDI abe
Compulsory Settlement of Disputes
.
Convention on the International Right of Correction
.
.
Convention on the Nationality of Married Women
Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Umitadons to War
Crimes and Crimes against Humanity
.
Convention on the Political Rights of Women
.
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of GeDodde
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized ApDda
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the UDited Natioaa
.
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Produetioa ...
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) ancl Toxin Weapoas ....
on Their Destruction
.
Declaration of Legal Principles Governing the Activities of States in abe
Exploration and Use of Outer Space .....................•....
Declaration of Principles Governing the sea·Bed and the Ocean Floor,
and the Subsoil Thereof, beyond the Limits 01. National lurilclicdoD
Declaration of the Rights of the Child.
.
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Ilela·
tions and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations
.
Declaration on Social Progress and Development
.
Declaration on Territorial Asylum
.
Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
.
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries aDd
Peoples
.
Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Main
of States and the Protection of Their Independence and Sovereipty
Declaration on the Occasion of the Twenty-fifth Anniversary 01. the UDiti14
Nations
Declaration on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear and 1bermollUClear
Weapons..
.
.
Declaration on the Promotion among Youth of the Ideals 01. PeIlce. MulUl1
Respect and Understanding between Peopla
.
.
Declaration on the Rights of Mentally RetardOd PeflODS
Declaration on the Strengthening of International Sccurily
.
International Convention on the Elimination of AD Porms' of . . . .
Discrimination ..........................................••••.
International Covenant on Civil and Politic:al Iliabll aDel Optioaal Protoc:ol
International Covenant on Economic, Soclal aDd Cultural lUPII

lIS

... (I)
{ 2902 (XXVI)

169 (II)
2345 (XXII)
317 (IV)
1763 A (XVD)

2m (XXVI)
1$30 (XXIV)
630 (VD)
1040 (XI)

2391 (XXIU)

_A

640 (VB)
(m)

179 (II)
22 A (I)
2126 (XXVI)
1M2 (XVIU)

274' (XXV)
1316 (XIV)
262$ (XXV)
2542 (XXIV)

2312 (XXII)
2263 (XXII)

1514 (XV)
2131 (XX)
2627 (XXV)
11S3 (XVI)
2037 (XX)
21$6 (XXVI)
27M (XXV)
2106 A (XX)
2200 A (XXI)
2200 A (XXI)

124

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session
Title

Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration
and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies
.
.
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Treaty on the Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and
Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Sea-Bed and the Ocean
Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof
.
.
United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination
.
Universal Declaration of Human Rights

Resolution No.

2222 (XXI)
2373 (XXII)
2660 (XXV)

1904 (XVIII)
217 A (m)

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

INDEX OF RESOLUTIONS AND DECISIONS
This index provides a reference, by agenda item, to the resolutions adopted
and other aotion taken by the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session.
Age..da
item

Pag.

1. Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation
of Indonesia
2. Minute of silent prayer or meditation
3. Credentials of representatives to the twenty-seventh session
of the General Assembly
(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee
.
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee
.
.
4. Election of the President
5. Constitution of the Main Committees and election of officers
6. Election of the Vice-Presidents
.
7. Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12,
paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations
8. Adoption of the agenda
.
.
9. General debate
10. Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization
.
.
.
11. Report of the Security Council

12. Report of the Economic and Social Council

Resolution 2948 (XXVII)

xii
6
xii
xii
xii

Decision
Decisions

9
9

Decision
9
Resolution 2991 (XXVII)
8
Resolution 2980 (XXVII)
81
Resolution 3009 (XXVII)
66
66
Resolution 3010 (XXVII)
67
Resolution 3011 (XXVII)
67
Resolution 3012 (XXVII)
Resolution 3013 (XXVII)
67
68
Resolution 3014 (XXVII)
Resolution 3015 (XXVII)
48
48
Resolution 3016 (XXVII)
49
Resolution 3017 (XXVII)
50
Resolution 3018 (XXVII)
51
Resolution 3019 (XXVII)
Decisions
9, 58, 108

13. Report of the Trusteeship Council

Resolution 2977 (XXVII)

79

14. Report of the International Court of Justice
15. Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency

Decision
Resolution 2907 (XXVII)

10
2

16. Election of five non-permanent members of the Security
Council
.
17, Election of nine members of the Economic and Social Council

xii
xiii

18. Election of five members of the International Court of Justice

xiii

19. Election of fifteen members of. the Industrial Development
Board
.
.

xiv

20. Co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity

Resolution 2962 (XXVII)

8

21. The situation in the Middle East

Resolution 2949 (XXVII)

6

Resolution 2908 (XXVII)
Resolution 2909 (XXVII)
Resolution 2910 (XXVII)
Resolution 2911 (XXVII)
Resolution 2977 (XXVII)
Resolution 2983 (XXVII)
Resolution 2984 (XXVII)
Resolution 2985 (XXVII)
Resolution 2986 (XXVII)
Resolution 2987 (XXVII)
Decision
Appointments to fill vacancies in the Special Committee

2
3

22. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples: I'eport of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples

125

4

4
79
84
85
86
86
87
90
10

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

126
Ap.u4

Pag•

•t_

Resolution 2937 (XXVII)
Resolution 2938 (XXVII)

6
6

Resolution 2925 (XXVII)

5

Resolution 2936 (XXVII)
Resolution 2930 (XXVII)
Appointment of the members of the Special
Committee on the World
Disarmament Conference

5

15

Resolution 2931 (XXVII)

IS

28. International co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer
space: report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space
{ Resolution 2914 (XXVII)
Resolution 2915 (XXVII)

11
12

23. Admission of new Members to the United Nations

24. Strengthening of the role of the United Nations with regard
to the maintenance and consolidation of international peace
and security. the development of co-operation among all nations and the promotion of the rules of international law in
relations between States
.
25. Non-use of force in international relations and permanent
prohibition of the use of nucleaT weapons
26.

~:~t')b ..........t Conf""re, "pnrt. of th, S""''''Y-{

27. Implementation of the results of the Conference of NonNuclear-Weapon States: report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency
.

IS

29. Preparation of an international treaty concerning the Moon:

Resolution 2915 (XXVII)
Resolution 2932 (XXVII)

16

Resolution 2933 (XXVII)

17

Resolution 2934 (XXVII)

17

Resolution 2935 (XXVII)
Resolution 2992 (XXVII)
Appointment of the members of the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Indian Ocean

19

20

35. Implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security: report of the Secretary-General ..

Resolution 2993 (XXVII)

20

36. Reservation exclusively for peaceful purposes of the sea-bed
and the ocean floor, and the subsoil thereof, underlying the
high seas beyond the limits of present national jurisdiction and
use of their resources in the interests of mankind, and convening of a conference on the law of the sea: report of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the
Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction ....

report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
.
(a) Report of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament
(b) Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(c) Report of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolution 2852 (XXVI), paragraph 5
31. Chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons: report
of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament
32. Urgent need for suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear
tests
.
(a) Report of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament
(b) Report of the Secretary-General
33. Implementation of General Assembly resolution 2830 (XXVI)
concerning the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco): report
of the Secretary-General
.

30. General and complete disarmament

34.

~thn""'~'::"~~"(kn" "'"""of ",,'" ~{

12

20

Resolution 3029 (XXVII)

21,22

37. Preparation of an international convention on principles governing the use by States of artificial earth satellites for direct
television broadcasting
.
{ Resolution 2916 (XXVII)
Resolution 2917 (XXVII)

14
14

38. Policies of apartheid of the Government of South Mrica

24

(a) Reports of the Special Committee on Apartheid

Resolution 2923 (XXVII)
Appointment to fill a vacancy in the Special
Committee

122

Resolution

23

(b) Reports of the Secretary-General

39. Effects of atomic radiation: report of the United Nations
Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation

2905 (XXVII)

127

Index of resolutions and decisions
Pgg.

Resolution 2963 (XXVII)
Appointment of an additional member of the
Advisory
Commission
of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

27

Resolutien 2964 (XXVII)

29

41. Comprehensive review of the whole question of peace-keeping
operations in all their aspects: report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations .....
........

Resolution 2965 (XXVII)

29

42. Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the
Occupied Territories ....
............

Resolution 3005 (XXVII)

30

Resolution 2904 (XXVII)
Resolution 3035 (XXVII)
Resolution 3036 (XXVII)
Resolution 3037 (XXVII)
Resolution 3038 (XXVII)
Resolution 3039 (XXVII)
Resolution 3040 (XXVII)
Decision
Composition of the Preparatory Committee for
the
United
Nations
Conference on a Code
of Conduct for Liner
Conferences

34
51
52
53
S3
53
54

Resolution 3041 (XXVII)

55

Decision

10

40. United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
.
.

29

(a) Report of the Commissioner-General
(b) Report of the Working Group on the Financing of the

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East
(c) Report of the United Nations Conciliation Commission

for Palestine
(d) Reports of the Secretary-General

43. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

(a) Report of the Conference on its third session

58

52

(b) Report of the Trade and Development Board
(c) Confirmation of the appointment of the Secretary-Gen-

eral of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development

Resolution 2952 (XXVll)
{ Resolution 2954 (XXVII)

36
7

Resolution 2953 (XXVII)

37

Decision

10

Resolution 2950 (XXVII)

35

46. Operational activities for development: reports of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Pro- {ReSolution 2969 (XXVII)
gramme
....... ..
.....
Resolution 2971 (XXVII)
Resolution 2972 (XXVII)

38
39
39

44. United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(a) Report of the Industrial Development Board

(b) Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Co-operation be-

tween the United Nations Development Programme and
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(c) Confirmation of the appointment of the Executive Director

of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization
.
.
45. United Nations Institute for Training and Research: report of
the Executive Director
.

J Resolution 2973 (XXVII)

(a) United Nations Development Programme .,
(b) United Nations Capital Development Fund

40

I Resolution 2974 (XXVII)
l Resolution 2975 (XXVII)

41

Resolution 2976 (XXVII)

41

Resolution 2970 (XXVII)

38

40

(c) Technical co-operation activities undertaken by the Sec-

retary-General
(d) United Nations Volunteers programme

.

General Assembly-Twenty..eventh Seuton

128

Page

47. United Nations Conference on the Human Environment:
.
report of the Secretary-General

52.

53.

43
45
46
46
47
47
48
48

45

45
35

Resolution 3032 (XXVII)

117

Decision
Resolution 2919 (XXVII)
Elimination of all forms of racial discrimination
..
Resolution 2920 (XXVII)
{
Decision
(a) Reports of the Secretary-General under General Assembly
resolutions 2784 (XXVI) and 2785 (XXVI)
(b) Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Resolution 2921 (XXVII)
Discrimination
.
(e) Status of the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination: report of the
Secretary-General
(d) Draft convention on the suppression and punishment of
the crime of apartheid
.
Resolution 2922 (XXVII)
Importance of the universal realization of the right of peoples
to self-determination and of the speedy granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples for the effective
.
guarantee and observance of human rights
Resolution 2955 (XXVII)
Principles of international co-operation in the detection, arrest,
extradition and punishment of persons guilty of war crimes
and crimes against humanity ..
Resolution 3020 (XXVII)
Crime prevention and control
.
Resolution 3021 (XXVII)

73
62
62
109

49. Human rights in armed conflicts
(a) Respect for human rights in armed conflicts: report of
the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolutions 2852 (XXVI), paragraph 8, and 2853 (XXVI) ..
(b) Protection of journalists engaged in dangerous missions
in areas of armed conflict: report of the Secretary-General

51.

42
42
42

Resolution 2951 (XXVII)
Composition
of
the
Founding Committee of
the United Nations Uni{
versity

.
.
48. Question of the establishment of an international umverslty

50.

Resolution 2994 (XXVII)
Resolution 2995 (XXVII)
Resolution 2996 (XXVII)
Resolution 2997 (XXVII)
Resolution 2998 (XXVII)
Resolution 2999 (XXVII)
Resolution 3000 (XXVII)
Resolution 3001 (XXVII)
Resolution 3002 (XXVII)
Resolution 3003 (XXVII)
Resolution 3004 (XXVII)
Election of the members
of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme
Election of the Executive
Director of the United
Nations
Environment
Programme

54. Youth, its education in the respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, its problems and needs, and its active
participation in national development and international cooperation
(a) Channels of communication with youth and international
youth organizations: report of the Secretary-General
(b) Implementation of the Declaration on the Promotion
among Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect
and Understanding between Peoples
.........
55. Status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights: report of the
Secretary-General

36

63

63

63

68
68

Resolution 3024 (XXVII)

70

Resolution 3022 (XXVII)

69

Resolution 3023 (XXVII)

70

Resolution 3025 (XXVII)

71

129

Index 01 rellolntioD8 and deeUioaa

Af,::a
56. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(a) Report of the High Commissioner
.
(b) Question of the continuation of the Office of the High
Commissioner
. . . . . .. .
.

Resolution 2958 (XXVII)
Resolution 2956 (XXVII)
Resolution 2957 (XXVII)

6S

57. Freedom of information

Decision

73

Resolution 3026 (XXVII)

71

Resolution 3027 (XXVII)

72

60. Programme for the observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights ....

Resolution 2906 (XXVII)

62

61. Assistance in cases of natural disaster and other disaster
situations: report of the Secretary-General
.

Resolution 2959 (XXVII)

65

62. United Nations conference for a world convention on adoption
law
.

Resolution 3028 (XXVII)

72

Resolution 2978 (XXVII)

80

64. Question of Namibia
Resolution 3031 (XXVII)
(a) Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples
(b) Report of the United Nations Council for Namibia
(c) Question of the enlargement of the United Nations {APPOintment
of
additional members of the
Council for Namibia: report of the Secretary-General ..
United Nations Council
for Namibia
(d) United Nations Fund for Namibia: report of the Secretary-General
....................
Resolution 3030 (XXVII)
(e) Appointment of the United Nations Commissioner for
Namibia
................
Decision

88

.

(a) Draft Declaration on Freedom of Information
(b) Draft Convention on Freedom of Information

58. Human rights and scientific and technological developments:
.
report of the Secretary-General
59. Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance
(a) Draft Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Religious Intolerance
.
(b) Draft International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief

63. Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations ...
(a) Report of the Secretary-General
(b) Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples

65. Question of Territories under Portuguese administration ..
(a) Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples
(b) Report of the Secretary-General
66. Question of Southern Rhodesia

90
87
10

Resolution 2918 (XXVII)

75

Resolution 2945 (XXVII)
{ Resolution 2946 (XXVII)

77
78

Resolution 2979 (XXVII)

80

(a) Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with

regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples
(b) Report of the Secretary-General

67. Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are
impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
in Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Territories under Portuguese domination and in all other Territories under colonial
domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid
and racial discrimination in southern Africa: report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples

Geller.1 A..embly-Twellt)'..~eDtb SeuloD

130
AI/nod"
stem

68. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by tbe specialized agencies and the international institutions associated
with tbe United Nations
.
(a) Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples
(b) R~ports of the Secretary-General
69. United Nations Educational and Training Programme for
Southern Africa: report of the Secretary-General
.
70. Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for
inbabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories: report of the
Secretary-General
.
71. Financial reports and accounts for the year 1971 and reports
of the Board of Auditors
.
(a) United Nations
(b) United Nations Development Programme
(c) United Nations Children's Fund
(d) United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East
(e) United Nations Institute for Training and Researcb
(I) Voluntary funds administered by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees
72. Supplementary estimates for the financial year 1972
.

73. Budget estimates for the financial year 1973

Resolution 2980 (XXVII)

81

Resolution 2981 (XXVII)

83

Resolution 2982 (XXVII)

83

Resolution 2912 (XXVII)

92

Resolution 2947 (XXVII)
Resolution 3043 (XXVII)
Resolution 3044 (XXVII)
Resolution 3045 (XXVII)
Resolution 3046 (XXVII)
Resolution 3047 (XXVII)
Resolution 3048 (XXVII)
Resolution 3049 (XXVII)
Decisions
Decision
Resolution 2960 (XXVII)

96
102
103

74. Planning estimate for the financial year 1974
75. Pattern of conferences: report of the Secretary-General ..
76. Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of subsidiary organs of the General Assembly
(a) Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions
Resolution 2939 (XXVII)
(b) Committee on Contributions
...........
Resolution 2940 (XXVII)
(c) Board of Auditors
Resolution 2941 (XXVII)
(d) Investments Committee: confirmation of the appoint- {
ments made by the Secretary-General
Resolution 2988 (XXVII)
Decision
(e) United Nations Administrative Tribunal

(f) United Nations Staff Pension Committee

Resolution 2942 (XXVII)
Resolution 2943 (XXVII)

77• Scale of assessments for the apportionment of tbe expenses
of the United Nations: report of the Committee on Contrib u t i o n s . . . . . .. .
..
{~~~~~~on 2961 (XXVII)

lOS

106
106
107
107
108

109
99

94
94

9S
100

110
9S
9S

99

110
78. Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United
Nations with the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency: reports of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
. ~ Resolution 2989 (XXVII)
1 Decision
79. loint Inspection Unit

Resolution 2924 (XXVII)
Decision

100

110
93

110

(a) Reports of the loint Inspection Unit
(b) Question of the continuation of the Joint Inspection

Unit: report of the Secretary-General

80. Publications and documentation of the United Nations ....
(a) Report of the Secretary-General
(b) Report of the Advisory Committee

and Budaetary Questions

on Administrative

~ Resolution 3006
~ Decision

(XXVII)

101

110

ladex of relolatloDl aad dedalODl

.4/1."".
;I.m

III
Pili'

81. Personnel questions

101

{ResolUtiOn 3008 (XXVII)
Decisions

110

Resolution 3007 (XXVII)

101

(a) Composition of the Secretariat: report of the Secretary-

General
(b) Other personnel questions: report of the Secretary-Gen-

eral
82. Report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board ..
Resolution 2944 (XXVII)
83. United Nations salary system: report of the Special Committee for the Review of the United Nations Salary System Resolution 3042 (XXVII)
84. United Nations International School: report of the SecretaryGeneral
_. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Resolution 2990 (XXVII)
85. Report of the International Law Commission on the work of {Resolution 2926 (XXVII)
its twenty-fourth session
Resolution 2927 (XXVU)
86. Report of the United Nations Commission OD International { Resolution 2928 (XXVII)
_. . .
Resolution 2929 (XXVII)
Trade Law on the work of its fifth session
87. Representation of States in their relations with international
organizations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Resolution 2966 (XXVII)
88. Report of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining
Aggression
_
_
Resolution 2967 (XXVII)
89. Need to consider suggestions regarding the review of the
Charter of the United Nations: report of the Secretary-General
Resolution 2968 (XXVII)
90. Review of the role of the International Court of Justice ..
Decision
91. Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country Resolution 3033 (XXVII)
92. Measures to prevent international terrorism which endangers
or takes innocent human lives or jeopardizes fundamental
freedoms, and study of the underlying causes of those forms
of terrorism and acts of violence which lie in misery, frustration~ grievance aI!d de~pair ~nd wh~ch cause: some people to {ReSOlution 3034 (XXVII)
sacrifice human bves, lDcludmg their own, 10 an attempt to Appointment of the memeffect radical changes
bers of the .Ad Hoc
Committcc on International Terrorism
93. Amendment to rule 160 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly
.

Resolution 2913 (XXVII)

95

102
101
113
114
114
115
116
116

116
119
118

119

119

93

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

CHECK. LIST OF RESOLUTIONS AND DECISIONS
The resolutions of the General Assembly are numbered in the 'order of their
adoption. This check list includes all the resolutions adopted and other decisions
taken by the Assembly during its twenty-seventh session.
Item

Title

2904 (XXVII)

2905 (XXVII)
2906 (XXVII)
2907 (XXVII)
2908 (XXVII)
2909 (XXVII)
2910 (XXVII)
2911 (XXVII)

2912 (XXVII)

2913 (XXVII)
2914 (XXVII)
2915 (XXVII)
2916 (XXVII)

2917 (XXVII)

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.
Effects of atomic radiation
.
.
Programme for the observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Unjversal Declaration of Human Rights
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
.
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
.
Dissemination of information on decolonization
.
International Conference of Experts for the Support of Victims
of Colonialism and Apartheid in Southern Africa
.
Week of Solidarity with the Colonial Peoples of Southern Africa
and Guinea (Bissau) and Ca.pe Verde Fighting for Freedom,
Independence and Equal Rights
.
Financial reports and accounts for the year 1971 and reports of
,the Board of Auditors
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.
.
Resolution C
.
Resolution D
.
Resolution E
.
Resolution F
.
.
Enlargement of the Committee on Contributions: amendment to
rule 160 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly ..
International action for the mitigation of the harmful effects of
storms
.
.
International co-operation in ,the peaceful uses of outer space ...
Preparation of an international convention on principles governing
the use by States of artificial earth satellites for direct television broadcasting
.
Preparation of interna,tional instruments or United Nations arrangements on principles governing the use by States of artificial
earth satellites for direct television broadcasting
Question of Territories under Portuguese administration
.
Decade for Action ,to Combat Racism and Racial Discriminatior..
Exploitation of labour through illicit and clandestine trafficking ..

43
43

Date of
adoPtio..

PlSue

34
34

39

26 September 1972
26 September 1972
17 October 1972

60

19 October 1972

15

31 October 1972

62
2

22
22

2 November 1972
2 November 1972

2
3

22

2 November 1972

4

22

2 November 1972

4

71
71
71
71
71

9 November 1972
9 November 1972
9 November 1972
9 November 1972
9 November 1972
9 November 1972

92
92
92
92
93
93

93

9 November 1972

93

28
28 and
29

9 November 1972

11

9 November 1972

12

37

9 November 1972

14

37

14
75
62
62

71

23

SfJ

9 November 1972
14 November 1972
15 November 1972
15 November 1972

2921 (XXVII)

Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discr::nir.ation . _.. _.. _. _
_
_
.

SO

15 November 1972

63

2922 (XXVII)

Draft Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the
Crime of Apartheid
.

50

15 November 1972

63

Policies of apartheid of ,the Government of South Africa
Resolution A _
.
Resolution B
.
Resolution C
.
Resolution D
Resolution E
.
Resolution F

38
38
38
38
38
38

15 November 1972
15 November 1972
15 Novemoer 1972
15 November 1972
15 November 1972
13 December 1972

2918 (XXVII)
2919 (XXVII)
2920 (XXVII)

2923 (XXVII)

132

. . .
.
.

65
50

24

20424

25

2S
26

133

Check list of resolutious and deeuio_
Ruollllitnt
N..

Date of

Item

lIdoP"tnt

79
79

24 November 1972
24 November 1972

24
85
85

27 November 1972
28 November 1972
28 November 1972

113
114

86

28 November 1972

114

86
26

28 November 1972
29 November 1972

115
15

27

29 November 1972

15

.
.

30
30
31

29 November 1972
29 November 1972
29 November 1972

16
16
17

.
.
.

32
32
32

29 November 1972
29 November 1972
29 November 1972

17
18
19

Implementation of General Assembly resolution 2830 (XXVI)
concerning the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol
II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
.
Latin America (Treaty of TIatelolco)

33

29 November 1972

19

2936 (XXVII)

Non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibi.
tion of the use of nuclear weapons

25

29 November 1972

5

2937 (XXVII)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly at its 2093rd plenary
meeting
.

23

29 November 1972

6

2938 (XXVII)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly at its 2093rd plenary
meeting
.

23

29 November 1972

6

2939 (XXVII)

Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
.

76 (a)

4 December 1972

94

Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of the Committee on Contributions
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.
Resolution C
.

76 (b)
76 (b)
76 (b)

4 December 1972
4 December 1972
4 December 1972

94
94
94

76 (c)

4 December 1972

95

76 (e)

4 December 1972

95

76 (/)

4 December 1972

95

2924 (XXVII)

2925 (XXVII)

2926 (XXVII)
2927 (XXVII)
2928 (XXVII)
2929 (XXVII)
2930 (XXVII)
2931 (XXVII)
2932 (XXVII)

2933 (XXVII)
2934 (XXVII)

2935 (XXVII)

2940 (XXVII)

Title

loint Inspection Unit
Resolution A
Resolution B
.......................
Strengthening of the role of the United Nations with regard to the
maintenance and consolidation of international peace and security, the development of co-operation among all nations and
the promotion of 'the rules of international law in relations between States
.
.
Report of the International Law Commission
Twenty-fifth anniversary of the International Law Commission ..
Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law
.
United Nations Conference on P.rescription (Limitation) in the
.
International Sale of Goods
World Disarmament Conference
.
Implementation of the results of the Conference of Non-NuclearWeapon States
.
General and complete disarmament
Resolution A
Resolution B
Chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons
Urgent need for suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests
Resolution A
Resolution B
Resolution C

.

Appointment to fill a vacancy in the membership of the Board of
Auditors
.
2942 (XXVII) Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of the United
Nations Administrative Tribunal
.
2943 (XXVII) Appointment to fill a vacancy in the membership of the United
.
Nations Staff Pension Commi,ttee

93
93

,

2941 (XXVII)

2944 (XXVII)
2945 (XXVII)

Report of the United Nations 10int Staff Pension Board
Question of Southern Rhodesia

.
.

82
66

4 December 1972
7 December 1972

95
77

2946 (XXVII)

Question of Southern Rhodesia

.

66

7 December 1972

78

2947 (XXVII)

Supplementary estimates for the financial year 1972
Resolution A
Resolution B

.
.

72
72

8 December 1972
8 December 1972

96
98

2949 (XXVII)
2950 (XXVII)

Credentials of ropresentatives to the twenty-seventh session of the
Genoral Assembly
.
The situation in the Middle East
.
United Nations Institute for Training and Research
.

3
21
45

8 December 1972
8 December 1972
11 December 1972

6
6
35

2951 (XXVII)

E&tablishment of the United Nations University

48

11 December 1972

35

2948 (XXVU)

,

134

General AsseJDbly-Twentyofleventh Seldon

R,solwliMt
No.

Title

Item

Date of
adoption

2952 (XXVII)

Second General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization
.

44

11 December 1972

36

2953 (XXVII)

Co-operation between the United Nations Development Programme
and the United Nations Industrial Development Organizatiolil

44

11 December 1972

37

2954 (XXVII)

Revision of the lists of States eligible for membership in the Industrial Development Board . _
.

44

11 December 1972

7

2955 (XXVII)

Importance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to
self-determination and of the speedy granting of independence
to colonial countries and peoples for the effective guarantee
and observance of human rights
.

51

12 December 1972

63

2956 (xxvn)

:Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refupea
Resolution A
_..
Resolution B
_
.

56
56

12 December 1972
12 December 1972

2957 (XXVII)

Continuation of the Office of the United Nations High CommIssioner for Refugees
.

2958 (XXVII)
2959 (XXVII)

Assistance to Sudanese refugees returning from abroad
.
Assistance in cases of natural disaster and other disaster situations
_
.

56
56

12 December 1972
12 December 1972

6S
6S

61

12 December 1972

6S

2960 (XXVII)

PaMern of conferences

7S

I3 December 1972

99

2961 (XXVII)

Scale of assessments for the apportionmen,t of the expenses of the
United Nations
Resolution A
_
.
Resolution B
_
.
Resolution C
.
Resolution D
_
_
.

77
77
77

99
99

77

13 December 1972
13 December 1972
13 December 1972
13 December 1972

100
100

2962 (XXVII)

Co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization
of African Unity . _
.

20

13 December 1972

8

2963 (XXVTI)

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East
Resolution A
_
.
Resolution B
.
Resolution C
_
_
.
Resolution D ...................................•....
Resolution E
_
.
Resolution F
.

40
40

27

40
40

13 December 1972
13 December 1972
13 December 1972
13 December 1972
13 December 1972
13 December 1972

28
28
29
29

40

13 December 1972

29

41

13 December 1972

29

87

14 December 1972

116

.

2964 (xxvn)

Working Group on the Financing of the United Nations Relief and
.
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

2965 (XXVII)

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peace-keeping
operations in all their aspects
.
International conference of ,plenipotentiaries on the representation
of States in their relations with international organizations ....
Report of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining
Aggression
_
.

2966 (XXVII)
2967 (XXVII)

40

.to

27

88

14 December 1972

116

2968 (XXVII)

Need to consider suggestions regarding the review of the Charter
of the United Nations
.

89

14 December 1972

116

2969 (XXVII)

Reports of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme
.

46

14 December 1972

38

2970 (XXVII)
2971 (XXVII)

United Nations Volunteers programme. _
.
Special measures related to the particular needs of the land-locked
.
.
developing countries ..
Review of criteria for calculating indicative planning figures
.
Financial resources of the United Nations Development Programme
_
.
Co-operation among developing countries in the United Nations
technical co-operation programmes and increased efficiency of
the capacity of the United Nations development system
.
Measures to strengthen ,the executing agencies of the United
Nations Development Programme
.
United Nations Capital Development Fund
.
Papua New Guinea .. _
.

46

14 December 1972

38

46
46

14 December 1972
14 December 1972

39
39

46

14 December 1972

40

46

14 December 1972

40

46
46
13 and
22

14 December 1972
14 December 1972

41
41

14 December 1972

79

63

14 December 1972

80

2972 (XXVII)
2973 (XXVII)
2974 (XXVII)
2975 (XXVII)
2976 (XXVII)
2977 (XXVII)
2978 (XXVII)

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations
.

ISS

Check list of resolntions aDd deeldoaa
ReJol"'itm

No.

Title

2979 (XXVII) Activities of foreign economic and other intere!lts which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in Southern
Rhodesia, Namibia and Territories under Portuguese domination
and in all other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa
.
2980 (XXVII) Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United
Nations
.
.
2981 (XXVII)
2982 (XXVII)
2983 (XXVII)
2984 (XXVII)

2985 (XXVII)
2986 (XXVII)
2987 (XXVII)
2988 (XXVII)

2989 (XXVII)

2990 (XXVII)
2991 (XXVII)
2992 (XXVII)
2993 (XXVII)
2994 (XXVII)
2995 (XXVII)
2996 (XXVII)
2997 (XXVII)
2998 (XXVII)
2999 (XXVII)
3000 (XXVII)
3001 (XXVII)
3002 (XXVII)
3003 (XXVII)
3004 (XXVII)
3005 (XXVII)
3006 (XXVII)
3007 (XXVII)
3008 (XXVII)
3009 (XXVII)

Uni,ted Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa
.
Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories
.
Question of Spanish Sahara '"
.
Question of American Samoa, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Brunei, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Guam, Montserrat, New Hebrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Turks and Caicos
Islands and United States Virgin Islands
.
Question of the Seychelles
.
Question of Niue and the Tokelau Islands
.
Question of Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St Kitts"Nevis-AnguiUa,
St. Lucia and St. Vincent
.
.
Confirmation of the appointments made by the Secretary-General
to fill vacancies in the membership of the Investments Committee
.
Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations
with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency
.
United Nations International School
.
Report of the Security Council
.
Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace
.
Implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security
.
l{Qited Nations Conference on the Human Environment
.
Co-operation between States in the field of the environment
.
International responsibility of States in regard to the environment
..
.
.
Institutional and financial arrangements for international environmental co-operation ..
.
.
Criteria gpverning multilateral financing of housing and human
settlements
.
Establishment of an international fund or financial institution for
human settlements
.
Measures for protecting and enhancing the environment
.
United Nations Conference-Exposition on Human Settlements
.
Development and environment
.
International prize for the most outstanding contribution in the
field of the environment
.
Location of the environment secretariat .. .. .
.
Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affectlng the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied
Territories
.
United Nations Juridical Yearbook ..
.
.
Composition of the Secretariat
.
Amendments to the Staff Regulations and Staff Rules of the United
Nations
.. . . . . .. ..
.
.
Employment of women in senior and other professional positions
by the secretariats of organizations in the United Nations system
.

I,.".

67

14 December 1972

80

68 and
12

14 December 1972

81

69

14 December 1972

83

70
22

14 December 1972
14 December 1972

83
84

22
22
22

14 December 1972
14 December 1972
14 December 1972.

85
86
86

22

14 December 1972

87

76 Cd)

15 December 1972

100

78

15 December 1972
15 December 1972
15 December 1972
15 December 1972

100

47
47

15 December 1972
15 December 1972
15 Decen:"ber 1972

20
42
42

47

15 December 1972

42

47

15 December 1972

43

47

15 December 1972

4S

47

46
46

47
47

IS December 1972
15 December 1972
15 December 1972
15 December 1972

47
47

47
47

15 December 1972
15 December 1972

48
48

41
80
81

IS December 1972
1& December 1972
18 December 1972

101
101

81

18 December 1972

101

11

18 December 1972

66

84
11
34
35

47

101
8
20

30

116

General Aa.embly-Twent:r_.enth Seulon
11"..
12
12
12
12
12
12

.,1itMof

PGfl'

18 December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972

66
67
67
67
68
48

12

18 December 1972

48

12

18 December 1972

49

12
12

18 December 1972
18 December 1972

50
51

52
53

18 December 1972
18 December 1972

68
68

54

18 December 1972

69

54

18 December 1972

70

54

18 December 1972

70

55

18 December 1972

71

58
58

18 December 1972
18 December 1972

71
71

Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance
.
59
United Nations conference for an international convention on
adoption law
.
62
Reservation exclusively for peaceful purposes of the sea-bed and
the ocean fIoor, and the subsoil thereof, underlying the high
seas beyond the limits of present national jurisdiction and use
of their resources in the interests of mankind, and convening of
a conference on the law of the sea
Resolution A
.
36
Resolution B
.
36
Resolution C
. 36
United Nations Fund for Namibia
.
64
.
Question of Namibia
64

18 December 1972

72

18 December 1972

72

21
22
22
87

91

18 December 1972
18 December 1972
1~ December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972

88
117
118

92
43

18 December 1972
19 December 1972

119
51

43
43

19 December 1972
19 December 1972

51

43
43
43

19 December 1972
19 December 1972
19 December 1972

53
53

54

Report of t~e Un.ited Na.tions Conference on Trade and Development on Its third session
.

43

19 December 1972

55

United Nations salary system

83

19 December 1972

102

R,MllvtlM
Nil.

3010 (XXVII)
3011 (XXVII)
3012 (XXVII)
3013 (XXVII)
3014 (XXVII)
3015 (XXVII)
3016 (XXVII)
3017 (XXVII)
3018 (XXVlI)
3019 (XXVII)
3020 (XXVII)
3021 (XXVII)
3022 (XXVII)
3023 (XXVII)
3024 (XXVII)
3025 (XXVII)

3026 (XXVII)

3027 (XXVII)
3028 (XXVII)
3029 (XXVlI)

3030 (XXVII)
3031 (XXVlI)
3032 (XXVII)
3033 (XXVII)
3034 (XXVII)

3035 (XXVlI)
3036 (XXVII)
3037 (XXVII)
3038 (XXVII)
3039 (XXVII)
3040 (XXVII)
3041 (XXVII)
3042 (XXVII)

Till,

International Women's Year
.
Capital punishment
.
Assistance in narcotics control
.
International instruments relating to drug abuse control
.
United Nations programme for drug abuse control
.
United Nations Chi.ldren's Fund
.
Permanent sovereignty over natural resources of developing countries
.
Outflow of trained personnel from developing to developed countries
.
The problem of mass poverty and unemployment in developing
countries
.
United Nations Fund for Population Activities
.
Principles of international co-operation in the detection. arrest,
e~tradition .andpunish';llent of persons guilty of war crimes and
cnmes agamst humaDIty
.
Crime prevention and control
.
Channels of communication with youth and international youth
organizations
..
Implementation of the Declaration on the Promotion among Youth
of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding between Peoples
.
Increased employment and mobility of young people in the United
Nations
.
Status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
.
Human rights and scientific and technological developments
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.

Respect for human rights in armed conflicts
.
Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country .,.
Measures to prevent international terrorism which endangers or
takes innocent human lives or jeopardizes fundamental freedoms, and study of the underlying causes of those forms of
terrorism and acts of violence which lie in misery, frustration,
grievance and despair and which cause some people to sacrifice
human lives, including their own, in an attempt to effect radical
changes
.
Code of conduct for liner conferences
.
Special measures in favour of the least developed among the developing countries
.
Charter of the economic rights and duties of States
.
Dissemination of information and mobilization of public opinion
regarding problems of trade and development
.
External debt servicing by the developing countries
.
Multilateral trade negotiations
.

49 (a)

DIJI,

53

137

Check list of resolutions and decisiona
Resol"fiOfl

No.

3043 (XXVII)
3044 (XXVII)

3045 (XXVII)
3046 (XXVII)
3047 (XXVII)
3048 (XXVII)
3049 (XXVII)

Title

Form of presentation of the United Nations budget and duration
of the budget cycle ...... . ..... . ............. . .........
Budget for the financial year 1973
Resolution A
........... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., .
.......... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Resolution B
.......................
Resolution C
Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the financial year 1973
Working Capital Fund for the financial year 1973 .....
...........
Revenue-producing activities
Use of ,travel funds ........... .
............
The financial situation of the United Nations
Resolution A
.........
Resolution B
.........
Resolution C

1Iem

Date of
adoption

PtI(/,

73

19 December 1972

102

73
73
73
73
73
73
73

19 December 1972
19 December 1972
19 December 1972
19 December 1972
19 December 1972
19 December 1972
19 December 1972

103
104
105
105
106
106
107

73
73
73

19 December 1972
19 December 1972
19 December 1972

107
107
108

Other decillions

Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Charter
of the United Nations
-. . . . ..
.
.

7

23 September 1972

9

Adoption of the agenda

8

22 September 1972
23 September 1972

9
9

10
12

14

13 December 1972
15 December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972
13 December 1972

9
108
10
58
10

-

. __ . .

.

Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization
Report of the Economic and Social Council
. .......
.

.
.

.
Report of the International Court of Justice
Appointments to fill vacancies in the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on ,the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
_.

22

8 December 1972

10

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
. . . . . . . .. .
.
Countries and Peoples

22
43

18 December 1972
19 December 1972

90

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development _

43 (c)

19 December 1972

10

44 (c)

11 December 1972
12 December 1972

10
73
73

.

Confirmation of the appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development
Confirmation of the appointment of the Executive Director of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization
_
Protection of journalists engaged in dangerous missions in areas of armed conflict ..

49 (b)

Freedom of information
........
....... .
Appointment of the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia ....

57

.

.

64 (e)

Budget estimates for the financial year 1973 ..
Budget estimates for the financial year 1973 ...
Elimination of all forms of racial discrimination
Planning estimate for the financial year 1974

73
73
_

.

Confirmation of the appointments made by the Secretary-General to fill vacancies
in the membership of the Investments Committee
_
_
.
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations ..
Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency
. . . . . . . . . . ..
.
Joint Inspection Unit ..
Publications and documentation of the United Nations
Personnel questions ..
Review of the role of the International Court of Justice

.

50
74
76 (d)

77
78
79
80
81

90

59

18 December 1972
18 December 1972
19 December 1972

10
108

} 15 November 1972

109

4 December 1972

109

15 December 1972
13 December 1972

110
110

15 December 1972

110

24 November 1972

110
110
110

18 December 1972
18 December 1972
18 December 1972

119

_

... .....

....,1

~~ .JIJ.".:.J,> J,...J' 4

""' .)oW .;Jl4,LII '" I.,. ~I • ~ .\0;1 ~ .I eo.»'" n>~ wl,;5:.Jl '" -.......II ,..VI wi;........ ..;. J,-JI J....
. ~ ~,I IJ;",-;.' .I eo-" .,J. -.....:.JI ,..VI • JI...51

J'

. . . . . . . ~t. .~. . .R....... .-~«~.~«flH~.8~~.~~
•• m.
8O.1'00II'I'AlN 1JJIIITI:D NATIONS PUIlUGATIONS
UIIi.. III.... ......daM _y be obtained from boobtDree and dilltributo...
.......... .... -W. Cauult your boobtore or write to: United Nationa. Sales
~ . New York_GeMft.

OOIllDNT. PlIOCuaa u:s PUBUCATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES

t- publieadaM dea· N.tianII U.... _ t en vente dllN lea librairies et lea agences
.....ltai_ du -.de lIIItier. Int--voua aupre. de votre Iibraire ou adreasez-vous
• : III."'" U..... 8ectian . . YlIIIt-. N_ York ou GenlJve.

H3IlIUlRR OpMUlHSaQIIR OCh.e.'lRReR_lIl HaQHA IIO*HO KynHTb B KHHJI(Hb'X Kara...... •
IITC'I'.ax _
Reex pMk>_x llilpa. HaBoIlHT" cnpaBKH oil HSAaHHIIX B
___
011 _nuRHe IIJIH nR.-.re no llApecy: OpraHHSaQHII OIl"loeAHHeHHb'x

RaqllA, e

DO npoll"''' R3,llaHltA, Rloto-Hopx RnH »CeReRa

COMO CONImVl.PV....CAC. . . . DE LAS NACIONES UNiDAS
LM publklM
de Ju lIIec~ Uaidu _tan en venta en IibrerfB8 y caua distriIIuiIIoraa en
...,... del mundo. ConauIte a 8U Iibrero 0 dirfjll8e a: Naciones
UIIidu. 8ecd6II de VentAII, N _ York 0 Ginebn.

Printed in U.S.A.--Way 1973
Reprinted in United Nations. New York

Price: SU.S.5.00
(or cquinlclIl in other (~urrendes)

12740 May 1979800
