S/PRST/2010/4

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 February 2010
English
Original: English/French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6277th meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 February 2010, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Threats to
international peace and security”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
“The Security Council notes with concern the serious threats posed in
some cases by drug trafficking and transnational organized crime to
international security in different regions of the world. These transnational
threats are a source of growing concern.
“The Security Council, in this context, further notes with concern the
increasing link, in some cases, between drug trafficking and the financing of
terrorism, including through the use of proceeds derived from illicit
cultivation, production of and trafficking in narcotic drugs and their
precursors, as well as illegal arms trafficking.
“The Security Council notes that these transnational crimes may threaten
the security of countries on its agenda, including post-conflict states, and
expresses its intention to consider such threats, as appropriate.
“The Security Council notes with concern that drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime contribute to undermine the authority of states.
“The Security Council notes that, in a globalized society, organized crime
groups and networks, better equipped with new information and
communication technologies, are becoming more diversified and connected in
their illicit operations, which in some cases may aggravate threats to
international security. In this context, the Council expresses concern at the
increase in incidences of kidnapping and hostage-taking, in some areas of the
world with a specific political context, with the aim of raising funds or gaining
political concessions. The development of cybercrime is another particular
source of concern.
“The Security Council calls upon Member States to increase international
and regional cooperation, on the basis of a common and shared responsibility,
as well as their cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs and

10-25067 (E) 240210

*1025067*

S/PRST/2010/4

Crime and the International Narcotic Control Board, in order to counter the
illicit production of, demand for and trafficking in drugs, and to identify
emerging trends in drug trafficking. It welcomes relevant initiatives such as
the Paris Pact. The Council also encourages Member States to undertake
further action, as well as to consider, on the basis of concrete proposals by
UNODC and INCB, through the United Nations Commission on Narcotic
Drugs, possible new international initiatives aimed at strengthening the combat
against illicit trafficking in chemical precursors.
“The Security Council encourages the coordination of United Nations
actions, including those of its agencies, funds and programmes, in order to
enhance the effectiveness of appropriate international efforts.
“The Security Council reaffirms and commends the important work of
UNODC in collaboration with other relevant entities of the United Nations.
“The Security Council encourages States to strengthen international,
regional and sub-regional cooperation to counter drug trafficking, transnational
organized crime, terrorism and corruption and to investigate and prosecute, as
appropriate, persons and entities responsible for these crimes consistent with
international law. Through compliance with their obligations under
international law, including the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
States can help strengthen international peace and security. The Council notes
relevant international conventions such as the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol, the Convention on
Psychotropic Substances of 1971, the United Nations Convention against
Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, the
United Nations Convention against Transnational organized crime of 2000 and
the Protocols thereto, the United Nations Convention against Corruption of
2003 and the relevant international conventions and protocols related to
terrorism.
“The Security Council expresses its concern about the number of victims
caused by acts of terrorism in various regions of the world. The Council
further reiterates that acts, methods and practices of terrorism, as well as
knowingly financing, planning and inciting terrorist acts, are contrary to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations. The Council calls upon States
to continue to condemn in the strongest terms all terrorist acts, irrespective of
their motivation, whenever and by whomsoever committed, as well as the
incitement of terrorism.
“The Security Council invites the Secretary-General to consider these
threats as a factor in conflict prevention strategies, conflict analysis, integrated
missions’ assessment and planning and to consider including in his reports, as
appropriate, analysis on the role played by these threats in situations on its
agenda.
“The Security Council welcomes further briefings, as necessary, on a
more regular basis, by the Executive Director of UNODC.”

2

10-25067
