236

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

relations and for assistance by the United Nations in this
endeavour,
Expressing the hope that the Special Committee will, on
the basis of the proposals before it, complete the mandate
entrusted to it as soon as possible,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee
on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle of Non-Use
of Force in International Relations;
2. Decides that the Special Committee shall continue
its work with the goal of drafting, at the earliest possible
date, a world treaty on the non-use of force in international
relations as well as the peaceful settlement of disputes or
such other recommendations as the Committee deems
appropriate;
3. Requests the Special Committee to consider thoroughly, and to take duly into account, the proposals submitted to it with a view to ensuring a successful completion
of its mandate;
4. Requests the Special Committee to take due account
of the efforts made by the non-aligned countries during the
Committee's session in 1981 to facilitate the organization
of the work of the Committee;
5. Invites the Governments that have not yet done so
to communicate their comments or suggestions or to bring
them up to date. in accordance with General Assembly
resoluticm 31/9;
6. Requests the Special Committee to be mindful of the
importance of reaching general agreement whenever that
has significance for the outcome of its work;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special
Committee with the necessary facilities and services;
8. Invites the Special Committee to submit a report on
its work to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled ''Report of the Special Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle of Non-Use of Force in International Relations".
57th plenary meeting
/3 November /98/

36/32.

Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its four
teenth session, 5
Recalling that the object of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law is the promotion of the
progressive harmonization and unification of international
trade law,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolutions 2205 (XXI) of
17 December 1966, by which it established the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law and defined the object and terms of reference of the Commission.
3108 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973, by which it increased
the membership of the Commission, 31/99 of 15 December
1976, by which Governments of Member States not members of the Commission were entitled to attend the sessions
of the Commission and its Working Groups as observers.
and 34/142 of 17 December 1979, by which the co-ordinating function of the Commission in the field of international trade law was emphasized, as well as its previous
'Ibid., Supplement No. 17 iA/16/17)

resolutions concerning the reports of the Commission on
the work of its annual sessions.
Recalling also its resolutions 320 I (S-Vl) and 3202 (SY!) of I May 1474. 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974
and 3362 (S-Vll) of 16 September 1975,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law, in reducing
or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international trade,
especially those affecting the developing countries, would
significantly contribute to universal economic co-operation
among all States on a basis of equality, equity and common
interests and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and. thereby, to the well-being of all peoples.
Having regard for the need to take into account the different social and legal systems in harmonizing the rules of
international trade law.
Stressing the usefulness and importance of organizing
symposia for promoting better knowledge and understanding
of international trade law and. especially, for the training
of young lawyers from developing countries in this field,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on
the work of its fourteenth session;
2. Commends the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law for the progress made in its work and
for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of its working
methods;
3. Calls upon the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law. in particular its Working Group on
the New International Economic Order, to continue to take
account of the relevant provisions of the resolutions concerning the new international economic order. as adopted
hy the General Assembly at its sixth and seventh special
sessions;
4. Welcomes the decision of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, upon the recommendation of the Working Group on the New International
Economic Order. to commence its work in the field of the
new international economic order with the drafting of a
legal guide identifying the legal issues involved in contracts
for the supply and construction of large industrial works
and suggesting possible solutions to assist parties, in particular from developing countries. in their negotiations;"
5. Reaffirms the mandate of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law to co-ordinate legal
activities in the field of international trade law in order to
avoid duplication of efforts and waste of resources and. in
this connection:
(a) Expresses its appreciation to all bodies within and
without the United Nations system that responded to the
request from the Commission for information on their current activities relating to international trade law. for the
purpose of the preparation of a report which formed the
basis for the recommendation of steps to be taken by the
Commission to strengthen co-ordination;
(b) Endorses the various methods suggested by the
Commission to implement further its co-ordinating role in
the field of international trade law;7
(c) Recommends that the Commission should maintain
close collaboration with the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the International Law Commission. the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the Commission on Transnational Corporations
and continue to collaborate with other international organizations active in the field of international trade law;
" /hid .. para. 84
' /hid .. paras. 9., I() I

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(d) Calls upon Governments to ensure co-ordination in
respect of the work programmes of the various international
organizations in which they are represented;
(e) Welcomes the invitation by the Hague Conference
on Private International Law to all States to participate in
the extraordinary session to be held in 1985 to revise the
1955 Hague Convention on the Law Applicable to International Sales of Goods, 8 and also to States members of the
Commission to attend a session, to be held in 1982, of the
Special Commission which will consider the preparatory
work for the revision;
(j) Welcomes the invitation by the International Institute
for the Unification of Private Law to States members of the
Commission that are not members of the Institute to participate in its Committee of Governmental Experts which
considered a draft Uniform Law on Agency of an International Character in the International Sale of Goods at a
meeting held from 2 to 13 November 1981;

6. Reaffirms the importance, in particular for the developing countries, of the work of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law concerned with training
and assistance in the field of international trade law and.
in this connection:
(a) Expresses its appreciation to the States which contributed to fellowships for participants from developing
countries at the Second Symposium on International Trade
Law, held by the Commission from 22 to 26 June 198 I.
and to the Commission for the success of the Symposium;
(b) Stresses the desirability of the Commission sponsoring symposia and seminars, including those organized
on a regional basis, to promote training and assistance in
the field of international trade law. and recommends that
the Commission should continue to sponsor such symposia
and seminars;
(c) Welcomes the initiatives being undertaken to sponsor regional seminars jointly with regional organizations.
such as the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee
and the Inter-American Juridical Committee;
(d) Invites Governments, relevant United Nations organs, organizations, institutions and individuals to assist the
secretariat of the Commission in financing and organizing
symposia and seminars;
7. Stresses the importance of bringing into effect the
conventions emanating from the work of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law for the global unification and harmonization of international trade law;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the Convention on the Limitation Period in the International Sale of
Goods, of 12 June 1974, 9 the Protocol amending the Convention on the Limitation Period in the International Sale
of Goods, of 10 April 1980, 10 the United Nations Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea, of 30 March 1978, 11
and the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the
International Sale of Goods, of I 0 April 1980, 12 to the notice
of all States that have not ratified or acceded to them, and

• United Nations, Treaty Series. vol. 510, No. 7411, p. 147.
Official Records of the United Nations Conference on Prescription
(Limitation) in the International Sale of Goods, New York, 20 May-14
June /974 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.74.V.8), p. IOI.
10 Official Records of the United Nations Conference on Contracts for
the International Sale of Goods, Vienna, JO March-I I April 1980 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.82.V.5), p. 191.
11
Official Records of the United Nations Conference on the Carriaf<e
of Goods by Sea, Hamburg, 6-31 March 1978 (United Nations publication.
Sales No. E.80.VIII.l), document A/CONF.89/13. annex I.
2
' Official Records of the United Nations Conference on Contracts for
the International Sale of Goods. Vienna, JO March-I I April 1980 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.82. V.5). p. 178.
9

237

to provide those States with appropriate information as to
the mode of their entry into force and the current status of
ratifications and accessions, and to draw the attention of
those States to the views of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law contained in its decision of 22
June 198 I, u in which the Commission emphasized that an
early entry into force and a wide acceptance of the instruments mentioned would be of great value for the unification
of international trade law;
9. Affirms the importance of the participation of observers from all States and interested international organizations at sessions of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law and its Working Groups;
10. Recommends that the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law should continue its work on the
topics included in its programme of work;
11 . Reaffirms the importance of the programme of work
of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law and of the increased role of the International Trade
Law Branch of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat
as the substantive secretariat of the Commission;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law the
records of the discussion at the thirty-sixth session of the
General Assembly relating to the report of the Commission
on the work of its fourteenth session.
57th plenary meeting
13 November /981

36/33.

Consideration of effective measures to enhance
the protection, security and safety of diplomatic
and consular missions and representatives
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General

submitted under this item. 14
Reaffirming its resolution 35/168 of 15 December 1980,
Emphasizing the duty of States to take all appropriate
steps to protect the premises of diplomatic and consular
missions and prevent any attacks on diplomatic and consular
representatives.
Recognizing the necessity to ensure the protection, security and safety of missions and of representatives to international intergovernmental organizations. as well as of
officials of such organizations.
Deeply concerned about the continued large number of
violations of, and failures to respect, the inviolability of
diplomatic and consular missions and representatives,
Noting that only a small number of States have so far.
in response to the call by the General Assembly at its thirtyfifth session, become parties to the relevant conventions
concerning the inviolability of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives.
Convinced that the reporting procedures established under
resolution 35/168 arc an important step in the efforts to
enhance the protection, security and safety of diplomatic
and consular missions and representatives,
Desiring to maintain and strengthen those reporting
procedures.
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Strongly condemns acts of violence against diplomatic and consular missions and representatives as well as

'' Official Records of th<' Ge11aal Assemblv. Thirry-sixth Session. S11ppler11,•11r No. 17 (Ai.101171. para. 118.
'' 1\1.10/445 and Corr I ,tnJ Add.1-.1.
