General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

32

concerning particularly the prohibition of the use of
napalm and other incendiary weapons,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the work of the Diplomatic Conference on the
Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts as regards the work of the Conference relevant to the present
resolution ;12
2. Invites the Diplomatic Conference to accelerate
its consideration of the use of specific conventional
weapons, including any which may be deemed to be
excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects,
and to do its utmost to agree for humanitarian reasons
on possible rules prohibiting or restricting the use of
such weapons;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, who has been
invited to attend the Diplomatic Conference as an observer, to report to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session on aspects of the work of the Diplomatic
Conference relevant to the present resolution;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Incendiary
and other specific conventional weapons which may
be the subject of prohibitions or restrictions of use for
humanitarian reasons".
96th plenary meeting
JO December 1976
31/65.

Chemical and bacteriological
(biological) weapons

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 2454 A (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2603 B (XXIV) of 16 December 1969,
2662 (XXV) of 7 December 1970, 2827 A (XXVI)
of 16 December 1971, 2933 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972, 3077 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3256
(XXIX) of 9 December 1974 and 3465 (XXX) of
11 December 1975,
Convinced that the process of international detente
is conducive to the implementation of further disarmament measures and of general and complete disarmament under effective international control,
Reaffirming the necessity of strict observance by all
States of the principles and objectives of the Protocol
for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925,13
Convinced that the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction14 constitutes an important step towards early agreement on the effective prohibition of
the development, production and stockpiling of all
chemical weapons and on their elimination from arsenals
of all States,
Recalling in that connexion the undertaking contained
in article IX of the Convention to continue negotiations
in good faith with a view to reaching early agreement
on effective measures for the prohibition of the <level12 A/9726, A/10222, A/31/146.
13 League of Nations, Treaty Series,

No. 2138, p. 65.
14 Resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.

vol. XCIV (1929),

opment, production and stockpiling of all chemical
weapons and for their destruction,
Stressing the importance of early agreement on the
complete prohibition of the development, production
and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their
destruction, which would contribute to general and complete disarmament under effective international control,
Noting the risk of continued development, production
and stockpiling of chemical weapons in the absence of
such agreement,
Having considered the report of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament,15
Noting that drafts of a convention on the prohibition
of the development, production and stockpiling of all
chemical weapons and on their destruction,16 as well
as other working documents, proposals and suggestions,
have been submitted to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament and constitute valuable contributions to reaching appropriate agreement,
Noting also the comments addressed to this problem
and relevant documents submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session,
Noting further that intensified efforts in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament have led to
increased understanding in identifying practical approaches towards the prohibition of the development,
production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons, and
their destruction, including definition of the agents to be
banned,
Recognizing the importance of developing methods
for providing adequate assurance of compliance with
effective measures for the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical
weapons, including methods of verifying the destruction
of stockpiles of such weapons,
Having in mind that agreement on the complete
prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their destruction
should not impede the utilization of science and technology for the economic development of States,
Desiring to contribute to a successful conclusion of
the negotiations on effective and strict measures for
the complete prohibition of the development, production
and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and for their
destruction,
1. Reaffirms the objective of reaching early agreement on the effective prohibition of the development,
production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and
on their elimination from arsenals of all States;
~·. Urges again all States to make every effort to
fac1htate early agreement on the effective prohibition of
the development, production and stockpiling of all
chemical weapons and on their destruction;

3. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue negotiations as a matter of
high priority, taking into account the existing proposals,
15
•
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Sesswn, Supplement No. 27 (A/31/27).
16
See Official Records of the Disarmament Commission
Supplement for 1972, document DC/235 annex ·B document
CCD/361; Official Records of the Gener~[ Assembiy Twentyninth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/9627), annex'n, document CCD/ 420; ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 27
( A/ 10027), annex JI, document CCD/ 452; and ibid., Thirtyfirst Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/31/27), annex III, document CCD/512.

III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

with a view to reaching early agreement on effective
measures for the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and
for their destruction;
4. Invites all States that have not yet done so to
accede to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction, as well as to accede to or ratify the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925,
and calls again for strict observance by all States of
the principles and objectives of those instruments;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament all
documents of the thirty-first session of the General
Assembly relating to chemical weapons and to chemical
means of warfare;
6. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to report on the results of its negotiations
to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session.
96th plenary meeting
JO December 1976
31/66.

Urgent need for cessation of nuclear and
thermonuclear tests and conclusion of a
treaty designed to achieve a comprehensive test ban

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its conviction that the cessation of nuclear-weapon testing would be in the supreme interest
of mankind, both as a major step towards controlling
the development and proliferation of nuclear weapons
and to relieve the deep apprehension concerning the
harmful consequences of radio-active contamination for
the health of present and future generations,
Gravely concerned at the continuation of both atmospheric and underground nuclear-weapon testing
since the thirtieth session of the General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on this subject, the
most recent being resolution 3466 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
Recalling the stated aim of the parties to the Treaty
Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in
Outer Space and under Water17 and the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons18 to seek to
achieve the discontinuance of all test explosions of
nuclear weapons for all time,
Noting the information concerning agreements concluded by two nuclear-weapon States limiting the scope
of underground nuclear-weapon tests and making provision in this connexion for the control and supervision
of peaceful nuclear explosions including, in certain
cases, arrangements for on-site verification, 19
Considering that conditions are favourable for these
two nuclear-weapon States to step up their efforts to
reach agreement on the means of verifying a comprehensive test-ban agreement,
Taking note of that part of the report of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament15 relating to
the question of a comprehensive test-ban treaty,
11 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol.
1s Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.
19 See A/31/125, annex.

480, No. 6964, p. 43.

33

l. Condemns all nuclear-weapon tests, in whatever
environment they may be conducted;
2. Declares its profound concern that substantive
negotiations towards a comprehensive test-ban agreement have not yet begun and re-emphasizes the urgency
of concluding a comprehensive and effective agreement;
3. Calls once again upon all nuclear-weapon States
to suspend the testing of nuclear weapons by agreement, subject to review after a specified period, as an
interim step towards the conclusion of a formal and
comprehensive test-ban agreement;
4. Emphasizes in this regard the particular responsibility of the nuclear-weapon States which are parties
to international agreements in which they have declared
their intention to achieve at the earliest possible date
the cessation of the nuclear-arms race;
5. Calls upon all States not yet parties to the Treaty
Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in
Outer Space and under Water to adhere to it forthwith;
6. Urges the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament to continue to give the highest priority to the
conclusion of a comprehensive test-ban agreement and
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session on the progress achieved;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Urgent need
for cessation of nuclear and thermonuclear tests and
conclusion of a treaty designed to achieve a comprehensive test ban".
96th plenary meeting
JO December 1976
31/67.

Implementation of General Assembly resolution 3467 (XXX) concerning the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(Treaty of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1911 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963, 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967,
2456 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2666 (XXV)
of 7 December 1970, 2830 (XXVI) of 16 December
1971, 2935 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972, 3079
(XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3258 (XXIX) of
9 December 1974 and 3467 (XXX) of 11 December
1975, eight of which contain appeals to the nuclearweapon States regarding the signature and ratification
of Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty
of Tlatelolco),20
Reiterating its firm conviction that, for the maximum effectiveness of any treaty establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone, the co-operation of the nuclearweapon States is necessary and that such co-operation
should take the form of commitments likewise undertaken in a formal international instrument which is
legally binding, such as a treaty, convention or protocol,
Recalling with particular satisfaction that the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America, France and the People's
20 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068, p. 326.
