S/2002/122

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 January 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 24 January 2002 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999, I have
the honour to convey the attached report on the international security presence in
Kosovo covering the period 1 to 30 November 2001 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-23217 (E) 250102

*0223217*

S/2002/122

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on operations of the
Kosovo Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1 to 30 November 2001), there were just under
40,000 troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in theatre.
2.
The overall situation in Kosovo during the month of November remained
relatively stable despite some inter-ethnic and criminally motivated incidents.
Voting for the election of the Kosovo Assembly took place on 17 November, with
reports of only a few minor and isolated acts of political intimidation. These
incidents included an explosion outside the municipality building of Zvecan during a
meeting of a Kosovar Serb political party, and the stoning of members of the same
political party when leaving Dakovica monastery after a meeting. A grenade was
also thrown at the house of the Mayor of Obilic.
Security
3.
Although no major incidents occurred in connection with the elections, other
incidents of a criminal and inter-ethnic nature were reported. These included several
stone-throwing attacks on the Zvecan/Kosovo Polje train — two people were
arrested following one of the incidents on 12 November; the killing of an elderly
Kosovar Serb woman and the injuring of her husband in a drive-by shooting in
Obilic on 22 November; and bombs thrown at a petrol station in Deneral Jankovic
on 29 November, where two employees were injured. Other incidents included
vandalism of graveyards and defacement of tombstones.
4.
KFOR soldiers were slightly injured in one of the attacks on the
Zvecan/Kosovo Polje train, and in a gas spray attack in north-east Mitrovica.
Border/boundary security
5.
KFOR continued its activities along the borders with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia1 and with Albania to confiscate weapons, deter smuggling,
detain persons illegally crossing the borders, and deter others attempting to enter the
province.
6.
During the reporting period, 190 weapons, 265 grenades and mines, and
24,065 rounds of ammunition were seized. Seventy-five people were detained and
handed over to United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
police. The number of attempted illegal border crossings did not increase over the
reporting period.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
7.
With regard to the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), progress was achieved
when General Ceku agreed on 24 November to the modification of the KPC
structure and to the requirement to establish a reserve force of 2,000. The first list of
375 reservists will be issued by the middle of December and the first vocational
course will begin in 2002.
8.
Thirteen cases of non-compliance were reported during November, an increase
over recent months. These included the arrest by UNMIK of the Commander of the

2

S/2002/122

KPC Regional Task Group 4 detachment in Mitrovica on suspicion of kidnapping.
Fifteen hundred Kosovar Albanians protested peacefully in Victurin following this
arrest. Other cases included one of attempted murder, and another of firing an
illegally held gun in a restaurant. Six cases of non-compliance have been closed,
leaving 30 cases open. The open cases are either pending investigation or
implementation of recent directions, or awaiting presentation to the judicial system.
9.
Despite this increase in the number of cases of non-compliance, no KPC
members violated the electoral process regulations. KPC members continued to
carry out a variety of humanitarian projects throughout the province.
10. No weapons were destroyed during this reporting period. The total number of
weapons destroyed under the weapons destruction programme therefore remains at
10,132.
11. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia security forces remain in general
compliance with the terms of the military technical agreement.
Cooperation with international organizations
12. KFOR continues to provide daily assistance to international organizations and
non-governmental organizations throughout Kosovo, on request, and to provide
security assistance in support of UNMIK police operations. On 16 November, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General confirmed his agreement to the first
two chapters of the joint UNMIK/KFOR Mitrovica strategy.
Return of refugees and displaced persons
13. The number of refugees from the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
estimated to be remaining in Kosovo is 23,200.
Elections held on 17 November
14. KFOR provided support to UNMIK and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe for the duration of the Kosovo-wide elections, in which 64.3
per cent of the 1,249,987 registered voters turned out.2 Although there were reports
of minor incidents in the areas of Gnjilane, Liplijan and Kacanik, and of some
intimidation of voters in northern Mitrovica, there were no organized efforts to
disrupt voting.
Outlook
15. The security situation in Kosovo continues to be stable. The lack of violence
during the election campaign, and the relative calm in both southern Serbia and in
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia are encouraging for the future security
situation in the province, although the high unemployment rate (at over 66 per cent,
the highest in Europe) and the dire economic outlook are of concern to the
international community.

3

S/2002/122

Notes

4

1

Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.

2

The turnout in Kosovo was 64.91 per cent and in Serbia and Montenegro 57.38 per cent. Special
needs and postal voting accounted for 65.72 per cent.
