A sa 457 6 seance, le 17 decembre 1949, le Conseil a
At its 457th meeting, on 17 December 1949, the
Council decided to request the President - General decide de prier le President - le general A. G. L.
A. G. L. McNaughton, representative of Canada - to McNaughton, representant du Canada - d'avoir des
meet informally with the representatives of India and ' entretiens officieux avec les representants de l'Inde et du
Pakistan and examine with them the possibility of Pakistan, d'examiner avec eux la possibilite de rechercher,
finding a mutually satisfactory basis for dealing with the dans la question du Cachemire, une base de discussion
Kashmir problem, and to report to the Council for its acceptable pour les deux parties, et de soumettre au
consideration any proposal which might develop during ! Conseil toute proposition qui pourrait resulter de ses
entretiens avec les deux parties.
his meetings with the parties.
Adoptee par 9 voix contre
zero, avec 2 abstentions ( Republique socialiste sovietique
d' Ukraine, Union des Republiques socia/istes sovietiques).

Adopted by 9 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions ( Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics).

THE PALESTINE QUESTIONlll

LA QUESTION DE PALESTINE 11

Decisions

Decisions

At its 433rd meeting, on 4 August 1949, the Council
decided to invite the representative oflsrael to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the question.

A sa 433 6 seance, le 4 aoOt 1949, le Conseil a decide
d'inviter le representant d'Israel a participer, sans droit
de vote, a la discussion de la question.

At its 434th meeting, on 4 August 1949, the Council
A sa 434e seance, le 4 aout 1949, le Conseil a decide
decided to invite the representative of Syria to participate, d'inviter le representant de la Syrie a participer, sans
without vote, in the discussion of the question.
' droit de vote, a la discussion de la question.

72 (1949). Resolution of 11 August 1949

72 (1949). Resolution du 11 aout 1949

[S/1376, TJ

[S/1376, I]

The Security Council,
Having taken note of the report of the Acting United
Nations Mediator in Palestine, submitted upon the
completion of his responsibilities, 13
1. Desires to pay special tribute to the qualities of
patience, perseverance and devotion to the ideal of
international peace of the late Count Folke Bernadotte,
who stabilized the situation in Palestine and who,
together with ten members of his staff, gave his life in
the service of the United Nations;
2. Desires to express its deep appreciation of the
qualities of tact, understanding, perseverance and

Le Conseil de securite,
Ayant pris acte du rapport que le Mediateur par
interim des Nations Unies en Palestine a presente a
l 'issue de sa mission 13,
l. Desire rendre hommage aux qualites de patience,
de perseverance et de devouement a l 'ideal de paix
internationale de feu le comte Folke Bernadotte, qui a
stabilise la situation en Palestine et qui, avec dix membres
de son personnel, a donne sa vie au service des Nations

" Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted
by the Council in 1947 and 1948.
"Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year, Supplement for August 1949, document S/1357.

"Question ayant fait J'objet de resolutions ou decisions de Ja
part du Conseil en 1947 et 1948.
" Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, quatrieme
annee, Supplement d'aoiit 1949, document S/1357.

Unies;

2. Desire exprimer combien il apprecie le tact, la
comprehension, la perseverance et le devouement au

7

devotion to duty of Dr. Ralph J. Bunche, Acting United
Nations Mediator in Palestine, who has brought to a
successful conclusion the negotiation of armistice
agreements between Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria
on the one hand, and Israel on the other;
3. Desires also to associate in this expression of
appreciation the members of the staff of the United
Nations mission in Palestine, including both the members
of the United Nations Secretariat and the Belgian,
French, Swedish and United States officers who served
on the staff and as military observers in Palestine.

devoir de M. Ralph J. Bunche, mediateur par interim
des Nations Unies en Palestine, qui a mene a une heureuse
conclusion la negociation de conventions d'armistice
entre l'Egypte, la Jordanie, le Li ban et la Syrie, d 'une
part, et Israel, d'autre part;
3. Desire associer dans cette expression de reconnaissance le personnel de la mission des Nations Unies en
Palestine, y compris les membres du Secretariat de
!'Organisation des Nations Uoies et Jes officiers belges,
fran~ais, suedois et des Etats-Unis qui ont servi avec la
mission en qualite d'observateurs militaires en Palestine.

Adopted at the 437th meeting."

Adoptee a la 437• seance"·

73 (1949). Resolution of II August 1949

73 (1949). Resolution du II aofi.t 1949

[S/1376, II]

[S/1376, II]

The Security Council,
Le Consei/ de securite,
Ayant pris acte avec satisfaction des differents accords
Having noted with satisfaction the several Armistice
Agreements15 concluded by means of negotiations d'armistice 15 que les parties impliquees dans le conflit
between the parties involved in the conflict in Palestine de Palestine ont conclus par voie de negociations,
in pursuance of its resolution 62 (1948) of 16 November conformement a sa resolution 62 (1948) du 16 novembre
1948,
1948,
I. Expresses the hope that the Governments and
1. Exprime l'espoir que les gouvernements et autorites
authorities concerned, having undertaken, by means of i interesses, s'etant engages, au cours des negociations
the negotiations now being conducted by the Conciliation I que conduit actuellement la Commission de conciliation
Commission for Palestine, to fulfil the request of the pour la Palestine, a donner suite a la demande de I' AsGeneral Assembly in its resolution 194 (III) of 11 semblee generale qui, dans sa resolution 194 (III) du
December 1948 to extend the scope of the armistice ! 11 decembre 1948, les invitait a etendre le domaine des
negotiations and to seek agreement by negotiations negociations d'armistice et a rechercher un accord par
conducted either with the Conciliation Commission or voie de negociations, soit directes, soit avec la Commission
directly, will at an early date achieve agreement on the de conciliation, parviendront rapidement a un reglement
final settlement of all questions outstanding between definitif de toutes les questions sur lesquelles ils ne se
them;
sont pas encore mis d'accord;
2. Finds that the Armistice Agreements constitute an
2. Constate que les accords d'armistice constituent
important step toward the establishment of permanent une etape importante vers l 'instauration d 'une paix
peace in Palestine and considers that these agreements permanente en Palestine et estime qu'ils se substituent a
supersede the truce provided for in Security Council ! la treve etablie par les resolutions 50 (1948) et 54 (1948) du
resolutions 50 (1948) of 29 May and 54 (1948) of 15 Conseil de securite, en date des 29 mai et 15 juillet 1948;
July 1948;
3. Reaffirms, pending the final peace settlement, the
3. Confirme, jusqu'au reglement pacifique definitif,
order contained in its resolution 54 (1948) to the Govern- l'ordre donne, en vertu de !'Article 40 de la Charte des
ments and authorities concerned, pursuant to Article 40 Nations Unies, par la resolution 54 (1948) aux gouverof the Charter of the United Nations, to observe an nements et autorites interesses d'observer une suspension
unconditional cease-fire and, bearing in mind that the d 'armes inconditionnelle, et, tenant compte de ce que
several Armistice Agreements include firm pledges Jes divers accords d'armistice contiennent de fermes
against any further acts of hostility between the parties engagements d'eviter tous actes ulterieurs d'hostilite
and also provide for their supervision by the parties entre les parties et prevoient aussi le controle de ces
themselves, relies upon the parties to ensure the continued conventions par les parties elles-memes, fait confiance
application and observance of these Agreements;
a ces dernieres pour continuer a les appliquer et a les
respecter;
4. Decides that all functions assigned to the United
4. Decide que toutes les taches confiees au Mediateur
Nations Mediator in Palestine having been discharged, des Nations Unies en Palestine ayant ete accomplies, le
1

u Adopted without vote.
"See Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year,
Special Supplements Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4.

" Le projet de resolution n 'a pas ete mis aUll voix.
"Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, quatrieme
annee, Supplements speciaux n°• 1, 2, 3 et 4.

8
