Council of the International Refugee Organization of 11 July 1949 10 and of 20 October 1949,11
Considering that in its aforementioned resolution the Eco:1omic and Social Council requested
the Governments of States Members of the United
Nations, and of other States, to provide the necessary legal protection for refugees who have been
the concern of the International Refugee Organization and recommended that the General Assembly at its fourth session should decide the functions and organizational arrangements, within the
framework of the United Nations, necessary for
the international protection of refugees after the
International Refugee Organization terminates its
activities,
l. Decides to establish, as of 1 January 1951,
a High Commissioner's Office for Refugees in accordance with the provisions of the annex to the
present resolution to discharge the functions
enumerated therein and such other functions as
the General Assembly may from time to time confer upon it;
2. Decides that, unless the General Assembly
subsequently decides otherwise, no expenditure
other than administrative expenditures relating to
the functioning of the High Commissioner's Office
should be borne on the budget of the United
Nations, and that all other expenditures relating
to the activities of the High Commissioner should
be financed by voluntary contributions;
3. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare detailed draft provisions for
the implementation of the present resolution and
the annex attached thereto, to circulate these
draft provisions to Governments for comments,
and to submit them to the Economic and Social
Council at its eleventh session, together with such
comments thereon as may have been received
from Governments ;
(b) To prepare, in consultation with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, a draft budget for the operation
in 1951 of the High Commissioner's Office for
Refugees;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council:
(a) To prepare, at its eleventh session, a draft
resolution embodying provisions for the functioning of the High Commissioner's Office for
Refugees and to submit the draft resolution to
the General Assembly for consideration at its
fifth regular session;
( b) To transmit to the General Assembly at
its fifth regular session such recommendations as
the Council may deem appropriate regarding the
definitions of the term "refugee" to be applied
by the High Commissioner;
5. Decides to review, not later than at its eighth
regular session, the arrangements for the High
Commissioner's Office for Refugees with a view
to determining whether the Office should be continued beyond 31 December 1953.
265th plenary meeting,
3 December 1949.

118 (IV). United Nations International
Children's Emergency Fund
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 6 of the Economic
and Social Council to the General Assembly and
the report 6 of the United Nations International
Children's Emergency Fund,
Recognizing the important role which the Fund
has been playing in the structure of the United
Nations,
1. N ates the steps taken by the Fund with respect to the United Nations Appeal for Children
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 215
(111) 7 of 8 December 1948;
2. Appeals to the various official and private
international organizations interested in child welfare to collaborate with the Fund in every pos1ible way;
3. Congratitlates the Fund, now in its third
year of operations, for its great humanitarian effort
in Europe and in the Middle East, now being
extended to Asia, Latin America and Africa, in
bringing substantial aid of lasting value, through
feeding, medical and related programmes, to millions of mothers and children;
4. N ates with concern the existence of children's emergency· needs arising out of war and
other calamities as well as the great needs which
the Fund's experience has demonstrated as existing in under-developed countries;
.5. N ates with approval the decisions of the
Executive Board of the Fund to devote hence-forth a greater share of the Fund's resources to
the development of programmes outside Europe;
6. Expresses gratification at the continued generous support of the Fund by Governments and
individuals, amounting to forty million dollars in
the past year;
7. Draws the attention of Members to the
urgent necessity of further contributions to enable
the Fund to carry out its programme.
264th plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.

319 (IV). Refugees and stateless
persons
A
The General Assembly,

Considering that the problem of refugees is
international in scope and nature and that its final
solution can only be provided by the voluntary
repatriation of the refugees or their assimilation
within new national communities,
Recognizing the responsibility of the United
Nations for the international protection of ref-

ugees,
Having examined resolution 248(IX)A 8 of the
Economic and Social Council of 6 August 1949,
the report9 of the Secretary-General of 26 October
1949, and the communications from the General

8 See Official Raords of the Economic and Social
Council, Fourth Year, Ninth Session, Resolutions,
page 58.
0
See Official Records of the fou,-th session of the General Assembly, Annex to the Third Committee, document A/C.3/527.
10 See document E/1392.
11
See Official Records of the fourth session of tlae General Assembly, Annex to the Third Committee, document A/C.3/528.

5
See Official Recof'ds of the fourth session of the Central Assembly, Supplement No. 3.
8
See Repo,-t of the International Chi/d,-en's Emergency Fund submitted to the Economic and Social Council at its ninth session.
1

See Official Records of the third session of the Gen-

~r'a/ Assembly, Part I, Resolutions, page 70.

36
