General Assemblv-Thirteenth Se.-:sinn

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE
CONTENTS

1262 (XIII). Question of arbitral procedure (14 November 1958) (item 57) . . . .
1288 (XIII). Diplomatic intercourse and imr-mnities (5 December 1958)
(iteni 56) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1289 (XIII). Relations between States and inter-governmental organizations ( 5
December 1958) (item 56) . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. . . .
1290 (XIII). Report of the International Law Commission covering the work of
its tenth session (cha?ter V) (5 December 1958) (item 56) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1291 (XIII). Question of the publication of a United Nations juridical yearbook
(5 December 1958) (item 56) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1306 (XIII). Question of initiating a study of the juridical regime of historic
waters, including historic bays (10 December 1958) (item 58) . . . . . . . . . . . .
1307 (XIII). Convening of a second United Nations conference on the law of the
sea (10 December 1958) (item 59) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1262 (XIII). Question of arbitral procedure

Page

53
53
54
54
54
54
54

ing up of arbitral agreements and the conduct of arbitral
procedure, with a view to facilitating a review of the
matter by the United Nations at an appropriate time.
780th plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 797 (VIII) of 7 Deceniber
1953 and 989 (X) of 14 December 1955,
Considering that arbitration is one of the means for
the pacific settlement of disputes referred to i.1 the Charter of the United Nations,
Having considered chapter II, on arbitral pro.::edure,
of the report of the International Law Commission covering the work of its tenth session, 1
Taking note of the comments in that report to the
effect, in particular, that the draft articles on arbitral
procedure contained therein would have no binding
effect on States unless accepted by them and save to the
extent that each one is accepted by them in treaties of
arbitration or in a compromis,
Taking into consideration the observations of Governments and the statements made in the Sixth Committee
at the thirteenth session of the General Assembly,
1. Takes note of chapter II of the report of the International Law Commission covering the work of its
tenth session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission and the Secretariat for their work on
arbitral procedure;
3-. Brings the draft articles on arbitral procedure contained in the report of the International Law Commission to the attention of Member States for their consideration and use, in such cases and to such extent as they
consider appropriate, in drawing up treaties of arbitration or compromis;
4. Invites Governments to send to the SecretaryGeneral any comments they may wish to make on the
draft, and in particular on their experience in the draw-

1288 (XID). Diplomatic intercourse and
immunities
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter III of the report of the
International Law Commission C'}vering the work of its
tenth session1 which contains draft articles and commentaries on diplomatic intercourse and immunities,
Recalling that the General Assembly, in its resolution
685 (VII) of 5 December 1952, requested the International Law Commission to undertake the codification of
the topic "Diplomatic intercourse and immunities", and
to treat it as a priority topic,
Taking into account paragraph 25 of the report of the
International Law Commission covering the work of its
ninth session2 wherein it is stated that the Commission
decided to present a final report on the subject of diplomatic intercourse and immunities to the General Assembly at its thirteenth session, after reviewing the subject
in the light of the comments of Governments,
Taking into account also paragraph 50 of the report
of the International Law Commission covering the work
of its tenth session wherein it is stated that the Commission decided to recommend to the General Assembly
that the draft articles on diplomatic intercourse and immunities should be recommended to Member States with
a view to the conclusion of a convention,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for its work on diplomatic intercourse
and immunities ;

1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/3859 and Corr.1).

1

53

lbid., Twelfth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/3623).

54

General A1111embly-Thirteenth Session

2. Invites Member States to submit their comments
on the draft articles concerning diplomatic intercourse
and immunities not later than 1 June 1959;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate such
comments so as to facilitate the discussion of the subject at the fourteenth session of the General Assembly;
4. Decides to include the item entitled "Diplomatic
intercourse and immunities" in the provisional agenda
of its fourteenth session with a view to the early conclusion of a convention on diplomatic intercourse and
immunities ;
5. Decides to consider at its fourteenth session the
question to what body the formulation of the convention
should be entrusted.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.

1289 (XIII). Relations between States and intergovernmental organizations
The General Assembly,
Taking note of paragraph 51 of the report of the International Law Commission covering the work of its
tenth session, 1 which refers to ad hoe diplomacy and,
in particular, to diplomatic conferences, and of paragraph 52 of the same report, which refers to relations
between States and international organizations,
Considering the importance and development of international organizations,
Considering the observations made by Governments
at the twelfth and thirteenth sessions of the General
Assembly, particularly on the question referred to in
paragraph 52 of the report,
Invites the International Law Commission to give
further consideration to the question of relations between States and inter-governmental international organizations at the appropriate time, after study of diplomatic intercourse and immunities, consular intercourse
and immunities and ad hoe diplomacy has been completed by the United Nations and in the light of the
results of that study and of the discussion in the General
Assembly.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
1290 (XIII). Report of the International Law
Commission covering the work of its tenth
session ( chapter V)

The General Assembly,
Having considered the questions dealt with in chapter
V of the report of the International Law Commission
covering the work of its tenth session,1
Takes note of chapter V of the said report.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
1291 (XIII). Question of the publication of a
United Nations juridical yearbook
The General Assembly,
Considering that it is a function of the General Assembly to take appropriate measures to encourage the
development of international law,
Considering that the publication of a United Nations
juridical yearbook may constitute a useful measure for
that purpose,

Recalling its resolution 176 (II) of 21 November
1947,
Having considered the discussion in the Sixth Committee on the question of the publication of a juridical
yearl)ook,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report on the question of the publication of a United Nations juridical yearbook, covering in addition the technical and financial implications of such a publication,
taking into account the suggestions made during the
discussion in the Sixth Committee, and to circulate the
report to Member States before the fourteenth session
of the General Assembly ;
2. Decides to place this question on the provisional
agenda of its fourteenth session.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
1306 (XIII). Question of initiating a study of the
juridical regime of historic waters, including historic bays

The General Assembly,
Having received the resolution adopted on 27 April
1958 by the United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea3 requesting the General Assembly to arrange for
the study of the juridical regime of historic waters, including historic bays, and for the communication of the
results of such study to all States Members of the United
Nations,
Decides to place the question of initiating a study of
the juridical regime of historic waters, including historic
bays, on the provisional agenda of its fourteenth session.
783rd plenary meeting,
10 December 1958.
1307 (XIII). Convening of a second United Nations conference on the law of the sea

The General Assembly,
Having received the resolution adopted on 27 April
1958 by the United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea,4 requesting the General Assembly to study at
its thirteenth session the advisability of convening a
second international conference of plenipotentiaries for
further consideration of questions left unsettled by the
Conference,
Recalling that the Conference made an historic contribution to the codification arid progressive development of international law by preparing and opening for
signature conventions on nearly all of the subjects covered by the draft articles on the law of the sea drawn up
by the International Law Commission,5
Noting that no proposal concerning the breadth of the
territorial sea or fishery limits received the two-thirds
majority required for adoption by the Conference,
Believing that the desire for agreement on these two
vital issues continues, and that agreement thereon would
contribute substantially to the lessening of international
• United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, Official
Records, Volume II: Plenary Meetings (United Nations publication, Sales No.: 58.V.4, Vol. II), annexes, document
A/CONF.13/L.56, resolution VII.
• Ibid., resolution VIII.
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh Sessfrm,
Supplement No. 9 (A/3159), para. 33.
