238

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,7
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Inde­
pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
American Samoa, including in particular its resolution 38/
41 of 7 December 1983,
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Power relating to American Samoa,8
Conscious of the need to promote progress towards the
full implementation of the Declaration in respect of
American Samoa,
Noting with appreciation the continued participation of
the administering Power in the work of the Special Com-

mittee in regard to American Samoa, thereby enabling it to
conduct a more informed and meaningful examination of
the situation in the Territory,
Reiterating the view that it remains the obligation of the
administering Power to carry out a thorough programme
of political education so as to ensure that the people of
American Samoa are made fully aware of their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence in accord­
ance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV),
Noting that the first five-year economic development
plan for the Territory, implemented by the Development
Planning Office of the Government of American Samoa, is
due to expire at the end of 1984,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of American Samoa and
stressing the necessity of diversifying the economy of the
Territory as a matter of priority in order to reduce its
dependence on fluctuating market conditions,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories and expressing its satisfaction at the
willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration,
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to American
Samoa;9
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
American Samoa to self-determination and independence
in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, con­
tained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exer­
cise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration contained in General Assembly reso­
lution 1514 (XV), which fully applies to American Samoa;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States of
America, as the administering Power, to take all necessary
steps, taking into account the freely expressed wishes of
the people of American Samoa, to expedite the process of
decolonization of the Territory in accordance with the rel­
evant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Declaration;
5. Reaffirms that it is the responsibility of the adminis­
tering Power to carry out a thorough programme of politi­
cal education so as to ensure that the people of American
Samoa are kept fully aware of their inalienable right to
self-determination and independence;
6. Takes note of the fact that a constitutional conven­
tion was held in American Samoa and that the convention
adopted, on 16 February 1984, a revised draft constitution
for the Territory, which was transmitted to the Congress of
the United States;
7. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power, under the Charter, for the economic and social
development of the Territory;
8. Calls upon the administering Power to intensify its
efforts to strengthen and diversify the economy of
American Samoa in order to reduce its heavy dependence

6 Ibid., sect. VI.
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thmv-mnth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/39/23), chaps. IV and XVII.

8 /hid., Thmy-ninth Sernon. Fourth Committee. 17th meeting, paras.
7 3-82.
q /hid., Thm1·-mnth Se11wn, Supp/emem No. 2J (A/39123). chap. XVII.

Islands and the co-operation it has extended to the Com­
mittee, including the receiving of visiting missions to the
Territory in 1974 and 1980,
l. Notes with satisfaction the observations and recom­
mendations of the United Nations Visiting Mission to
Observe the Act of Self-Determination in the Cocos (Keel­
ing) Islands, 1984;6
2. Takes note that the people of the Cocos (Keeling)
Islands voted by a substantial majority for integration with
Australia;
3. Endorses the view of the Visiting Mission that, in so
doing, the people of the Territory have exercised their
right to self-determination in accordance with the princi­
ples of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declara­
tion on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV);
4. Considers it appropriate that, in view of the decision
of the people of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands, the transmis­
sion of information in respect of the Cocos (Keeling)
Islands under Article 73 e of the Charter should cease;
5. Takes note of the actions taken by the Government
of Australia to transfer ownership of land to the Cocos
(Keeling) Islands community and to extend relevant legis­
lation to the community so that it may enjoy the same
benefits as those available to the Australian community at
large, as well as the Government's assurances that the
unique cultural identity, heritage and traditions of the
Cocos community will be preserved;
6. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Australia, as the administering Power concerned, and to
the Cocos (Keeling) Islands Council for the co-operation
extended to the United Nations;
7. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples for the work it has accomplished, in
close co-operation with the administering Power, in
respect of the Territory.

87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984
39/31. Question of American Samoa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

on economic and financial support from the United States
and to create employment opportunities for the people of
the Territory;
9. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to strengthen and extend the
responsibilities of the Development Planning Office fol­
lowing the expiration of the five-year development plan at
the end of 1984;
10. Urges the administering Power to continue to facil­
itate close relations and co-operation between the peoples
of the Territory and the neighbouring island communities
and between the territorial Government and the regional
institutions in order to enhance further the economic wel­
fare of the people of American Samoa;
11. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to safeguard the inalien­
able right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment
of their natural resources by taking effective measures to
ensure their right to own and dispose of those resources
and to establish and maintain control of their future
development;
12. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to American Samoa should be kept under
review;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the dispatch of a further visiting mission to American
Samoa, in consultation with the administering Power,
taking into account, in particular, the wishes of the people
of the Territory, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/32. Question of Guam
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Guam,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 10
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Inde­
pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
Guam, including in particular its resolution 38/42 of 7
December 1983,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the
administering Power relating to Guam, 8
Noting with appreciation the continued active participa­
tion of the administering Power in the work of the Special
Committee in regard to Guam, thereby enabling it to con­
duct a more informed and meaningful examination of the
situation in the Territory with a view to accelerating the
process of decolonization towards the full and speedy
implementation of the Declaration,
Noting that a referendum on political status was organ­
ized in the Territory, the final phase of which was held on
4 September 1982,
Recalling all relevant resolutions of the United Nations
relating to military bases and installations in colonial and
Non-Self-Governing Territories and aware of the presence
lO Ibid., chaps. IV, VI and XVIII.

239

of military bases and installations of the administering
Power in Guam,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of Guam and the neces­
sity of diversifying the economy of the Territory as a
matter of priority and noting the great potential for diver­
sification and development offered by commerical fishing,
agriculture and development of the transportation
industry,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories and expressing its satisfaction at the
willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Guam; 11
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Guam to self-determination and independence in con­
formity with the Declaration on the Granting of Indepen­
dence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV):
3. Reaffirms its conviction that such factors as terri­
torial size, geographical location, size of population and
limited natural resources should in no way delay the
speedy exercise by the people of the Territory of their ina­
lienable right to self-determination and independence in
conformity with the Declaration contained in General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), which fully applies to
Guam;
4. Takes note of the fact that in the referendum on
political status, the final phase of which was held on 4 Sep­
tember 1982, 7 5 per cent of the participants voted for
Commonwealth status in association with the United
States of America, and of the statement by the administer­
ing Power that the Congress of the United States has
requested the Guamanian Status Commission to draft leg­
islation establishing Guam as a Commonwealth of the
United States and to submit it to the Congress for
approval;
5. Calls upon the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to expedite the process of
decolonization strictly in accordance with the expressed
wishes of the people of the Territory;
6. Reaffirms its strong conviction that the presence of
military bases and installations in the Territory could con­
stitute a major obstacle to the implementation of the Dec­
laration and that it is the responsibility of the administer­
ing Power to ensure that the existence of such bases and
installations does not hinder the population of the Terri­
tory from exercising its right to self-determination and
independence in conformity with the purposes and princi­
ples of the Charter of the United Nations;
7. Urges the administering Power to continue to take
all necessary measures not to involve the Territory in any
offensive acts or interference directed against other States
and to comply fully with the purposes and principles of the
Charter, the Declaration and the resolutions and decisions
of the General Assembly relating to military activities and
arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories under their
administration;
8. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power, under the Charter, for the economic and social
development of Guam and calls upon the administering
11 1/"d.. chap. XVIII.
