Resolutions adopted on the report of the
Joint 2nd and 3rd <Ammittee and 5th Committee, meeting jointly

ing so many projects as to exceed the available technical, administrative and financial resources,
Recognizing that the extent of activity is determined
by the programme decisions and by the budgeta~y. appropriations of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies,
Declaring that the resources placed at the disposal
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies
should be applied where they are most needed,
1. Requests each specialized agency to review its
1952 programme during 1951, using the criteria set
forth in the report 8 of the Co-ordination Committee as
approved by the Economic and Social Council ;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the specialized agencies to indicate, when new projects
are adopted, which current projects may be deferred,
modified or eliminated to ensure that the economic and
social work of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies will be carried on most effectively ;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council:
(a) To review, during 1951, the 1952 programmes
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies,
using the criteria set forth in the report of the Coordination Committee as approved by the Economic and
Social Council ;
( b) To seek, in reviewing the programmes, the
assistance of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the administrative and
financial aspects of this matter ;
( c) To report to the sixth session of the General
Assembly on the results of these reviews ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the administrative heads of the specialized agencies, to include in annex IV to the Secretary-General's
budget estimates a summary schedule of the estimated
costs of the projects provided for in the budgets of the
United Nations and of the specialized agencies ; and,
further,
Having noted the steps taken and progress made by
the Economic and Social Council, the SecretaryGeneral, the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination and the specialized agencies,
5. Urges that the efforts which are being made to
ensure the fullest co-ordination of the programmes and
activities of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies be vigorously pursued.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
414 (V).

Membership in the specialized agencies

The General Assembly,
Considering the principle of international co-operation as an important condition for the full success of
the activities of the _specialized agencies,
Noting that some of the specialized agencies do not
enjoy participation of all Member States in their work,
8

See documents E/1810 and E/1810/Corr.1.
•See document A/C.1.&J/93-A/C.5/375, annex IL

37

Expresses the hope that those Members not partir:ipating at the present time may find their way to assume
or resume, as soon as possible, full participation in the
specialized agencies.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
415 (V). Transfer of functions of the International Penal and Penitentiary Commission

The General Assembly,
Noting resolutions 262 B (IX) and 333 H (XI) of
the Economic and Social Council and the resolution'
adopted by the International Penal and Penitentiary
Commission on 12 August 1950,
1. Approves the plan contained in the report prepared by the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
International Penal and Penitentiary Commission, concerning the transfer of the functions of the Commission
to the United Nations and which is annexed to the
present resolution ;
2. Notes the decision of the Commission with respect
to its residual assets;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for
donating its library and its archives to the United Nations on the conditions specified in the above-mentioned
plan;
4. N ates that these arrangements do not involve the
assumption by the United Nations of responsibility for
any liabilities of the Commission;
5. Authorizes the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, in consultation with the Secretary-General of
the International Penal and Penitentiary Commission,
to make arrangements for the transfer of the functions
of the Commission and of its library and archives to the
United Nations on a mutually satisfactory date prior to
31 December 1951;
6. Pays tribute to the accomplishments of the Commission, during the long period of its existence, in the
field of the prevention of crime and the treatment of
offenders.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
ANNEX

Plan• prepared by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations in consultation with the International Penal and Penitentiary Commission:
(a) All Members of the United Nations, and all existing m~m?ers of the lnt~rnational Penal and Penitentiary
Comn11ss1on (IPPC) which are not Members of the United
Nations, and any other States designated by the Economic
and Social Council, shall be invited by the Council to
appoint one or more representatives of expert qualifications or experience, professional or scientific in the field
of the prevention of crime and the treatment ~f offenders.
The experts so appointed shall act in the first instance as
individual correspondents with the United Nations Department of Social Affairs.

" For the draft plan, see annex I of document A/C.1.&3/93-A/C.5/375.
