VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of
the present resolution.

report to the General Assembly at its forty-fo~rth session
on the implementation of the present resolution.
75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988

75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988

43/143.

Emergency assistance to voluntary returnees
and displaced persons in Chad

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/128 of 7 December 1987 on
emergency assistance to voluntary returnees and displaced
persons in Chad, as well as all its previous resolutions on
this question,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
emergency assistance to voluntary returnees and displaced
persons in Chad, 151
Deeply concerned about the persistence of the harmful
effects of the drought, desertification, floods and infestations oflocusts and grasshoppers, which are compounding
the already precarious food and health situation in Chad,
Conscious that the large number of voluntary returnees
and displaced persons resulting from the war and the
drought in Chad poses a serious problem of their integration into society,
Considering that the mass return of retumees to Chad
and of displaced persons in the northem region poses serious social and economic problems for the Government of
Chad,
Bearing in mind the many appeals made by the Government of Chad for international emergency assistance to
the voluntary returnees and displaced persons in Chad,
l. Endorses the appeals made by the Government of
Chad for emergency assistance to the voluntary returnees
and displaced persons in Chad;
2. Reiterates its appeal to all States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to support,
by generous contributions, the efforts being made by the
Government of Chad to assist and resettle the voluntary
returnees and displaced persons;
3. Takes note with satisfaction ofthe action undertaken
by the various organizations ofthe United Nations system
and the specialized agencies with a view to mobilizing
emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary
returnees and displaced persons in Chad;
4. Again requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator to mobilize emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary returnees and displaced persons
in Chad;
5. Calls upon:
(a) The Secretary-General to continue his efforts to
mobilize special humanitarian assistance for the resettlement of displaced persons in the northern region of Chad;
(b) The international community to support the efforts
made by the Government of Chad to implement the programmes for repatriating and resettling the voluntary
returnees and displaced persons in Chad;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, to

151 A/43/593 and Add.1

215

43/144.

Assistance to refugees and returnees in Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Recalling ali its resolutions, in particular resolution
42/139 of 7 December 1987, as well as all those of the
Economic and Social Council, on assistance to displaced
persons in Ethiopia,
Taking note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia, 152
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, 87
Recognizing the increasing number of refugees and
voluntary returnees in Ethiopia,
Deeply concerned about the massive flow of refugees and
voluntary returnees into the country and the enormous
burden this has placed on the country's infrastructure and
meagre resources,
Deeply concerned also about the gra:v~ consequences t~is
has entailed for the country's capabthty to grapple w1th
the effects of the prolonged drought,
Aware of the heavy burden placed on the Government of
Ethiopia and of the need for adequate assistance to refugees, voluntary returnees and victims of natural disasters,
l. Commends the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and intergovernmental organizations and voluntary agencies for their assistance in mitigating the plight of the large number of refugees and
voluntary returnees in Ethiopia;
2. Appeals to Member States and to international organizations and voluntary agencies to provide adequate
material, financia! and technical assistance for relief and
rehabilitation programmes for the large number of refugees and voluntary retumees in Ethiopia;
3. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue his efforts in mobilizing
humanitarian assistance for the relief, rehabilitation and
resettlement of voluntary returnees and the large number
of refugees in Ethiopia;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the High Commissioner, to apprise the Economic
and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1989,
of the implementation of the present resolution and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth
session.
75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988

43/145.

Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in El Salvador

The General Assembly,
Guided by the principies of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration ofHuman Rights, 2 the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 20
and the humanitarian rules laid down in the Geneva Con-
