TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

5 JUNE

1968

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l429)

Statement

by the President

. . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a. . I . . . . . .

Page

. . . . .. . . . . . , .. . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . .. . . . . .

S/PV. 1429

1
1

Symbols of Uriited Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Menrion of’such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of $he Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND TWENTY-NINTH MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday,5 June 1968, at 6.00 p.m.
President: Mr. Arthur J. GOLDBERG
(United States of America).

3. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): The Indian delegation
received the news of the dastardly attack on Senator
Robert Kennedy with a sense of profound shock: This cruel
attempt to assassinate a great American in the prime of his
life can only be the act of a deranged person.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

4. Senator Kennedy is held in the highest respect in my
country and indeed in all parts of the world. His dedication
to peace and prosperity throughout the world is well
known. It is not often that in the political arena we come
across a personality of Senator Kennedy’s sensitivity and
passion for the welfare of mankind. We hope his life will be
spared and we offer our fervent prayers for his recovery.
The Kennedy family has had more than its fair share of
tragedy and suffering, and our hearts go out in sympathy to
Mrs. Robert Kennedy and, her children.

Provisional agenda (SiAgenda/l429)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
(4 Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the representative
of Jordan to the President of the Security Council
(S/8616);
(b,’ Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the representative
of Israel to the President of the Security Council
(S/8617).

5. We associate ourselves with the sentiments expressed in
the telegram to be sent in the name of the Security Council
to Mrs. Robert Kennedy. I may add that my Prime Minister
has already sent a telegram of sympathy to Mrs. Kennedy.

Statement by the President

6. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of my Government I
thank Ambassador Parthasarathi for his remarks.

1. The PRESIDENT: Before proceeding to OUTagenda, as
President of the Security Council I wish to make a brief
statement in connexion with the tragic attempt last night
on the life of Senator Robert F. Kennedy, which today has
called forth statements of sympathy and sorrow from the
Secretary-General, the President of the General Assembly
and other leading figures at the United Nations, and indeed
from governmental and religious leaders throughout the
world.

7, Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I
am sure that all members of the Council would wish you to
act as you have proposed, and we thank you for the words
you have spoken to us this evening. I too should like to say
a word, if I may, about the terrible news which we received
early this morning.
8. The evil of senseless violence has today cast a shadow of
gloom over us all. On this sad and bad day we all have more
reason than ever to hate violence with a fierce hatred and to
grieve over all its evil deeds and consequences. We in this
Council have special reason today to denounce violence in
all its forms and manifestations. On behalf of my Mission,
on behalf of my Government and on behalf of the British
people everywhere, I wish to convey to you, Sir, and to
your Government and people our feelings of outrage,
heartfelt anxiety and deep compassion for all those who
pray today for the life of a brave man.

2. Senator Kennedy, like his late brother, President John
F. Kennedy, has many times expressed his devotion to the
United Nations and to its purposes of peace. At this time,
in view of the tragic event which is in all our minds, I
believe that it would be appropriate if, in the name and on
behalf of the Security Council, I, as its presiding officer,
were to send the following telegram to Mrs. Robert
I?. Kennedy:

9. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of my Government I
thank Lord Caradon for what he has said.

“On behalf of the United Nations Security Council, and
as its President during the month of June, I wish to
convey to you the sense of shock and deep sorrow which
all members feel at the grievous news of the attempt to
assassinate your husband; Senator Kennedy’s support for
the United Nations and its purposes of peace is known
and respected throughout the world. All members of the
Council join in hoping and praying for him and in
profound sympathy for you and for the entire Kennedy’
family.”

10. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation associates itself with the sentiments of shock and grief that have
been expressed at this meeting by my colleagues and with
your message, Mr. President, to the family of Senator
Robert F. Kennedy.
11, At this hour, when the people of my country are filled
with horror at the heinous crime and are following with
1

22. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (tran‘sZuted fionr
Spanish): My Government and my delegation were appalled
at the news of the assassination attempt on United States
Senator Robert F. Kennedy in the early hours of this
morning.

hope and anxiety Senator Robert Kennedy’s battle for life
it is my sorrowful duty to express the deepest sympathy of
my Government to his brave lady, to other members of his
illustrious family and to the Government and people of the
United States. The President of Pakistan in a statement
earlier today has expressed his sense of deep shock and
sorrow. We pray that God in His infinite mercy may spare
Senator Kennedy’s life and grant him a speedy and
complete recovery to serve the cause of peace and
humanity.

23. I need not dwell on Senator Kennedy’s qualities; his is
an outstanding personality that transcends purely national
boundaries. The telegram you are proposing to send,
Mr. President, to the family of Senator Kennedy, expresses
the sincere and profound feelings of my delegation. But 1
feel it my duty to convey those feelings at the same time,
through you, to the people and Government of the United
States, for it is they, after all, who wilI suffer most from the
grim consequences of today’s tragic event.

12. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of my Government I
wish to express appreciation and thanks to Ambassador
Shahi for his remarks.
13. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): The senseless attempt to
assassinate one of the most outstanding personalities of the
United States has made the deepest impression of horror
and sorrow in my country-sorrow
felt personally by each
and every citizen of my country.

24. The PRESIDENT:
I thank
Paraguay on behalf of my country.

the representative of

25. Mr. SETTE CAMARA (Brazil): My delegation cannot
but join the representatives who have already spoken and
express the feelings of grief and shock with which the
Brazilian people and Government received the sad news of
the attempted assassination of Senator Robert Kennedy,
We deeply deplore the fact that a great political tragedy has
again struck the United States.

14. The Danish Foreign Minister, who is at present in
Washington, in a statement issued this morning recalled that
Senator Robert F.Kennedy had devoted himself to the
struggle for liberty and equality and against oppression and
violence.

26. I thank you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative in
expressing to the family of Senator Kennedy, O~I OUI
behalf, the sentiments of profound sorrow we all share at
the regrettable event of last night. The whole Brazilian
people will be praying that Senator Kennedy quickly
recovers and that he may soon resume the place he rightly
holds as a great figure in American life.

15. Our deepest sympathy goes to the family of the
Senator and to Government and people of the United
States. It is our fervent hope that he may soon recover from
this cruel attack.
16. My delegation fully associates itself with the telegram
that you, Mr. President, intend to send in the name of the
Council to Senator Kennedy’s wife,

27. The PRESIDENT:
for what he has said.

17. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Denmark on behalf of my Government.

I thank the Ambassador of Brazil ’

28. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): The Hungarian delegp
tion learned with deep shock the tragic news that the
outstanding American statesman, Senator Robert Kennedy,
had fallen victim to a senseless act of violence. Wejoin you,
Mr, President, in conveying the expression of our profound
sympathy to the family of Senator Kennedy and to the
Government of the United States, and our best wishes to
the Senator himself for his early recovery.

18. Lij
Endalkachew
MAKONNEN
(Ethiopia):
Mr. President, my delegation wishes to associate itself with
the sentiments of sympathy and sorrow that you have
expressed on our behalf with regard to the tragedy that has
befallen the Kennedy family. Senator Kennedy brings to
mind his late brother in the feelings of admiration and
affection that he evokes in all parts of the continent of
Africa.

29. The PRESIDENT:
I thank
Hungary for what he has said.

19. We in Ethiopia remember the visit he paid to Addis
Ababa and to the headquarters of African organizations in
our capital city and we recall in particular the inspiring
addresses he delivered on those occasions. He is a recog
nized leader in all endeavours having to do with human
freedom and progress, be it here in the United States or in
the rest of the world.

the Ambassador of

30. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): On behalf of Canada, a
close neighbour and friend of the United States, I would
say that the news overnight came as the most profound
shock to everybody in my country. We would, of course,
wish to associate ourselves with the message which you read
out, Mr. President, but we wish also to say that at this
moment our thoughts are, of course, of the Senator and his
family and of all that he stood for, as you said, in the
advocacy of world peace, social justice and all those things
which are enshrined in the Charter-things in which all just
men believe. At this moment in the trial of this country our
profoundest sympathy goes to all concerned.

20. My delegation and the Government and people of
Ethiopia join the people of the United States in the fervent
prayer that the life of this great and inspired man may be
saved for the sake of his family, his nation and the whole of
mankind.

31, The PRESIDENT: I thank Ambassador Ignatieff.
21. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of my Government, I
express appreciation to Ambassador Makonnen for his
remarks.

32. Mr. CHAYET (France) (translated from Fre!~ch): It
was with heartfelt and profound emotion that my delega.
2

tion, like all the delegations to the United Nations, heard of
the attempt on the life of Senator Robert Kennedy.

United States. My delegation completely associatesitself
with the sentiments in the message which YOU,
Mr. President,so thoughtfully proposeto sendon behalf of
the entire Council.

33. This attempt on his life affects us for more than one
reason, since Mr. Kennedy is Senator for New York State,
the state which is host to the United Nations. This brilliant
man, opposed to violence in all its forms, who has just been
the victim of violence as was his brother, President John
Fitzgerald Kennedy, is an honour to the United States.

42. The PRESIDENT: I thank AmbassadorLiu.
43. Mr. BOUATTOURA (Algeria) (translated from
French): Mr. President,my delegationfully associates
itself
with the wording of the messageyou have been kind
enoughto readout on our behalf.

34. I would ask you, Mr. President, to transmit the French
delegation’s condolences to your Government and I thank
you for conveying to Mrs. Robert Kennedy our feelings of
grief and sorrow, our wishes for her husband’s speedy
recovery, and the hope we share with her that the news
may soon be better.
35. The PRESIDENT:
France.

I thank

the representative

44. We shouldlike to expressour sorrow at the tragedy
which has struck Senator Robert Kennedy. It was his
ambition to pursuethe noble missionof the late lamented
John Fitzgerald Kennedy and thus to reconcile the United
States with itself and with the wholeworld.

of
45. On behalf of the Algerian delegation, we expressto
you, Mr. President,and to your delegation,our feelingsof
deep sympathy. We ask you to be good enoughto convey
these feelingsof affectionate sympathy to Mrs. Kennedy
and her family.

36. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated from French): The
delegation of Senegaland particularly its representative
here in the Security Council, who has had the privilege of
knowing SenatorRobert Kennedy personally-learnedwith
consternationof the shockingattempt upon the life of one ,46. In view of this sadevent, and despite the urgency of
of the finest sonsof the United Statesof America.
L/”the questionwe are discussing,my delegationwould like to
make a formal requestto you and the Council to adjourn
37. On behalf of my Government I would ask you,
this meetingand, with the consentof the Council to decide
Mr. President,to transmit totSenator Kennedy our earnest when our work shouldbe resumed.
hope for his speedy.andcomplete recovery. My delegation
joins with you in expressingits complete agreementwith
47. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
the sentimentsexpressedin your telegramand we ask you
Algeria for what he hassaid.
to convey to your Government and to the Kennedy family
our concernand our goodwishes.
48. Before putting his proposalto the Council, I should
like to.add a few wordson my own behalf, sinceI mademy
38. The PRESIDENT: I thank AmbassadorBoye for what
first statementin my capacity aspresident of the Council.
he hassai d ’
%1
49. As wepray for SenatorKennedy, our heartscry out in
39.. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) pain and anguishat this terrible act of violence; andthe cry
(translated porn Russian): Mr. President,we were deeply
is that all violencemust stop. Surely by now the lessonthat
horrified to hear, early this morning, of this tragic event.We
violence breedsviolence.must be pounded into our heads.
firmly condemnacts of political terrorism, and extend our
Surely by now all will agreethat there must be an end to
deepestsympathy and condolenceto the family of Senator killing at home and abroad. Otherwise there will be little
Kennedy as well as our sincere wishesfor the Senator’s hope for my country, for any other country or for the
recovery. Weendorsethe message
readout by you, which is
world.
to be sentto his family.
1.,+‘50.The Council has heard the proposal made by the
40. The PRESIDENT: I thank AmbassadorMalik.
representativeof Algeria. Since I hear no objection, I shall
adjourn this meetingon the termshe proposed.
41. Mr. LIU (China): I should like to join in the
spontaneousexpressionof sympathy around this table for
the family of Senator Kennedy and for the peopleof the
The meetingroseat 7.15 p. m.

3

:

:

:

/i

:

;
/

i

:’

i

‘,

I
I
/
/
/ I
5’.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publicotionr
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,

DES NATIONS

HAH

llOJlYL(MTb

L43AAHMFi

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

OPTAHMSA~MH

New York

Price:

06bEAHHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES

tar publicaciones
de Ias Nocioner
Unidar
ertdn
en lodes
parter del mundo.
Consulte
o su librero
Ventar,
Nuevo York o Ginebm.

Nations,

UNIES

Nations
Unier
rant en vente
dons
ler libroirier
et ler q gences
entier.
Informez-vous
oupr&s
de votre libroirie
ou adresser-vour
6:
de, venter, New York ou Get&e.

Ler publications
der
d&pasitairer
du monde
Notions
Unies, Section

Litho in United

throughout
New York

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

HAuHii

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y cosos dirtribuidoras
o dirljare
a: Nociones
Unidar,
Secci6n

in other

currencies)

de

3543o-September

1972-W~o
