6

. General Aaaembly-Twenty-third Se11ion

in ali Territories which have not yet attained independence;
12. Requests the Special Committee to make concrete suggestions which could assist the Security
Council in considering appropriate measures under the
Charter of the United Nations with regard to developments in colonial Territories which are likely to
threaten international peace and security, and recommends the Council · to take such suggestions fully into
consideration ;
13; Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the compliance of Member States with the
Declaration and with other relevant resolutions on the
question of decolonization, particularly those relating
to the Territóries under Portuguese domination, Southern Rhodesia and Namibia, and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session;
14. Invites the Special Committee to pay particular
attention to the small Territories and to recommend to
the General Assembly the most appropriate methods
and also the steps to be taken to enable the populations
of those Territories to exercise fully their right to selfdetermination and independence ;
15. Urges the administering Powers to co-operate
with the Special Committee by permitting the access
of visiting missions to the colonial Territories in accordance with decisions previously taken by the General Assembly and by the Special Committee;
16. Decides to establish a Preparatory Committee
for the Tenth Anniversary of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, consisting of the members of the Special Committee and six other members to be nominated by the
President of the General Assembly in consultation with
the Chairman of the Special Committee, and requests
the Preparatory Committee to prepare a special programme of activities in connexion with the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration with a
view to finding further ways and means of expediting
the achievement of the objectives set forth in the Declaration, ancl to report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-fourth session ;
17. Requests tbe Secretary-General, having regard
to the suggestions of the Special Committee, to take
concrete measures through ali the media at bis disposal,
including publications, radio and television, to give

Other

------------------

widespread and continuous publicity to the work of the
United Nations in the field of decolonization, to the
:situation in the colonial Territories and to the continuing struggle for liberation being waged by the colonial
peoples;
18. Requests the administering Powers to co-operate
with the Secretary-General in promoting the large-scale
dissemination of information on the work of the United
N ations in the implementation of the Declaration;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all the
facilities necessary for the implementation of the
present resolution.
1751st plenary tueling,
20 Decembw 1968.

*

*

*

The President of the General Assembly iliformed lltt
SecretarJ•-Genera/ 16 that ALGERIA, CANADA, GHANA, INDONESIA, MONGOLIA and TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO hod OCCl/}l,tJ llu
invita lioti to sen:e on the Pref,aratory Committe, f or lht
Tenth Anniversary o/ the Declaration on th, Grat11i,sg of
/ndef,endence to Colonial Co11ntries and Peo/}lts eslablillud
under f,aragraf,h 16 of tht abovt resolution.
As a result, the Pre/}aratory Commifttt will be cofflla#d
o/ the following Member States: AFGHANISTAN, ALO&aIA,
AUSTRALIA, BULGARIA, CANADA, ECUADOR, ETHIOPIA, GHANA,
HoNouRAs, INDrA, INDONESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, lTALY, lvoay CoAsT,
MADAGASCAR, MALI, MoNcouA, NoRWAY, PoLAND, SJDaA
LEONE, SYRIA, TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, TUNISIA, UNION 0P
SOVIET SocIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GUAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TAN•
ZANIA, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, VENEZUELA altd YUGOSLAVIA.

2492 (XXIII). Credentlale of repreeentatlvee to
tbe twenty-third 1ee1ion of the General
Aesembly

The General Assembly
Approves the report of the Credentials Committee.n
1752nd plenary tueling,
21 December 1968.
18 See A/7486.
17 Official Records

of tht General Assnnbl,.L'{wenty-lhird
Session, Anneses, agenda item 3, document A/7ZZ8.

deci,ion,

Notification by the Secretuy-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the
·
Charter of the United Natione
(ltem 7)
At its 1676th plenary meeting, on 27 September 1968, the General Assembly
took note of the communication dated 24 September 1968 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the General Assembly. 18

Adoption of tbe agenda
(ltem 8)
At its 1676th plenary meeting, on 27 September 1968, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the General Committee, 19 decided to postpone to the
18 /bid., agenda itcm 7, document A/7241.
19 [bid., agenda item 8, document A/7250, para. 9.
