TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

23 APRIL

1968

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 14 15) . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . .

Adoption

of the agenda

Page
1

,. . , , . .. . . . , . . .. .. . .. .. . .. ,. . .., .. . . . .

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30
August 1963 addressed to the President of the Security Council on behalf of the
representatives of thirty-two Member States (S/5382 and S/5409):
Letter dated 12 March 1968 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Algeria, Botstvana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central
African Republic,
Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic
of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho,
Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Niger, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda,
United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia
(S/8454)
. . . . . . . . . . , , . ., . . . . * . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . .

SlPV.1415

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND FIFTEENTH MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 23 April 1968, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Y. A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 415)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30 August 1963 addressed to
the President of the Security Council on behalf of the
representatives of thirty-two
Member States (S/5382
and S/5409):
Letter dated 12 March 1968 addressed to the President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, . Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda,
United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia (S/8454).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda wus adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
letters dated 2 and 30 August 1963 addressed to the
President of the Security Council on behalf of the
representatives of thirty-two
Member States (S/5382 and
S/5409):
Letter dated 12 March 1968 addressed to the President of
the Security Council by the representatives of Algeria,
Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Flepublit, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic
Republic of),, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Ivory, Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia,‘Sudan, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Republic, United Repubtic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia (S/8454)
1I The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): In accordance with the earlier decisions of the Security Council, and

if I hear no objection, I shall invite the representatives of
Zambia and Jamaica to take places at the Council table to
participate in the Council’s debate on this question,
without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. P. Aitken
(Jamaica)and Mr. J. B. Mwemba(Zambia) took placesat
the Counciltable,
2. The Councilwill now resumeits considerationof the
question of the situation in Southern Rhodesia.Before
callingon the first speaker,I shouldlike to drawattention
to the draft resolutionsubmittedby the United Kingdom
and distributed today in document S/8554. The first
speakeron my list is the representativeof the United
Kingdom,uponwhomI now call.
3. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): More than a
month ago I stated the position and policy of my
Governmentin this Council on the questionof Rhodesia.
None of us, SO I believe,wishesnow to retrace our steps
over very familiar ground or to look back at old disagreements. We understandeachother well enoughnow, The
time for talking is almostover. So I will say no more now
about the pastexcept to remindyou in a few sentences
of
the coursewhich my Governmentdeliberatelyset and,has
consistentlyfollowed.
4. We declaredand repeatedlyconfirmed the principles
which we consideredshould form the basis of a ‘just
settlement. They were accepted by all parties in my
country. Somepeoplethought that the statedprinciplesdid
not go far enough.Somethought they went too far. But
these declared principles are, I am confident, widely
recognizedfor what they are and what they represent--a
genuineattempt to chart the right way forward to a fair
settlementfor all the people of Rhodesia.We have not
shiftedfrom thoseprinciples.Westandby them now.
5. One of the first acts of my Governmentin 1964wasto
give a warningof the consequences
of anillegaldeclaration
of independence.
No onecansaythat we failedto give that
warningin time. No one can say that we did not give the
warningin,plainandunmistakableterms.
6. When neverthelessthe illegal declarationwasmadeon
11 November1965,immediately-on the following day-we
cameto this Council,Weset ourselves
the aimof achieving
our purposesby peaceful meansand by international
co-operation. We appealedto the Council and to all
Membersof the United Nationsto join with US andsupport
us in a joint effort. No one can say that we did not

immediately and continuously consult and co-operate with
the United Nations. No one can say that we did not
faithfully carry out the decisions of the Council. No
country has done more than mine to put the Council’s
decisions into effect. We have done so at financial and
economic sacrifice. We have gone well beyond the requirements of the Council’s resolutions.

the result of a joint and intensive examination of e,,ery
aspectof the complicated and stubborn problembeforeas
I know very well that somefnembersof the Councilwol,ld
wish to go further. But I claim that what we now propose
to the Council represents the widest area on which
agreementcan be reached between US. It is on that solid
ground that I recommendtO$iY that we shouldgo forward,

7. Many countries responded to our call and our lead. We
are grateful to them. But that was not enough. Certainly,
there have been delays, miscalculations, mistakes. There
have been evasions and failures too. We have sought to deal
with them. When there have been rare evasions by our own
nationals, we have not hesitated to act and, to take one
example, a fine of ~27,000 was recently imposed by a
British court on a firm which had exported goods to
Rhodesia through South Africa. But the main evasions do
not come from my country. They come from elsewhere,
and we cannot deal with them alone by ourselves. We need
the further help of many other countries and we need the
further authority of the Council.

12. What are the tests which we have throughout sought
to apply? They are two tests, very simple and very
important: the test of effectivenessand the test of effect,
Each measurewe decide should and must be capableof
effective implementation.We must resistthe temptationto
take decisionswhich C~UI easily be flouted or circumvented4
Everything we do must satisfy that test. Webelievethat all
our proposalsdo satisfy that test. Where we havenot
adopted some other proposalsput to US,someof tllem
superficiallyattractive, it wasbecausethey did not standup
to the test of effectiveness.

8, So it was that a month ago I placed myself at the
disposal of the Council for urgent consultations. I recommended that we should at once undertake together a full
and careful review of past action and future possibilities. I
hoped that we should not do so in a defeatist or divisive
spirit. I hoped that we could do so with a genuineand
common desirenot to disputebut to decide-to decideon
positive and practicableaction which we could all support.
I was anxious, as I am sure we all were, to undertakean
urgent searchfor commonground on which we could go
forward together. That is the constant and compelling
obligation of us all in the Council.

13. I turn to the other test, which I call the test Ofeffect,
Never let us forget the purpose. It is. to show the iflegal
rdgimein Salisbury, and evelyone elsetoo, that the illegal
courseon which they have embarked cannot succeed,that
it can lead only to political isolation and deepereconomic
stagnation.

14. We must show them and everyone elsethat thereisno
hope for them until and unlessthere is a return to leg&y
and democratic advance. If we here together and in full
agreementgo forward by deliberate and measuredactionto
reinforce what we have done before, we can give effect to
our determination. But if on the other hand we wereto
divide and give to Salisbury and the world a picture of
disageement
and dispute we should ourselvesdestroyour
9. During recent weeksthere havebeen urgent diversions commonaims.WCshould not dismaybut delightthe illegal
and consequentdelays.But I am glad to be ableto report regime.Weshould give to them and any who supportthem
comfort and encouragement.We should prolong the resist.
to the full Council that the recommendationI madefor
consultation wasreadily taken up andthoroughly followed ante. We shouldincreasethe dangers.I pray that we should
not cometo sucha negativeand defeatist conclusion.
up. The consultationhasbeenin the best traditions of the
Council, with franknessand courtesy and a desire to
understand each other and a determination to discover 15. Now let me turn to the draft resolution whichI
commendto you. I shallnot attempt a detailed cornmen.
ground for agreement.I know how deeparethe feelingsof
tary. Members of the Council are fully familiar with the
all those who have participated in this consultation,and I
acknowledgewith respectful gratitude the thoroughness purposesand the methodswe advocate. I would only sayin
and thoughtfulness which membershave brought to this generalthat eachparagraph,each clause,indeedeachword,
consultation. No one could have askedfor more construc- in the draft resolution had been most fully discussed
and
tive or for more candidco-operation.
most carefully weighed by my Government. The draft
resolution representsthe results of searchingeffort and
10. It is not our practicein the Council to report on the
careful formulation on questions’fullof detaileddifficulties
processesand progressionof private consultationbetween andtechnicalcomplications.The draft resolutionrepiesents
Council members.Rightly so. For if we were to go over h
an instrument forged with the greatestcareto give effectto
public each past step of private discussion,confidencein
comprehensive
mandatory economicsanctions.
free and frank exchangewould be destroyed.We dealhere
in full Council not with the stepsbut with the results. 16. The draft resolution speaksfor itself. It seekslo take
practical action to intensify the pressureby the internaConsequentlyI shallnot go back over the road. I shallonly
say that, while others havebeenready to take into account tional community on Rhodesiain trade andin everyfieldh
which the test of effectivenesscan be met. It dealswith
what we have proposed,we on our sidehavemostcarefully
and fully examinedevery proposalput to us and wherever investmentand remittances. It dealswith airlines.It de&
we have been convinced, whereverwe could, we havegone with passportsand travel by supportersof the rbgime.It
to meet and satisfy the ideasandviewswhich othershave dealswith emigration to Rhodesia.It dealswith transport
put to us.
andshippingand carriageof goodsgenerally.
11. The draft resolution [S/85.54] which we have drawn
up and which I now put before the Councilis consequently

17. Its main effect and its main purpose is to imposea
total ban on all imports from Rhodesia,closinggapswhich

-

previously existed and, subject to certain stated exceptions,
mainly OII humanitarian and educational grounds, to
impose equally a total ban on all exports to Rhodesia. We
have given special care in our consultations to the vital
question of supervision and implementation. It is, I believe,
well understood
and agreed that the task of securing
information and calling for the necessary reports should be
vested in the Secretary-General. But we have also proposed
that this Council should set up a committee of the Council
to consider the reports obtained by the Secretary General;
to evaluate the information
so secured; to advise the
Secretary-General on further action required and to report
from time to time to the Council itself on its activities, all
for the purpose of enabling the Council to secure the full
implementation of the sanctions already imposed and now
to be strengthened,
18. I return from a discussion of the provisions of the
draft resolution to the general aims and considerations
which I urge the Council to remember.
19. I trust that no one will conclude from studying the
limited but effective action we propose that I do not
understand the intensity of feeling which African members
in particular
bring to this problem. Nor do I fail to
appreciate that the problem which we tackle today is part
of a much larger problem of racial policy in southem
Africa, a problem which carries dangers which I have long
maintained threaten the whole of Africa and indeed the
world.
20. I would ask the Council to accept my contention and
my conviction that it is because the problem is so menacing
and the mounting dangers so great that we must soberly
assess what we can do and act within our clear capacity. It
is not by declarations and generalizations and by empty
threats that we shall progress and one day succeed. It is by
effective, practical and persistent action. I sometimes say
that this is a job not for the cavalry but for the sappers.
21. Here I should like to make reference to the outstanding speech of Ambassador Makonnen last week (1413th
meeting]. My respect for the representative of Ethiopia ii
so great that I find it difficult to part company with him on
any subject. But, clearly, I cannot accept or support all that
he says. I would say in passing that there is no poison in the
arrows of his attack, and when he wields his sharp sword in
debate it is with such skill and elegance that the wound is
clean. But though I cannot fully agree with him I must
say-and I endeavour to match the steadiness and impfessive moderation of his statement-that
I do not ask him or
anyone else to diminish the intensity of his feeling or to
abandon or modify his convictions or his conclusions.
22. All I ask is that he and others should be prepared to
meet us and act with us in what he and they may regard as
a limited advance. I do not ask them to change or retreat
from their own judgements, but I do ask them to join with
US in the practical advance we propose. They may feel that
what we propose does not go far enough. At least I hope
that they will accept that it is in the right direction. I trust

that they will join with us if only because they accept that
Only a resolution carrying the support of most if not all the
members of this Council can have*“full political impact. 1
trust that they will recognize the overriding importance of
that consideration.
23. It is that argument which I wish to emphasize before I
finish this morning. Permit me to repeat what I said last
month. There are some who say that there is no way but by
force, that the endeavour to use peaceful means was
misguided from the start or that, even if that were not so,
the methods we have employed under the authority of the
Council have now no further part to play, that there is no
additional measure, no new pressure, no stopping of
loopholes, no prevention of evasions that is worthy of
consideration. I am myself convinced that that is not so. I
am sure that there are effective measures still to be taken.
24. I go further. I would say that in spite of the
difficulties and limitations of which I am all too well aware
we have a duty not to decide and declare that sanctions
have failed, not to pronounce that one of the main weapons
of international enforcement has proved useless. We have a
duty to explore and to examine every effective. and
practicable method to supplement and sustain the measures
we have already taken. This is not the time to give up; it is
the time to go ‘on. That is the decision which should go
from this Council to Salisbury. We need to convince
everyone, including particularly the illegal regime in Rhodesia, that we mean to go on:We need to convince them that
in the end there will be no escape from the situation
created by their illegal actions except by a return to the
road of legality and democratic advance and free government which was so wantonly abandoned on 11 November
1965.
25. Let me end by saying this. Our obligation is to all the
people of Rhodesia. Specially we have in mind more than
4 million Africans who are denied freedom to participate in
the government of their own country. Many of us know
personally the leaders who are kept in detention without
trial. We think of them. We think of those who have spent
years in condemned, cells. We think of all the people of
Rhodesia who must rely on us for positive action. I believe
that we owe it to them not to raise hopes we have no power
to satisfy. We owe it to them to take effective action within
our clear capacity. We owe it to them to act in this Council
together. Our deliberations have been sufficient Our
consultations have been productive. I earnestly hope that
our action can now be unanimous.
26. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Russian): 1 have no
more speakers on my list, I understand that it is the general
view of the members that the meeting should now adjourn
for further consultations and that the next meeting of the
Security Council on this matter should be convened as soon
as possible. AS I have already stated, the meeting is
adjourned.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

,

,//57

,,,,_,~
’ ,“’
/’

/’ /I’

,/

I

/’

,/

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Gene-es.

may
bookslore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

Les publicolions
des
d6poritaires
dv monde
Notions
Unies, Section

COMO

CONSEGUIR

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

in United

Nations,

New York

UNIES

Notions
Unies
sent en vente
dons
les libroiries
et les ogences
entier.
Informer-vous
aup&
de votre libroirie
ou odresser-vow
6:
des venter,
New York ou Gen&ve.

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicociones
de lcu Nociones
Unidos
ert6n
en todos
partes
del mundo.
Consulte
q su librero
Ventas,
Nuevo
York o Ginebro.

Litho

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

Price:

UNIDAS

en vcnta en librerios
o dirtjose
01 Nocioner

$U.S, 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

y cases distribuidoros
Unidos,
Secci6n

currencies)

de

35424~September

1972-2,100
