TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

nd
MEETING: 22 AUGUST 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1442) . . . . . . , . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

..,.... ,.. ., ,......., .... ..... ,.. ... ..

1

Letter dated 21 August 1968 from the representatives of Canada, Denmark,
France, Paraguay, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8758) , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1442

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resohrtions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-SECOND MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 22 August 1968, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. JoIo August0 DE ARAUJO CASTRO
(Brazil).

inscription of this item in our agenda yesterday. We
supported the inscription of this item on our agenda
because we believe that this is a kind of situation which can
affect the very foundation of international peace and
security and of international law.

Present: The representatives of the followink States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of G’reat
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

6. My delegation has given careful attention to all statements and submissions made so far in the Council, and we
listened with particular attention to the Acting Representative of Czechoslovakia who presented to us a number
of communications received from authorities and organs of
his Government. We attach, needless to say, special importance to the communication brought to us by the
representative of Czechoslovakia because we recognize his
voice as the voice of a Member Government exercising its
right to speak for the people of a State Member of the
United Nations. What we have heard so far confirms, in
short, that the military forces of four Member States and of
East Germany have by a concerted move crossed the state
boundaries of the Czechoslovak Republic. That this has
been done is not even denied by the Member States which
have undertaken the military action.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l442)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 21 August 1968 from the representatives
of Canada, Denmark, France, Paraguay, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8758).
Adaption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,

7. We heard in a number of statements made before the
Council yesterday that the Soviet Union and certain of its
Warsaw Pact allies had in fact been obliged to undertake the
said military action in order to forestall and frustrate the
so-called action of reactionary forces both within Czechoslovakia and from other parts of the world. We were also
told that the military action of the Soviet Union and of
certain other members of the Warsaw Pact was undertaken
at the invitation of the duly constituted authorities of
Czechoslovakia. But we find no justification for or substantiation of the claim, which is in fact contradicted by
the statements received from Czechoslovak leaders that the
armed forces of certain of their Warsaw Pact allies moved
into their territory without invitation and/or authorization.

Letter dated 21 August 19G8 from the representatives of
Canada, Denmark, France, Paraguay, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8758)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken yesterday, I propose now, if there is no objection, to
invite the representative of Czechoslovakia to take a place
at the Council table in order to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.
2. There being no objection, I invite the representative of
Czechoslovakia to take a place at the Council table.

8. It is in the light of this situation and in confirmation of
Ethiopia’s faithful dedication to the ,cause of peace and
peaceful settlement that my august Sovereign His Imperial
Majesty Haile Selassie I made the following official declaration which is self-evident in its expression of Ethiopia’s
position on this vital issue affecting international peace and
security. I have the honour to read this declaration into the
records of the Security Council. His Imperial Majesty’s
declaration reads as follows:

3. The Security Council will now continue its consideration of the question before it.
4. Lij Endallcachew MAKONNEN
(Ethiopia): If the
Ethiopian delegation has kept quiet so far in this crucial
debate, it is because we felt that those of our colleagues
who had taken the initiative of asking for a meeting of the
Council, and those directly concerned, should speak first, in
order that we may be able to get as full a picture as possible
of the tragic situation that prevails in Czechoslovakia.

“Throughout my life I have constantly supported the
basic principle that one State should not interfere in the
internal affairs of another State. The principle of noninterference in the internal affairs of another State is a
basic principle that should always govern international

5. The urgency that we attach to the problem and our
attitude towards the role of the Security Council in matters
affecting international peace and security were clearly
demonstrated by our affirmative vote on the issue of the
1

repudiation of all the accepted norms of international
behaviour, as well as a violation of its own pledges and
declarations. This is the unanimous verdict of the whole
world.

relations. The corollary of non-interference is that solutions to all disputes and misunderstandings among nations
must be sought through peaceful means. This is a
necessary condition for the maintenance of international
peace as envisaged by the Charter of the United Nations
and that of the Organization of African Unity. Thus the
events in Czechoslovakia in the last few days have
saddened me much. What took place against Czechoslovakia is a sad and unfortunate repetition of the
misfortune that befell many other small States in the past
and might recur until all States learn that the consequences of disturbing basic conditions of harmonious
inter-State relations is in the end harmful to the interests
of all States. I urge that all foreign troops that have been
introduced into Czechoslovakia should be withdrawn
forthwith
and that the misunderstanding between
Czechoslovakia and her immediate neighbours should be
settled by peaceful means.”

15. Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter defines the
necessary condition for a community
of independent
peoples:
“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any state, or in any
other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the
United Nations.”
16. In resolution 2131 (XX), of which the Soviet Union
was the prime mover, the General Assembly declared the
inadmissibility of intervention in the domestic affairs of
States. Operative paragraph 1 of that resolution states:

9. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): The debate in the
Council yesterday was memorable for many reasons.
Outstanding was the dignified and courageous bearing of
the representative of Czechoslovakia. The statements by his
Government which he read to us were historic declarations.
They have won and deserved the admiration of the world.

“No State has the right to intervene, directly or
indirectly, for any reason whatever, in the internal or
external affairs of any other State. Consequently, armed
intervention and all other forms of interference or
attempted threats against the personality of the State or
against its political, economic and cultural elements, are
condemned.”

10. In circumstances of crisis and confusion, in the face of
overwhelming odds, with the future of their country at
stake and immediate dangers crowding round them, the
leaders of Czechoslovakia spoke out to all the world. We are
fortunate that we have here in Minister Muzik a worthy
representative of such brave men. The declarations which
he read to us dominated our debate; they cannot be
questioned; their appeal is strong, and their eloquence is
completely convincing, The justice of the case they put is
unanswerable.

17. Thus the Soviet armed intervention in the internal and
external affairs of Czechoslovakia stands condemned, both
by the United Nations Charter and by a General Assembly
resolution. Yet the Soviet Union tries to strike a pose of
superior rectitude and cynically justify its brutal interven.
tion in the internal and external affairs of Czechoslovakia
on the ground of collective and individual self-defence.
Self-defence against what? The familiar spectre of imperialist interference has been dragged out as an excuse. It
even has the effrontry to claim that the invasion was made
at the request of the Czechoslovak Government and
Communist Party leaders, notwithstanding
all evidence to
the contrary,

11. The Czech leaders call for a withdrawal of the invading
troops, for the preservation of their sovereign independence
and the integrity of their country. We join with all those
who love freedom and honour courage in paying tribute to
Minister Muzik, to his Government and to all the leaders of
his brave country who have refused to bow down before
the forces of invasion and suppression.

18. It is all too clear that the Soviet Union cannot tolerate
the existence of any semblance of freedom and democracy
inside the Soviet bloc. In its view, all forms of dissent are a
threat to the Soviet system and to Moscow’s iron control,

12. Where are those leaders now? In recent weeks, the
Soviet leaders have met and dealt with them as equals. We
are told that the meetings were in a spirit of fraternal
respect. But from yesterday night we have all been gravely
concerned for their freedom and for their safety.

19. The Acting Permanent Representative of Czechoslovakia, in his factual statement yesterday before the
Council, made it clear that Czechoslovakia has not re.
pudiated socialism, has not repudiated the Warsaw Pact,
and has not violated the principle of socialist internationalism. All it has done has been an attempt to improve
and strengthen socialism by giving the people more free.
dom.

13. And on this I ask a direct question of the Soviet
Ambassador. Let Ambassador Malik tell us now that the
President and the First Secretary of the Communist Party,
and other acknowledged leaders of Czechoslovakia, are free
and safe. Let Ambassador Malik confirm that they will not
be arrested and will not be molested. Let him confirm that
they will be permitted to continue to speak and work for
their people.

20. If this merits the armed intervention of the Soviet
Union, then, what value can we attach to Soviet professions
about democracy, freedom, and about equal rights and
self-determination of peoples?

14. Mr. LIU (China): The armed invasion of Czechoslovakia by countries of the communist bloc, led by the
Soviet Union, is a negation of all the principles and
purposes of the United Nations, a threat to world peace, a

21. In recent years, we have been told time and again that
the Soviet Union has matured and that it no longer expects
unquestioning obedience from its satellites. This has been
2

belied by the tragic invasion of Czechoslovakia. The world
has been given depressing proof of what the Soviet Unlor,
really means by such slogans as “socialist solidarity”
“proletarian internationalism” and “war of liberation”. The
significance of this should not be lost on all those who have
been seeking so-called accommodation with communism.

bond of deep sympathy-between my country and the
Czechoslovak people. The fate of Czechoslovakia is and
must be at the centre of our attention, To the call for
respect for the sovereignty of Cze’choslovakia my country
adds an appeal to the Soviet Union not to damage all the
patient, painstaking efforts to build up a new and better
relationship among the countries of Europe, between East
and West.

22. The prevention and suppression of acts of aggression is
the keystone of the United Nations Charter. The Charter,
however, does not state what constitutes aggression. We are
indebted to the Soviet Union for the following definition,
which it has time and again enunciated since the League of
Nations days. Aggression, according to the Soviet Union,
involves, among other things, the following elements:
(1) invasion by armed forces of the territory of another
State; (2) attack by its land, naval or air forces on the
territory, vessels or aircraft of another State; (3) no
political, military, economic or other considerations may
serve as an excuse or justification for the aggression referred
to above.

29. In the course of our debate yesterday and during the
-informal conversations we have had with a number of other
delegations, we observed on essential points widespread
agreement which could form the basis for a resolution of
this Council. Acting upon this basis, seven delegationsthose of Brazil, Canada, France, Paraguay, the United
States, the United Kingdom and Denmark-have submitted
a draft resolution which I shall now read out to the Council
and introduce on behalf of the seven delegations, it being
understood that the text will shortly& circulated by the
Secretariat.
1I/,$ ( ,I ;) h*..‘L.9
c-” j ~~::‘~~;?)* I
30. The text of the draft resolution reads as followd: “‘ ’

23. Judging by its own definition, the Soviet action in
Czechoslovakia is aggression, simple and unadulterated.

“The Security Council,

24. The Charter, as we know, enjoins all Member States to
suppress aggression by collective action. If this is out of the
question, the least the Security Council can do is to
condemn the Soviet aggression in the strongest terms and
call upon the Soviet authorities to withdraw their armed
forces immediately from the territory of Czechoslovakia
and to cease all interference in the affairs of that
unfortunate country.

cbRecalling that the United Nations is based on the
principle of the sovereign equality of all its Members,
c.“Gravely concerned that, as announced by the Presidium of the Central Committee of the Communist Party
of Czechoslovakia, troops of the Soviet Union and other
members of the Warsaw Pact have entered their country
without the knowledge and against the wishes of the
Czechoslovakian Government,

25. Mr, BORCH (Denmark): The position of Denmark
with respect to the invasion of Czechoslovakia by the
Soviet Union and certain of its allies was stated clearly and
fully by the Danish representative in the Council yesterday,
and I have nothing in substance to add to that statement.
Since I left Denmark only after the tragic news llad reached
my country, and since before leaving I had the opportunity
of attending meetings between members of the Government
and in the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Danish
Parliament, I would wish once again to underline the
dismay and sorrow with which the news of the events in
Czechoslovakia was met in my country.

i “Considering that the acticn taken by the Government
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and other
members of the Warsaw Pact in invading the CzechoSlovak Socialist Republic is a violation of the United
Nations Charter and, in particular, of the principle that all
Members shall refrain in their international relations from
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State,
t--“Gravely concerned also by risks of violence and
reprisals as well as by threats to individual liberty and
human rights which cannot fail to result from imposed
military occupation,

26. Denmark has followed the developments of the last
weeks with the deepest compassion and anxiety. We have
also observed with respect the restraint and moderation
shown by the Czechoslovak Government and the whole
Czechoslovak people. This same attitude of dignified
restraint and resolve was once again reaffirmed in the
address of the Czechoslovak ChargB d’Affaires to the
Council yesterday.

“Considering that the people of the sovereign State of
the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic have the right, in
accordance with the Charter, freely to exercise their own
self-determination and to arrange their own affairs with.
out external intervention,

27. Precisely on that background and against the background of the great understanding which has marked the
relationships between the peop1e.sof Europe during the last
years, we did think that there was ground for hope, that
Czechoslovakia would be allowed to pursue its course to
the ultimate benefit of everybody concerned. What
happened was felt the more deeply.

“1. Affirms that the sovereign, political independence
‘and territorial lntegrity of the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic must be fully respected;
cz.
Condenzns the armed intervention of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and other members of the
Warsaw Pact in the internal affairs of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic and calls upon them to take no action
of violence or reprisal that could result in further

28. Once again, we felt that across borders, irrespectively
of different social systems, there exists a deep bond-a
3

Members of the United Nations, the very first principle
mentioned in the Charter. Another is that all Members shaI1
refrain in their international relations from the threat or the
use of force against the territorial integrity or politicd
independence of any State. These two principles stand out
in the preamble of this text, together with an expression of
grave concern for individual liberty and human rights. The
preamble also includes a statement of fact, confirmed in
this Council by the legitimate representative spokesman for
the Czechoslovak Government, namely that troops of the
Soviet Union and certain other members of the Warsaw
Pact entered Czechoslovnkia without. the knowledge and
against the wishes of the Czechoslovak Government.

suffering or loss of life, forthwith to withdraw their
forces, and to cease all other forms of intervention in
Czechoslovakia’s internal affairs;
“3. calls upon Member States of the United Nations
to exercise their diplomatic influence upon the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the other countries concerned with a view to bringing about prompt implementation of this resolution;
“4. Requesfs the Secretary-General to transmit this
resolution to the countries concerned, to keep the
situation under constant review, and to report to the
Council on compliance with this resolution.”

37. The draft resolution, in its operative section, first of
all affirms the need for full respect for the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. It is also the view of the
co-sponsors that the Council cannot at this time do less
than condemn the armed intervention of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and certain other members of ths
Warsaw Pact, calling on them forthwith to withdraw their
forces and to cease all other forms of intervention in
Czechoslovak internal affairs. Likewise, those responsible
for this unwarranted and shameful intervention in [he
affairs of a small State struggling to follow its own path
towards a freer society within the context of a socialist
system are called upon to refrain from any acts of vioteace
and to refrain from any reprisal which could result L
further suffering or loss of life.

31. The draft resolution, we believe, speaks for itself. It is
based upon three basic considerations. First, the inadmissibility of intervention in and occupation of Czechoslovakia
by the Soviet Union and other members of the Warsaw
Pact, Second, our deep concern for the fate of the people
of Czechoslovakia and their legitimate leaders in this serious
hour, And, third, our demand that the Soviet Union and
other members of the Warsaw Pact cease to pursue their
present course, withdraw all their military forces from
Czechoslovakia, and desist from any further intervention in
the internal affairs of that country. On those principles,
then, the substance of the draft resolution is based.
32. It then goes on to call upon Member States to exercise
their diplomatic influence, with a view to bringing about
prompt implementation, and requests the Secretary-General
to transmit the resolution to the countries concerned and
to keep the situation under constant review and to report
to the Council on the compliance with the resolution,

38. It is indeed intolerable, in the view of this delegation,
that the lawful authorities of the Czechoslovak Govenmicnl
should be subjected to the indignity of being removed
forcibly from public office.

33. The right of each and every country to shape its own
destiny is at stake. The seven delegations hope that the
Council will act swiftly and adopt the draft resolution with
the broadest support.

39. Finally, the draft resolution calls on Member States of
the United Nations to exercise their diplomatic iniluellce
upon the Soviet Union and the other countries concertled
with a view to bringing about prompt implementation of
this resolution and requests the Secretary-General to
transmit this resolution to the countries concerned ml to
report to the Council on their compliance.

34. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): The latest news from
Czechoslovakia has done nothing to dispel our fears and our
anguish at the fate of Czechoslovakia, including the safety
and ‘well-being of its leaders and its people. It is poignant
that even now, when Soviet tanks are in the streets of
Prague and thousands of Warsaw Pact troops occupy the
country, voices are still being raised in Czechoslovakia in
support of the right of this sm‘sll European State to arrange
its own affairs without external intervention.

40. My delegation and the other co-sponsors of this tcxf
are firmly convinced that it contains the essentials of the
position which the Security Council is bound to take at tliis
time on the basis of maintaining the integrity of the
fundamental principles of the Charter.

35. Taking into account the debate which took place here
yesterday, I now have the honour to support the draft
resolution just read out and introduced on behalf of the
delkgations of Brazil, Canada, Denmark, France, Paraguay,
United Kingdom and United States. This resolution, in our
view, reflects the least we can do if the fundamental
principles of the Charter have any meaning; if the small
States of this world are to have any hope of international
sympathy and support at a time of threat, intimidation and
intervention in their internal affairs,

41. Yesterday, the representative of the Soviet Union had
occasion to remark that the present situation in CzechoSlovakia can only become “another dead question 011 the
extremely long list of’ dead questions on the Sect&
Council agenda”. I think it should become clear to him anif
to his Government, and to the Governments of the other
countxies concerned, that world public opinion can~~ot bc
easily diverted from the raw facts of this case by atly
amount of spurious argument regarding the nature aad
alleged justification of this intervention which has taker1
place in the affairs of Czechoslovakia during the last
forty-eight hours. The Soviet Union and its collaborators iI1
this adventure should not be allowed to think that th*
governments, the Parliaments, the peoples of the world, ~a1

36. The draft resolution reflects the principles of the
Charter which many representatives cited in their statements yesterday. One is the sovereign equality of all
4

either ignore or accept or allow to die the issue of
Soviet-led intervention in the affairs of Czechoslovakia.

forces. Radio Prague is continuing to broadcast to the
world reports of the seizure and detainment by the
occupying forces of top Czech leaders-First Secretary
Dubcek, Prime Minister Cerm’k and Defence Minister Dzur,
to mention oniy three who have been consigned to
undisclosed destinations and doubtful fates. And a Prague
television broadcast last night reported that Premier Cemik,
abducted by the Soviets, has been brutally mistreated and is
reportedly ill and in need of medical assistance.

42, The facts speak for themselves, and, like a jack-in-thebox, once they have jumped out they cannot easily be put
back again. In the name of my delegation, I request my
colleagues in this Council to give the text which has been
introduced the support it merits.
43. Mr. BALL (United States of America): My Government is joining with others this morning in sponsoring the
draft resolution which has just been introduced by the
representative of Denmark. That draft resolution makes
three simple points: an inexcusable international crime has
been committed; the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic has
been invaded and occupied by armed forces of the Soviet
Union and certain of its Eastern European satellites. This
action has been taken in the face of explicit and publicly
expressed opposition from the Czechoslovak Government
and people, an opposition that is growing in volume,
intensity and sense of urgency in spite of the brutality of
the occupying forces.

48. The Czech radio has announced that the USSR has
proclaimed martial law in Prague, beginning at noon today.
The Soviet Commander of the invading forces has forbidden the issuance of leaflets and has banned all meetings.
He has ordered a curfew to extend throughout the night
and has announced that violators will be shot on sight.
Large-scale arrests of cultural leaders and intellectuals are
being carried out. The Soviet invading forces are seeking
frantically
to choke off the normal constitutional
machinery of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. And,
most recently, early this morning Radio Prague broadcast
the news that according to “military circles of the Soviet
occupation army” a new Government is to be formed at the
Soviet embassy in Prague this morning. In fact it seems
clearly apparent that the Soviet Union is in desperation
trying to find the quislings traitorous enough to put their
names to the strange and incoherent document which the
Soviet representative read to us last night at great length
and in the original Russian. The ominous addendum to this
report from Radio Prague is that the list of legally elected
Czechoslovak representatives to be arrested has already
been prepared by the secret police.

44. This action by the Soviet Union and four of its
Eastern European puppets must be judged and condemned
for what it is: a violation not only of the most rudimentary
elements of international morality but also of the United
Nations Charter, in particular the central principle that all
Members shall refrain in their international relations from
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State,
45. There are steps-very simple steps-that can be taken
to redress the present situation. We must affirm here
beyond the possibility of ambiguity or misunderstanding
the fundamental right of the people of the sovereign State
of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic freely to exercise
their own self-determination and to arrange their own
affairs without external intervention. We must make it clear
to the world that the communist Governments have no
special immunity from the requirement of the Charter to
respect the sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity of other States.

49. The draft resolution before us demands of the USSR ’
and its four Eastern European allies only what common
decency requires of them. It does not ask them to give up
anything which is theirs, to refrain from anything which
they have any right to be doing, or to desist from any
action which, if taken by others, they would not be the
first to deplore and condemn, to use their all-purpose
words, as “outrageous imperialism”. It asks only they do no
more than abide. in deed by those principles to which they
repeatedly and, loudly proclaim allegiance in words, principles in the Charter of the United Nations, principles in the
General Assembly’s Declaration on the Inadmissibility of
Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States, in whose
initiation and sponsorship the Soviet Union took such
pride, principles included in article 1 of the Warsaw Pact,
and principles sanctimoniously reaffirmed at Bratislava less
than three weeks ago in an agreementconcludedbetween
Czechoslovakiaand the samefive partiesthat arecynically
engagedin the rapeof that unhapjy country.

46. The Soviet Union has long called for peaceful coexistence among States of different social systems. Is it too
much to demand the same for States of similar systems?
47. We must insist that the Soviet Union and its four
Eastern European client States immediately withdraw their
forces from the territory of the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic and cease all other forms of intervention in the
internal affairs of that country, and finally we must
urgently call on these same parties to refrain from fuujher
killings and tortures and outrages in Czechoslovakia that
could exacerbate the situation, and to desist from all
actions of terror or reprisal that could result in further
suffering or loss of life. The need for this latter call is, alas,
though not unexpectedly, underlined by the dramatic
headlines announcing events that have taken place in the
few short hours since this Council met last night. The world
press is beginning to report the number of patriotic
Czechoslovak citizens being killed and wounded in small
but courageous acts of defiance against the occupying

50. In the short time that haspassedsincethe dark hours
of the night of 20 and 21 August, there has been an
unparalleledoutpouring of governmentaland public indignation and revulsionagainstthis, the mostrecent despoiling
of Czechoslovakia.From every corner of the globe,from
every continent, from the most remoteoutpoststo which
the winds have carried the newsof this crime, the reaction
hasbeen the same.The world is revoltedby the attempt to
justify the invasionand occupationof a sovereigncountry
on the preposterousgroundsthat it wasundertakenin the
interests of peaceand security. The world is disgustedby
5

the pious assertion that this invasion and occupation of a
sovereign country are merely “fraternal assistance”. It is
extended to a fellow-communist State.
51. Let me read to you the meaning of “fraternal
assistance” as it is interpreted by the leaders of the Soviet
Union. This is from a broadcast from Czechoslovakia:

perialist President Ccausescu of Romania; that imperi&t
President Tito of Yugoslavia; that imperialist President
Nyerere of Tanzania; those imperialists the leaders of the
communist parties in France and Italy. These are only a
very few of a very long list, a list that is growing hour 6~
hour and day by day.
56. What shocks us all is the low appraisal that the Sovie]
leadership places on human intelligence. How gullible, hoA
childishly credulous does it think humankind really is.No,
the whole world can recognize naked aggression when ii
sees it and the frantic and frightened leaders of the So&
Union cannot conceal it or disguise it, for the world ha;
already found them out. It has found them out andit
despisesand is disgusted by their furtive and fraudulent
efforts to drape tyranny with sanctimony and anointit
with piety.

“The military command of the occupation troops has
issued an ultimatum to the remaining members of the
Party Central Committee Presidium and to the
Secretaries-that
is aside from Dubcek, Smrkovsky,
Cernik, Spacek, Kriegel and Cisar-to form a Party
leadership and respectively to submit a draft list of a new
Government, which would not include the above-named
comrades.
“This ultimatum expires tonight. The Soviet authorities
concerned recommend the following composition: Bulak,
Indra, General Rytir, Pavlovski, and Lenart. If this is not
done an occupation Government will be imposed which
will depend directly on the Soviet troops. The rump
Presidium has begun-or was to have begun-its session at
about 12.00 hours.”

57. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (trumlated from
Spanish): This debate has proved beyond all doubt thata
Member State of our Organization, an independentandfrti
State, haswitnessedand continuesto witnessa violationof
its sovereignty by the invasion of foreign troops, As a result
of that mili’.ary occupation, its people is prevented from
exercisingthe first and most basic of its rights, that of
carrying on its own national self-determination.Suchisthe
caseof Czechoslovakia,which hasbeeninvaded by troops
of the membersof the WarsawTreaty, led by units of Ihe
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

52. Again from Radio Czechoslovakia, the general staff of
the Czechoslovak Army has criticized the USSR for having
violated all norms of international law. The Czechoslovak
general staff calls emphatically for the withdrawal of the
foreign troops and the release of the interned Czechoslovak
politicians, so that they can resume their constitutional
duties. The members of the general staff express their full
support’for the leadership of our State, headed by General
Svoboda and Alexander Dubcek.

58. At this dramatic and ominousmoment, when funds.
mental national rights are being enslaved,our minimum
individual and collective obligation is to cry out asloudlyu
possiblein forceful condemnation of theseacts treading
underfoot the State which is the victim of this aggressionwhich is perfidious-and to express unhesitatingly con.
demnation of those who have perpetrated it and arc
continuing to do so.

53. This is what is called fraternal assistance. It is a very
curious kind of fraternal assistance and if the Soviet
representative will not be offended by my reference to the
Holy Bible, I can point out to him one famous precedent
that may illuminate the answer to the question of what he
means by fraternal assistance. The kind of fraternal
assistance that the Soviet Union is according to Czechoslovakia is exactly the same kind that Cain gave to Abel.

59. The very foundations of relationsbetweenStates,and
the principles incorporated in the Charter, which sw
universally valid, are at stake. Without the slightesthesits.
tion, in full awarenessof the seriousness
of this moment
when, I repeat, what is at stake is the entire structureof
international law-the basis of the security of all Statas
which, like Czechoslovakia, cannot adequately defend
themselvesin view of the vast disproportionbetweentheir
defensivemeansand the invading forces-we at Ieast wanl
our condemnationto sound out vigorously andfirmly.

54. The resounding, even deafening, outcry echoing
through the world can be summed up in three simple words
of admonition to the Soviet Union and its puppets: stop
your aggression! That is the plea this Council must address
to those who have invaded and now hold in bondage the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.

60. And we want something else too: we want this
Council,in the nameof the United Nations,to take astand,
and to do so clearly and without delay. This is why my
delegationhas decided to collaborate asco-sponsorof the
draft resolution which was introduced a shortwhile agoby
the representativeof Denmark andwhich, in our opinion,is
the least-1 repeat, the very least-a shockedworld expects
of us.

55. NOW, in conclusion, let me, if I may, address a word or
two specifically to the Soviet representative, Ambassador
Malik. What shame your Government must feel to be a part
to this callous and brutal assault on the unoffending and
defenceless Czechoslovakian people. What fright the men of
the Kremlin must feel to risk the disgust and obloquy of
the whole world because they see their dominance of their
client States imperilled not by any threat of force but by
the first fresh breath of freedom. You have said,
Mr. Ambassador, that only imperialists oppose and deplore
these brutal acts of your Government, Let me call the roll
of those imperialists. That imperialist the Prime Minister of
India; that imperialist His Holiness, Pope Paul; that im-

61. Among the Members of the United Nations, recalling
my own country’s past I think few Stateshaveshownsuch
firm adherence,carried to the utmost extremes of India
vidual and national sacrifices, as has Paraguay for the
preservationof its sovereignty and territorial integrity. Tlie
6

passing of time since then has turned those events of our
saga into mere historical facts, but our elementary duty to
ourselves, our past, and our own traditions motivates the
position we are adopting today.

68. It is in this spirit and upon such premises that the
delegation of Brazil joins the delegations of Canada,
Denmark, France, Paraguay, the United Kingdom and the
United States, as a co-sponsor of the draft resolution which
has been tabled before this Council today by the delegation
of Denmark.

62, The PRESIDENT: As I have no speakers on my list, I
should like to address the Council in my capacity as
representative of BRAZIL.

69. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I shall confine myself to a short
reply, reserving the right to speak later on at the next
meeting and to show the groundlessness, the fictitious and
slanderous nature of the whole so-called “reasoning” put
forward here by the representatives of the NATO countries.
No matter how the American delegate-the main orchestra
conductor of the repulsive comedy begun yesterday-tries
to deny the participation of imperialism in this whole
business, he will never under any circumstances succeed in
doing SO. This shameful comedy begun yesterday goes on,
The minor NATO members have performed as soloists.
Then even the representative of the dead Chiang Kal-shek
regime joined in the anti-Soviet, anti-communist chorus.
The position of American imperialism is indeed weak, if it
even resorts to this method, to this way of reasoning.

63. I wish to state quite briefly and quite clearly the
position of the Government of Brazil on the matter under
consideration, The Government of Brazil views the situation created by the armed intervention in Czechoslovakia
by forces of the Warsaw Pact countries with the utmost
concern. Not only does this act constitute a flagrant and
unwarranted violation of the United Nations Charter and of
the principles of international law, not only does this
intervention evidence that the use of brutal force is still
resorted to as a means of settling problems and questions,
but likewise-and
what may be more serious in the long
run-it poisons the whole international atmosphere, inasmuch as it introduces a new eiement of distrust, animosity
and resentment among nations.

70. Today I shall confine myself to a report just received
from MOSCOW, a Tass report, so that it may be obvious to
everybody whence the American delegate derives his
slanderous statements concerning the situation in Czechoslovakia, his insinuations and the so&led facts he refers to.
They are all fabrications, All of them are prepared by
clandestine radio stations and printing plants, They are all
manufactured by the counter-revolutionaries. And these
slanderous fabrications and falsehoods are’ snatched up by
imperialist propaganda, which hastens to see them as the
official expression of Czechoslovakia’s position and of its
public opinion.

64. Patient and enduring efforts exerted by both sides
towards a better understanding and towards a dhwte in
the world political situation are now nullified and invalidated by a wholly unjustifiable act of violent intervention
which puts the clock back several years and reverts to the
bitter days of the cold war.
65. It is with sorrow, consternation and apprehension that
the Government of Brazil makes this assessment and this
evaluation. My country wishes to state its position quite
clearly. We condemn the action undertaken by the Warsaw
Pact Powers against the legal Government and the people of
Czechoslovakia. It is our earnest opinion that the United
Nations should speedily act on such deplorable and violent
deeds. We do not subscribe to any theory of the spheres of
influence or to any Tordesillas-like reallotment of the world
along certain geographical lines. That is why we cannot
accept the theory advanced here by the Soviet Union,
according to which Warsaw Pact Powers are the sole arbiters
of the freedom and sovereignty of its members.

71. Here, in the Security Council, these slanderous fabrications are snatched up by the American, British and other
delegates of the NATO countries.
72. I shall now read the Tass report.
“According to reports coming in from Czechoslovakia,
the situation in the country remains normal. Industrial
and agricultural enterprises and State institutions are
working as usual. The population of Czechoslovakia,
obeying the call of the President of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic, Ludvik Svoboda, is displaying calm
with a sense of its civic responsibility. The command of
the allied troops, which is in contact with the command
of the Czechoslovak People’s Army, is co-operating to
ensure the internal and external security of the CzechoSlovak Socialist State.

66. Without entering into the merits of the obligations and
commitments under the Warsaw Pact, it is quite clear to my
delegation that, under Article 103, the obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations shall prevail. And one of
the obligations imposed by the Charter is th.e respect for
the freedom, territorial integrity and sovereignty of all
States. The Charter confers special prerogatives on the
major Powers, but by no means is the right to interfere
militarily included among such prerogatives. This action not
only goes beyond the Charter; it clearly violates it.

“As reported earlier, the anti-sociahst forces are trying
to disrupt normal life in the country and to create
complications, counting on inflaming national passions
and hostility towards the healthy patriotic forces of
Czechoslovakia which are devoted to the cause of
socialism, and towards the fraternal countrieti which have
come to the aid of the Czechoslovak people. . . .”

67. The only sphere of influence my country recognises is
the sphere of the influence of law and peaceful association
among all States of the world, For those very reasons my
delegation does not hesitate to deplore and condemn the
action now undertaken against the Government and the
people of Czechoslovakia, who are entitled to freedom and
to sovereignty and who are entitled to live in peace,
unhampered by the presence of foreign military troops.

73. That’s just it, Mr. Ball: “have come to the aid of the
Czechoslovak people”; the fraternal countries have come to
help against the threat of imperialism from the West.
7

American representative, in co-operation with the British,
the Canadians and the other members of the NATO
military aggressive bloc aimed against the socialist cornmunity in Europe, has displayed such frenzied and, I would
say, uncharacteristic activity in order to drag this questioll
into the Security Council for discussion.

L‘

The hostile elements are striving to aggravate the
situation at all costs, committing grave crimes. Thus they
arrested a member of the Presidium of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia,
the editor-in-chief of the newspaper Rud.4 Pram, Comrade Svestka, and issued a special number of this
newspaper-which
is the organ of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia-containing
attacks on the Soviet Union and the other socialist
countries. Comrade Svestka was released from arrest by
Soviet troops.”
.

.

*

77. However, I shall continue reading the Tass report,
“On the evening of 21 August the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic pointed
out the groundlessness of the attempts to put thismatter
before the United Nations Organization, stressing that
Czechoslovakia will not agree to a discussion of it in the
United Nations, since questions of reciprocal relations
between Czechoslovakia and other socialist countries are
settled among themselves within the framework of the
socialist community.”

74. American propaganda, which is in the hands and
defends the interests of the large-scale monopoly capital in
that country, and which is the main spokesman of Wall
Street, has seized upon this slanderous version and spread it
in every possible way, claiming that Comrade Svestka was
arrested by Soviet troops, But in fact, it was the Soviet
troops who freed him from arrest by the counterre$olutionary forces, to whom the American delegate gave
instructions and whom he incited in his statement yesterday.

78. And it should be further noted that the Czechoslovak
Government, which was represented at this table yesterday,
did not propose and did not insist on an examination of
this question in the Security Council. The representatives of
the NATO member countries were the ones who insisted on
it. It was they who, making a laughing stoek of themselves
before the whole world, suddenly, unexpectedly became
active defenders of socialism and communism, defenders of
socialist Czechoslovakia. We may well ask Mr. Ball and Lord
Caradon: which socialist Czechoslovakia are you defending? Those elements which have tried to make it suit your
plans and plots or the one which is a genuine socialist
country, an active, equal, free, sovereign State in the
association of genuine socialist States?

“The counter-revolutionary
forces, particularly in
Prague, are resorting to dangerous actions. They organized sabotage in the central district of Prague: they
burned four Soviet armoured personnel carriers and set
fire to neighbouring buildings. These saboteurs are also
trying to put means of communication and transport out
of operation and to cut off the population’s food supply.
“The counter-revolutionaries have put previously prepared clandestine radio transmitters and printing presses
in operation, The slanderous fabrications and falsehoods
manufactured this way by the counter-revolutionaries are
being snatched up by imperialist propaganda, which
hastens to view them as the expression of Czechoslovakia’s official position and that of its public
opinion. . . .”

79. Yesterday it was shown how false and hypocritical
were these crocodile tears of the representatives of the
imperialist Powers trying to act as though they are
defending socialism in Czechoslovakia. The Security
Council has never yet witnessed a more ridiculous and, I
may say frankly, more repulsive spectacle than this, where
the representatives of monopoly capital play the part of
defenders of socialism and communism and, what’s more,
even of communist unity.

75. It should be mentioned particularly in this connexion
that the greatest activity in the dissemination, exaggeration
and ceaseless repetition of this slanderous propaganda,
coming from the counter-revolutionaries through their
previously prepared clandestine radio transmitters, is displayed by American propaganda.

80. The socialist countries and their peoples declare aloud,
positively, officially and for all to hear: the imperialists are
not to stick their noses into socialist and communist affairs.
Otherwise, they may have no noses left.

“Also in this connexion there is a groundless attempt of
some of the Western Powers to drag the so-called
‘question of Czechoslovakia’ up for discussion by the
Security Council of the United Nations.”

81. The reciprocal relations between Czechoslovakia and
the other socialist countries have been, are and will
continue to be settled by the peoples and countries of the
socialist community themselves, and the peoples and
countries of socialism will not tolerate any outside interference. And appropriate and effective measures will be
taken against anybody who tries to interfere.

76. And in this connexion it must be pointed out, in
particular, that those who have been most active in trying
to drag this question up for discussion in the Council are
precisely the American representatives. They are trying to
exploit to their advantage the wholly legitimate, wellfounded and historically justified actions of the group of
socialist States to provide aid and co-operation to a
fraternal socialist republic and in defence of Czechoslovakia’s socialist system against the threat of reaction and
counter-revolution which is acting on directives and instructions from abroad and playing the specific role of imperialist agents in this country. This explains why the

82. I shall continue the Tass report:
“On the evening of 21 August, the President of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, Ludvik Svoboda, spoke
again over the Czechoslovak radio, making a speech ia
which he addressed a plea to the country’s population tc
maintain calm and guard the mainstays of socialism+
freedom and democracy.”
8

83. I consider it possible to confine myself to this brief
reply at the present meeting, reserving the right to speak at
greater length at the next meeting.

89. The Soviet Union has repeated its adherence to the
principle of non-interference in the affairs of other States.
Their intervention has made a mockery of this, particularly
coming, as it does, a bare fortnight after their public
reaffirmation of that principle in Rratislava.

84. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I had intended
to make a short statement on the draft resolution which has
now been presented to us, but I would also wish to say a
word in reply to the speech we have listened to from the
Ambassador of the Soviet Union.

90.. I should like to say one further word about the wider
significance and repercussions of this evil invasion. We have
all recognized that it is a tragedy: a tragedy for Czechoslovakia, a tragedy for Europe, a tragedy for the world.
There have been so many patient and persevering efforts
over recent years to end the futility and frustration of the
cold war and to establish an effective, working understanding between East and West. My country has consistently
and sincerely worked for that purpose. Many others have
laboured with us to establish the confidence which is
necessary for world progress. Many of us had hoped that we
were making advances towards a better understanding and
towards more effective co-operation between East and
West. The Soviet actions ‘have now dealt a heavy blow at
that confidence, and unless the actions of the past
forty-eight hours are promptly reversed the cause of better
relations between East and West will have been thrown
right back.

85. He has referred to our proceedings here as “a repulsive
comedy”; but all of us are much more concerned, of
course, with the repulsive tragedy which i: taking place in
Czechoslovakia as a result of the evil intervention of the
Soviet Union. He asked us what Czechoslovakia we support.
I would simply answer him by saying that when we wish to
be informed about Czechoslovakia and the wishes of its
people, we prefer to listen to the acknowledged leaders of
Czechoslovakia: to the President, to the First Secretary of
the Communist Party, to the Premier, and to the wellknown leaders who have been speaking for their country.
When we wish to be informed about Czechoslovakia we go
to the Czechoslovakians and not, as he does, to Tass. The
Czechoslovakia of Tass is not the Czechoslovakia which we
wish to hear. It is the Czechosloval:ia of the people of
Czechoslovakia who have made their wishes and their views
exceedingly plain even in these days of intervention and
suppression, Their statements are the statements which
have dominated our debate. The statements of the Czechoslovak leaders have exploded, more effectively than any
academic debate could possibly do, the arguments put to us
by the Soviet Union. What are those arguments?

91. Can this really be in the interests of any of us’? Is the
Soviet Union so indifferent to the hopes and desires of
mankind? Are the Soviet leaders so blind to the consequences of their action as far as the welfare of their own
people is concerned?
92. Our duty here in this Council is clear, We should not
hesitate to adopt the draft resolution and to adopt it
without delay. Some people say that there is no force or
effect in resolutions. Not so. It is clearly of the utmost
necessity and urgency that the invasion should bt: immediately condemned in the clearest terms. So the CzechoSlovak leaders believe, and they are the best judges. That is
our immediate duty. We should not fail to do it. We should
not fail to do it now.

86. First, the Soviet Union has been seeking to argue that
Czechoslovakia was threatened by the West. My Government has, throughout the crisis of recent months, been at
pains to avoid any comment on the affairs of Czechoslovakia or any action which might be misunderstood or
which might increase tension in the aria. It has been our
steadfast view, in the words of my Foreign Secretary in the
House of Commons on 18 July, that “it is not for us to
order the internal affairs of Czechoslovakia, not for us or
for anyone else except the people of Czechoslovakia”. It is
perfectly plain that the only real threat to Czechoslovakia
has been in the fear of brutal action by its allies.

93. Mr. BALL (United States of America): I want to avail
myself of the right of reply since a great deal of what the
representative of the Soviet Union has said this morning has
been aimed at me and at my Government.

87. Second, the Soviet Union has argued that a threat
existed to Czechoslovakia from within. The plain fact is
that the Soviet bullying in recent months has made it quite
clear to the world that the Czechoslovak people have been
more united behind their leaders recently than they have
been at any time in the last twenty years.

94. First, let me say to him that I am not defending
socialism and communism as he insists, as he accuses my
Government of doing. What we are seeking to do is to
defend freedom and freedom is very, very different from
the kind of socialism and communism with which the
representative of the USSR is all too familiar.

88. Third, the Soviet Union has claimed that the invasion
was in resprnse to a request from the Czechoslovak
Government, The clear and repeated statements from the
Czechoslovak leaders themselves have utterly destroyed
that claim. No one in the world believes it. The CzechoSlovak leaders have themselves made it perfectly plain that
the Soviet Union’s action not only conflicts with the
United Nations Charter and with the principles of international law, but violates as well the terms of the Warsaw Pact
and the agreements between Czechoslovakia and its neighbours. And no one is a better judge of that than
Czechoslovakia itself.

95. Let me point out also, to underline what Lord
Caradon has said, that it is rather remarkable that the
Soviet representative has made no attempt to reply to the
utterly damning statements which were made by the leaders
of the Czechoslovak Government and which were read to us
last night by the Acting Permanent Representative of
Czechoslovakia.
96. I was struck also by the fact that the Soviet
representative read a statement from Tass referring to a
speech by President Svoboda. Rut what he neglected to say
9

sentative of Bulgaria has addressed a letter to the President
of the Security Council which was received a short time
ago. The letter reads as follows:

was what the real content of that speech was, because what
President Svoboda said was:
“Dear fellow citizens,

(The speaker continued in French.)

“I am addressing you for the second time during this
fateful day. We are going through exceptionally grave
moments in the life of our nation. Military units of the
Soviet Union, together with units of the Polish People’s
Republic, Bulgarian People’s Republic, German Democratic Republic and the Hungarian People’s Republic have
stepped on the soil of our Republic. This took place
without the agreement of the constitutional bodies of the
State, bodies which, however, proceeding from their
responsibility to the nations of our homeland must
speedily solve the situation thus created and achieve a
departure of the foreign troops soon.”
97. Finally, let me observe how struck I have been again
and again during these past two days in listening to the
remarks of the representative of the Soviet Government, to
detect the psychological undertones which he discloses
when he speaks about the reactions of the brave people of
Czechoslovakia to this invasion. All of them who take any
steps to interfere with this invasion are, I believe the term
is, “counter-revolutionaries
obviously propped up by
imperialists”. I am getting very familiar with this terminology-all too familiar, I am afraid.
98. It was evident to me, as I remarked last night, that the
Soviet Government regards Czechoslovakia as a Soviet
colony and insists that it be treated as such. But as regards
the attitude which the Soviet representative displays toward
the people of Czechoslovakia and their reactions, I can only
recall an anecdote told by a very famous English writer,
Dean Swift. What he said was this: “This dog, Sir, is vicious
and dangerous and should be destroyed. When attacked he
defends himself.”

“Mr. President,
“On instructions from my Government, I have the
honour to inform you that, in accordance with Article 31
of the Charter, I should like to participate, without right
to vote, in the debate on the question now before the
Security Council.
“I have the honour to be, etc.
“Yours, etc.
“(Signed] Milko TARABANOV
“Ambassador Extraordinary and i-‘le.ripotentiary
and Permanent Representative of Bulgaria
to the United Nations.”
(The speaker continued ii2 English.)
102. In accordance with the normal practice of tits
Council, and if there is no objection, I propose to invite the
representative of Bulgaria to participate in the discussion at
our next meeting, without the right to vote, pursuant to his
request under the relevant provisions of the United Nations
Charter.
103. The Presidency has held some consultations asto the
time of our next meeting. A majority of delegations is in
favour of our meeting at 4 o’c!ock this afternoon. The
opinion has been advanced by two or three delegations that
we might meet at a later hour, say G p.m. I wonder if we
could find a compromise solution by meeting at abottt
5 p.m. or 5.30 p.m.

99. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): At this moment I should
only like to point out that yesterday evening the CzechoSlovak Foreign Ministry made a statement and pointed out
that Czechoslovakia does not agree to the discussion of the
matter at the United Nations and considers that the
relations between Czechoslovakia and the other socialist
countries are decided by themselves within the framework
of the socialist community. In this connexion I should also
like to point to the fact that no Czechoslovak representatives appeared this morning in the Security Council.
They did not answer the call of the President. These two
facts are closely connected. Of course it should be
substantiated, but it may happen that yesterday, at the
time when the Acting Representative of Czechoslovakia
spoke, his instructions were quite different. Their absence
underlines the opinion of the most interested party in this
discussion, Czechoslovakia.

104. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated fiunr
French): If I have understood you correctly, Mr. Fresidcat,
there is no speaker on the list for the meeting proposed for
4 p.m. this afternoon?
105. The PRESIDENT:

That is correct.

106. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated @/?I
French): If there were any speakers on the list for the
4 p.m. meeting, my delegation would have no objection te
the meeting being heId at that time as you, Mr. President,
have proposed,
107. The practice is that, if delegations express their wish
to speak, the Council and the President comply with that
wish. The President has been kind enough to inform me
that no delegation has expressed its desire to speak.
Furthermore, each of the delegations present here is aware
of certain important developments which might assist some
delegations in defining their final positions. We are among
those who are concerned above all with respect for fhe
Charter, for international law, and not with the establish.
ment of a cold war situation which is always detrimental tc

100. It seems to me that the draft resolution which would
be adopted by the Security Council would not render any
help to the Czechoslovak people; it would only aggravate
the situation and only do harm.
101. The PRESIDENT: I wish to acquaint the members of
the Council with the fact that’ the Permanent Repre10

our peoples, including,
people.

in this case, the Czechoslovak

116. It has been brought to my attention-and, I believe,
to that of many other delegations around this table-that
new events might be placed before us in the course of the
afternoon. Moreover, my Government has not yet taken
note of the text of the draft resolution which will be the
subject of governmental consultations in my capital, and of
consultations with friendly delegations and members of the
Security Council.

108. My delegation considers it necessary respectfully to
draw your attention to the fact that, for known and
obvious practical reasons, the French text of the draft
resolution could not be submitted to my Government. By
the same token, my delegation feels that consultations
could be undertaken immediately, in keeping with a rightly
established tradition. I recall that on several occasions
certain delegations-and not the smallest-have been accused of wishing to act without prior consultations and
without having made the necessary efforts by every means
in their power to arrive at the broadest agreement possible.

117. For all these reasons, and in the light of my short and
modest experience, 1 find it difficult to imagine that these
consultations could lead to any results between now and
5 p.m. or even between now and G or 7 p.m. However, if
these consultations should lead to any conclusions before
5 p.m., my delegation would be perfectly willing to attend
a meeting of the Security Council when it is convened by
the President.

109. I am convinced that my delegation has always shown
the concern which prompts us all, namely, with the attempt
to combine the twofold imperative of rapid action and of
agreement which is equally broad and effective.

118. It is not a question of adjourning sine die, but of
allowing the delegations to communicate with their Governments; of enabling certain delegations to take note of
certain information which they are awaiting with the
greatest impatience; of allowing certain delegations to
continue the consultations they have already begun this
morning, and it is also a matter of remaining constantly at
the disposal of the President of the Security Council and of
attending any meeting which may be called as soon as this
becomes necessary.

110. For all these reasons, my delegation would very
much wish that, unless there are representatives who wish
to speak, the members of the Council may immediately
engage in the widest possible all-embracing consultations
and that they remain on call to attend any meeting which
may be convened as soon as it becomes necessary.
111. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Algeria has
proposed, if I understood him correctly, that we adjourn
this meeting now, with no set time for the next meeting,
and that that meeting would be convened as soon as
possible after consultations have been made.

119. The PRESIDENT: Are there any further comments?
120. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): We are aware that there
are new elements. They have been only too frequently
referred to, that is, that the Government of Czechoslovakia
is in the process of being changed, in the process of being
changed today.

112. Are there any comments on this suggestion of the
representative of Algeria?
113. Mr. BALL (United States of America): The matter
we are concerned with is one of very great importance to
the whole world, and the world is watching this body to see
how it responds to the very dangerous and grievous
situation with which it is presented. Meanwhile, the
occupation is being consolidated in Czechoslovakia; people
are being imprisoned; people are disappearing; the troops
are imposing martial law.

121. I do hope that we are not going to wait until we
receive representations from a new government which says,
and confirms the statement, which the representative of
Hungary has made, that the new government would of
course not wish to continue this discussion, I would suggest
that the custom is, as our colleague from Algeria says, that,
in a situation as fraught with dangers and followed with
such anxiety by so many people, we should continue the
consultations and should call the meeting of the Council, as
you have suggested, Mr. President, for 5 o’clock. If the
consultations do not permit the actual beginning of the
meeting-this has happened before, I am afraid-we will
have to continue consultations until they do, but I think
that we should have an understanding that, when we
adjourn today, the consultitions start forthwith and that
we meet at 5 o’clock. If the formal meeting has to be
delayed, it will not be the first time this has happened in
similar situations.

114. I think, under the circumstances, for this Council to
adjourn without a fixed date would be a very great mistake
and could lead to enormous misunderstanding concerning
the seriousness of our purpose. I appreciate the interest and
desire of the representative of Algeria to consult, but I do
not see why that consultation could not take place between
now and 5 p.m., and I would propose that we adjourn
until 5 p.m.
115. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated porn
French): In order to avoid any misunderstanding, I wish to
make it clear that I had no intention of asking that the
meeting of the Council be adjourned sine die. It is
customary,
when the Council deals with such serious
situations, for all the members of the Council to remain
constantly at the disposal of the President of the Security
Council so that they may be called to meet at any hour of
the day or night.

122. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): I would like to say that I
feel that the. logic and argumentation of the representative
cf Algeria are vrry valid, and I fully agree with his
argumentation.
123. I should like to add that there is really more than one
delegation among the members of the Council that has not
expressed itself and has not addressed the Council, and if
11

there are no speakers for the next, meeting this is an
indication that, at present, they are not in a position to
make statements and to declare their stand. Therefore it is
fair, I think, not to convene the meeting too hastily and to
press a decision. And I should like to add the problem of
the difference in time between New York and some of the
capitals-it is sometimes eight hours or more. Therefore,
there are certain problems in communication with Governments and in getting instructions. So I appeal to you,
Mr. President, to take these problems into consideration.
124. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): First of ail, I
am sure that we would all welcome what the representative
of Algeria has put to us, that it is necessary for us to
continue in urgent consultation-very
valuable, very
necessary-but it is also essential that we should proceed
with our work with urgency,- and show that we are
proceeding with our work with a sense of due urgency.
125. Therefore, I believe it is right that we should fix a
time for our next meeting, and I hope that we shall now do
so. Consultations can and will proceed, of course, and, as
the representative of Canada has pointed out, if the
consultations were at a critical stag& it would of course be
perfectly possible for us to postpone the meeting beyond
the time arranged.
126. With that in mind and in order that we should not
unduly delay on a simple procedural matter, I would
formally propose that this Council should adjourn until
5 o’clock this afternoon, on the understanding that if
consultations make it desirable we can postpone the
meeting from that time.

133. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russiun): Mr. President, I regret that in
bending over your table you did not notice my hand, which
was raised to signify my request for the floor. I had asked
for the floor before you said you were proceeding to a vote.
I should therefore like to say a few words to state the views
of the Soviet delegation on the question mentioned by the
Algerian representative.
134. According to established practice, proposals aad
wishes of this kind, and the arguments advanced by the
Algerian representative and subsequently added to and
strengthened by the Hungarian representative, desevz
attention. Proposals and wishes of this kind deserve to be
taken into consideration inasmuch as they are reasonable,
logical, well-founded and entirely in accordance with Ihe
established practice in the work of the Security Xouacil
from way back. This is a matter of respect, of courtesy
towards sufficiently well-founded requests and wishes (the
arguments advanced were substantiated) to which the olhcr
members cannot but agree. And usually, as a rule, according
to established practice, wishes of this kind have been
considered and taken into account. And in view of thir
objective fact, and considering the established and accepted
practice in the work of the Security Council, nothing so
very terrible would happen if, for example, the Securily
Council were to meet tomorrow in consideration of the
wishesof those representativeswho, for the reasonsthey
have given, prefer that no meeting be held today, evenin
the evening.
135. Of course, the American representative’sstatement,
in which he demandsand insists011 having the Sccurit~
Council convened perforce, makes a rather strangeim.
pression.And the impression it creates is that he hasa
burning desireto exert pressureboth on the members
and
on the Presidentof the Council. Sllch a practice is hardly
appropriateunder the conditions of the established
practiw
in the work of the Security Council. The proposalsand
considerationsexpressedby the Algerian representative
atId
strengthenedby the representative of Hungary are fully
justified and wholly appropriate.

127. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the United
Kingdom has formally moved that we adjourn now the
meeting until 5 o’clock, with the understanding he has
stated. According to rule 33, any motion for the suspension
or for a simple adjournment of the meeting shall be decided
without debate.
128. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (transhzted jkom
French): I am afraid that I did not receive the entire
interpretation
of the statement you just made,
Mr. President. I thought that the representative of the
United Kingdom mentioned the understanding that if
consultations reached a critical stage then the meeting
could be postponed. That was my understanding.

136. Why doesthe American representativeignorethem?
As for the British representative,he goesevenfurther: heis
already proposing a formal vote, expecting to haveTV
majority. But this is not the acceptedway of settlingsuch
questions.I seeno reason to disregardthe wishesof [lie
representativeof Algeria, and to force this matter to beput
to a vote. If such a proposal is being made,and if the
representativeof the United Kingdom insistson this,then
we can draw only one conclusion: he is pursuingsome
specialendsof his own. He has saidnothing about f&at;Ile
has referred to the Canadian representative. But the
Canadiandelegatewas franker about the reasonsfor haste,
about why he is in a hurry. He revealedthe reason.Reis
afraid the end has come for the counter-rcvolufiooary
forcesin Czechoslovakia.

129. The PRESIDENT: I ask the representative of the
United Kingdom to clarify his motion.
130. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I thought that
you had already stated it perfectly clearly, Mr. Presidentthat I formally proposed that we should adjourn until
5 o’clock this afternoon and meet again at that time, but
that if consultations which will proceed in the interval
made it desirable, it would of course be within our power
to adjourn that meeting at that time, My proposal was a
formal one, that we adjourn until 5 o’clock.

137. And no matter how much haste there is here,yoii
will not succeedin giving any aid, Therefore, you haveput
your cards on the table, you have explained the reasons.
But this is not a sufficiently respectablereasonfer
disregardingthe reasonableconsiderationsexpressed
bytL

13 1. The PRESIDENT: I intend to put it immediately to
the consideration of the Security Council.
0
132. The representative of the Soviet Union has asked for
the floor. I understand it to be on a point of order.
12

Algerian representative. Even if you are in such a hurry,
nothing will happen if the meeting is set for tomorrow,
taking into account the wishes of the representative of
Algeria, supported by the Hungarian representative.

140. A formal proposal was then made to the effect that
we adjourn until 5 p.m. this afternoon. According to rule
33, when a motion is made for the suspension or temporary
adjournment of a meeting, it shall be decided upon without
debate. Therefore, according to the rules of procedure,
which exert a certain pressure on the President, I propose
that we come to a decision, I think the simplest procedure
will be for me to ask those who are in agreement with the
motion advanced by the representative of the United
Kingdom so to indicate by raising their hands.

138, The PRESIDENT: On the point raised by the
representative of the Soviet Union, I wish to reassure him
that the President of the Security Council is not subject to
pressure of any kind from any member, permanent or
non-permanent. The only pressure that is exerted on the
President is the pressure of the rules of procedure, and that
is the only pressure I recognize and admit to.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia,
France, Paraguay, Senegal, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.

139. I understand that it has been the general practice to
have informal consultations as to the holding of the next
meeting. Those informal consultations were held. All
delegations were consulted, and the result of the consultations is that twelve delegations agreed that we should meet
at 4 o’clock and three delegations proposed a later hour.
Quite frankly, I stated that although there was a tentative
majority agreement on having a meeting at 4 p.m., I
realized that some delegations had expressed the view that
we could meet at a later hour. I therefore acquainted the
members of the Security Council with the results of my
consultations.

Against: None.
Abstaining: Algeria, Hungary, India, Pakistan, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics.
The motion for adjournment was adopted by 10 votes to
none, with 5 abstentions.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

13

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS
may
bookstore

PUBLlCATlONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
to: United
Notions,

and

distributors
Soles
Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Ler publications
ddporitoirer
du

des
monde

LES PUBLICATIONS
Nations
entier.

Section

der

Unies
sent
Informer-vour

Notions

Unies,

venter,

KAK

IlOJlY’iHTb

M3,iJAHMfl

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

New York

DES NATIONS

en vente
dons
ler
libroirier
et ler ogencer
aupr&r
de votre
libroirie
ov adressez-vour
6:
ou Gen&ve.

OPrAHM3AUMH

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

06bEAWHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicociones
de los Nocioner
Unidas
estdn
en todor
portes
del mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
Ventas,
Nuevo
York o Ginebra.

Litho

UNIES

UNIDAS

en vento en librerior
o dirijose
a: Nacioner

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

HAUHfl

in other

currencies)

Y cosas dirtribuidoros
Unidar,
Secci6n

de

35 I 76 -October

1972-2,050
