S/2014/138

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 February 2014
Original: English

Special report of the Secretary-General on the review of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
Six years after the transition from the African Union Mission in the Sudan to
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), a
comprehensive political settlement to the Darfur crisis has yet to be reached.
Fighting continues and protection and humanitarian assistance needs among the
civilian population remain considerable. Further compounding the situation,
intercommunal conflict has intensified, especially over resources, since August
2012. At the same time, humanitarian space continues to be challenged and
UNAMID itself has been subject to increasingly hostile action. In 2013, UNAMID
suffered 19 attacks, resulting in 16 dead and 27 injured and a significant loss of
vehicles, weapons and ammunition. In that context, the Security Council requested
in its resolution 2113 (2013) a detailed and forward-looking review of the Mission’s
progress towards achieving its mandate, particularly in the light of major changes
and developments in the situation in Darfur since the Mission’s establishment.
2.
A joint assessment team, consisting of representatives from the African Union
Commission, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Support of the Secretariat, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the World Food Programme and
UNAMID, undertook the review in close consultation with the United Nations
country team in the Sudan. The review was conducted in three phases, the first of
which involved an updated analysis of the causes, drivers and effects of conflict in
Darfur. In the second phase, the Mission’s existing capacities and strategies were
evaluated, taking into account the operating environment. In the third phase, the
assessment team reviewed the strategic priorities for UNAMID and developed
recommendations to address the main challenges to the implementation of the
mandate.

II. Conflict analysis
3.
The conflict in Darfur continues to take place within the context of
pre-existing root causes that include the loss or severe disruption of traditional
livelihoods, weakened traditional dispute resolution mechanisms, impunity and
weak rule of law, weak or absent State administrations in rural areas, the prevalence

14-24520 (E) 050314

*1424520*

S/2014/138

of arms and armed militias, a lack of trust between and within communities, the
manipulation of social divisions and cycles of retaliatory violence. Those drivers
have been further intensified by long-term demographic and climate change,
including urbanization and drought. In addition, new elements, elaborated below,
have influenced conflict dynamics in Darfur, leading to a considerable deterioration
of the security situation during 2013.
Centre-periphery dynamics
4.
Grievances related to the political and economic marginalization of Darfur by
Khartoum continue to fuel the armed rebellion. The Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM)-Jibril Ibrahim, the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA)-Abdul Wahid and SLAMinni Minawi are the Government’s main adversaries in that regard. That aspect of
the conflict took on a new dimension following the secession of South Sudan in July
2011, when similar grievances reignited rebellions in Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile States led by the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM)-North. In
November 2011, all four rebel movements united to form the Sudan Revolutionary
Front (SRF). That marked, for the first time since fighting ended between the
Government of the Sudan and SPLM, in January 2005, the coming together of
several armed groups in the “peripheries” of the Sudan for the stated cause of a
more equitable share of power and wealth.
5.
While Government and armed movement forces have continued to clash
sporadically inside Darfur, the formation of the SRF shifted the focus of the armed
opposition’s operations to areas beyond Darfur. Armed clashes outside Darfur now
adversely affect stability within Darfur (and vice versa), as raids are carried out by
movements within Darfur to obtain supplies for operations on other fronts.
6.
The establishment of the SRF also led to the adoption by the Darfur armed
movements of a national political agenda. That agenda is set out in the “New Dawn
Charter”, a political platform adopted by SRF in January 2013. Among other things,
it calls for a holistic (i.e., national) as opposed to piecemeal (i.e., regional) approach
to resolving the multiple conflicts within the Sudan, arguing that the underlying
causes of each stem from a set of common issues. Since entering the alliance, the
Darfur armed movements have presented that argument as a precondition for
negotiations with the Government. Conversely, the Government’s position is that the
conflicts in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States, which it characterizes as
symptoms of unresolved issues related to implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement of 2005, must be dealt with separately from negotiations over
Darfur. Further, it insists that negotiations concerning Darfur be based on the
Darfur-specific Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. The parties cite this divergence
of views as a key obstacle to negotiations over a political settlement. The
announcement by President Bashir on 27 January 2014 of a national dialogue
presents an opportunity in that respect, and the modalities of such a dialogue
deserve to be explored to address the legitimate grievances of the people of Darfur.
Intensification of intercommunal conflict
7.
With regard to other new conflict dynamics, a marked deterioration in the
economy of the Sudan following the secession of South Sudan in July 2011
seriously undermined security in Darfur. The Sudan lost three quarters of its oil
production as a result, which, according to the International Monetary Fund,

2/17

14-24520

S/2014/138

accounted for half its previous fiscal revenue and a third of its export proceeds. The
subsequent 14-month cessation of oil production and transportation by South Sudan
further exacerbated the situation. Those losses were compounded by other serious
economic challenges, including unsustainable external debt, an annual budget
deficit and bilateral economic sanctions. In addition, high military spending and
disruptions to revenue collection in conflict-affected areas have further undermined
economic growth and stability.
8.
The effects in Darfur have been visible in increased fuel and basic commodity
prices, a rise in criminal activity and heightened competition between communities
for natural resources, in particular arable land and minerals. At the same time, the
economic crisis is alleged to have constrained the Government’s ability to finance
the mainly pastoralist tribal militias from which it draws the paramilitary units that
supplement its military operations. The resulting disruptions in salary payments
have led elements of those units (the Popular Defence Forces, the Central Reserve
Police and border guards) to seek alternative sources of revenue. That situation is
considered to have precipitated their involvement, in support of tribal affiliates, in
heavy intercommunal fighting over natural resources, in particular artisanal gold
mines in Northern Darfur, a prospective oil field in Eastern Darfur and land in
Central and Southern Darfur.
9.
While resource-based clashes between communities, supported by tribal
militias, have occurred in Darfur since long before the rebellion began in 2003, that
dimension of the crisis has intensified significantly since the economic downturn in
mid-2012, such that it has eclipsed military clashes as the primary cause of violence
against civilians and of population displacement. The escalation began in January
2013, when a dispute over control of an artisanal gold mine in Jebel Amir, Northern
Darfur, triggered heavy fighting, supported by paramilitary elements, between
groups from the northern Rezeigat and Beni Hussein tribes. The clashes led to the
displacement of approximately 100,000 civilians, a substantial increase in
humanitarian assistance needs and major disruptions to livelihood activities. Six
major outbreaks of resource-based intercommunal fighting followed in 2013, which,
along with sporadic clashes between Government and armed movement forces,
displaced an additional 400,000 civilians.
Effects on the civilian population
10. The fighting in Darfur continues to have a highly deleterious effect on
civilians. After 11 years of fighting between Government and armed movement
forces, together with the recent trends towards increased criminal activity and
intercommunal conflict, Darfur remains one of the world’s largest humanitarian
crises. In 2013, the humanitarian situation deteriorated significantly in many areas
as an estimated 400,000 people were forced to flee new outbreaks of fighting. The
total number of internally displaced people increased to almost two million.
Protracted displacement, food insecurity and a lack of basic services continue to
drive chronic vulnerability in all five Darfur states. Overall, a total of 3.5 million
people are currently targeted for humanitarian assistance. The deprivation,
displacement and limited access to basic social services are both symptoms and
drivers of conflict. The protracted violence has destroyed or had a severe impact on
the economic livelihoods of almost all Darfuris. The destruction of homes, markets
and food sources, the displacement of rural communities into urban settings and the
disruption of transport infrastructure for trade have significantly affected much of

14-24520

3/17

S/2014/138

the population. Clashes and the resulting population displacements have severely
disrupted transhumance routes and pastoralist production patterns.
11. Protection assessments conducted in conflict-affected areas during 2013 noted
serious concerns related to civilian casualties, sexual and gender-based violence, the
separation of families, the recruitment of children into armed groups, violence
against children and the targeting of civilians in transit camps or temporary
settlements. Moreover, assaults, sexual and gender-based violence and looting take
place within an overall climate of impunity.

III. Analysis of the capacities of UNAMID
12. Based on the updated conflict analysis, the review team evaluated the
Mission’s existing capacities and impact, taking into account the evolving operating
environment and challenges.
Protection of civilians and ensuring unhindered humanitarian access
13. UNAMID contributes to the protection of civilians through, among other
things, various types of patrols, static security and the promotion of community
policing, particularly in camps for internally displaced persons. The Mission
facilitates the medical evacuation of wounded civilians from insecure areas,
provides security for local community mediation and contributes to area security
through confidence-building patrols. Additional contributions include support in
preventing and responding to sexual and gender-based violence, the protection of
human rights, child protection and addressing the risks posed by the explosive
remnants of war. The Mission facilitates the delivery of humanitarian assistance by
aid agencies by providing escorts and logistical support, contributing to area
security and ensuring the safety and security of aid personnel and their property.
14. While UNAMID is having some impact in those areas, its effectiveness is
seriously constrained by access restrictions and mobility constraints and shortfalls in
the operational capabilities of several troop and police contingents. An example of
the Mission’s positive impact includes the timely establishment in 2013 of a
temporary operating base in El Sireaf, Northern Darfur, that enhanced protection
and enabled humanitarian actors to deliver aid to approximately 60,000 civilians
who had been displaced by heavy intercommunal fighting. With regard to the
facilitation of humanitarian assistance, the United Nations country team agencies
called for UNAMID troops to adopt a more robust posture when faced with
restrictions of movement to crisis-affected areas. Supporting that analysis, the
review also noted a need for improved planning, prioritization and coordination
between Mission components and between the Mission and humanitarian actors.
Support to the political process
15. The framework for African Union and United Nations facilitation of the Darfur
peace process of 2012 (see S/2012/166) guides the Mission’s work to increase the
inclusiveness of the political process. That framework, endorsed by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union and the Security Council, is built on the
following three pillars, which are to be pursued simultaneously: (1) support to the
signatory parties with regard to the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur, (2) engagement with the Government and Darfur armed movements to

4/17

14-24520

S/2014/138

promote negotiations and (3) support for Darfur-based internal dialogue and
consultations. The ability of UNAMID to facilitate progress in the first area has
been limited by delays in the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur by the signatory parties (the Government of the Sudan, the Liberation and
Justice Movement (LJM) and JEM-Bashar) and the absence of an inclusive political
settlement between the Government and non-signatory movements. While
implementation of the power-sharing aspects of the agreement has led to the
inclusion of LJM and JEM-Bashar personnel in the various levels of government, in
particular in the Darfur Regional Authority, the degree to which they have been able
to govern effectively and inclusively has been constrained by a lack of capacity,
resources and political influence.
16. With regard to reaching an inclusive settlement to the conflict, there remains a
divergence of views between the parties over whether the talks should be national or
regional in scope. In addition, the lack of unified pressure on the parties from the
international community continues to hamper the efforts of the African Union and
United Nations Joint Special Representative and Joint Chief Mediator for Darfur,
Mohamed Ibn Chambas, to promote negotiations between the Government and
armed movements. In that connection, the Joint Chief Mediator has intensified his
engagement with key regional actors to solicit their support for the talks. In
addition, he coordinates with the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
and the United Nations Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan to
synchronize efforts to address conflicts in Darfur and Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile States.
17. The Darfur-based internal dialogue and consultations provided for in the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, if safe, credible and broadly inclusive, could make a
meaningful contribution to increasing the inclusiveness of the peace process at the
local level. That initiative, which UNAMID is mandated to support, is scheduled to
commence in the first half of 2014. The national, state and local elections planned
for 2015 could offer another opportunity to increase the inclusiveness of and
representation in the Government, provided those elections are free and fair. The
constitutional review process, as proposed by the Government, would provide
another means through which to address conflict factors related to political
marginalization and exclusion, if it is broadly inclusive, transparent and credible.
Facilitating recovery and supporting local dispute resolution
18. The weakness of local dispute resolution mechanisms is another major
contributor to the intensification of intercommunal conflict. In that connection,
UNAMID has stepped up its support to local mediation efforts between
communities, including through the transportation of officials and influential
community leaders to “hot spots” for reconciliation meetings, the building of the
capacity of local authorities and traditional mediators to resolve conflict and the
promotion of dialogue between conflicting parties. That assistance has contributed
greatly to peaceful dialogue that in almost all cases has led to local cessation of
hostilities agreements. In 2013 alone, conflicting parties entered into a total of 15
local cessation of hostilities agreements. While several of the agreements
subsequently broke down, owing to a lack of attention by the parties in addressing
the resource-related root causes of the conflicts, the accords nevertheless provided
lulls in the fighting that allowed for the provision of assistance to civilians and the
increased engagement of local mediators. The review found that the Mission’s

14-24520

5/17

S/2014/138

engagement in that priority area is having a positive impact, although it is limited by
the absence of an inclusive political settlement.
19. The inequitable management of access to natural resources is another key
cause of intercommunal fighting. In that connection, the Darfur Development
Strategy, formulated by the Darfur Regional Authority and international partners in
November 2012, provides a framework for addressing the resource-related drivers
of conflict, as well as recovery, development and poverty eradication needs more
broadly. However, the transfer of funds from the federal Government to the Darfur
Regional Authority to enable the Strategy’s execution is lagging far behind the
implementation timetable of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur ($165 million
of the $500 million currently due has been transferred). In addition, donors have yet
to fulfil their contributions to the $1 billion pledged at a conference in Doha in April
2013. Within its limited means, the Darfur Regional Authority is in the process of
commencing 315 development projects in the areas of health, education and water
as at December 2013 (funded from the $165 million received thus far). Other
development activities include the ongoing construction of Qatari-funded “model
villages” throughout Darfur to promote population return. Those efforts
notwithstanding, the recovery and reconstruction needs of Darfur remain massive.
Without the increased commitment of resources and political will by the signatory
parties, as well as donors, making progress in this area will remain challenging for
the Darfur Regional Authority and the United Nations country team.
Strengthening the rule of law, human rights and arms control
20. Grievances related to weak rule of law, human rights violations and the
prevalence of arms and armed groups remain major drivers of conflict and
instability in Darfur. The Mission works to strengthen the rule of law and increase
access to justice by rehabilitating court facilities, transporting judges to rural areas
for “mobile court” hearings and training traditional community leaders. In addition,
UNAMID collaborates with UNDP to provide legal assistance to pre-trial detainees.
The maintenance of emergency and national security laws that allow the authorities
to arrest and detain citizens without charge for prolonged periods severely limits the
development of the judicial sector even when support has been provided within the
framework of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
21. The Mission, in conjunction with UNDP, has strengthened the corrections
system and improved conditions in prisons managed by the Ministry of the Interior.
In December 2013, the Government launched a five-year strategic plan to further
develop, with the support of UNAMID and UNDP, prisons and the capacity of
corrections staff. However, UNAMID is not allowed access to facilities managed by
the National Intelligence and Security Services or the Sudanese Armed Forces.
While there has been good progress made in improving the welfare of prisoners
where UNAMID has access, there is a need for commensurate progress in the
reform of the judicial system to ensure such efforts are more closely linked to the
Mission’s overall conflict resolution and stabilization objectives.
22. UNAMID works to address grievances related to criminal accountability
through, inter alia, training and building the capacity of Government police,
promoting community policing, in particular in camps for internally displaced
persons, and various types of police patrols. The work of the police component in
that area is constrained by an insufficient number of officers with the special skills

6/17

14-24520

S/2014/138

needed to meet the specific capacity-building needs of Government police,
including in the areas of crime scene analysis, forensics, human trafficking,
information technology and transnational crime. The Mission has developed closer
working relations with the Ministry of the Interior, including through the signing of
a memorandum of understanding in August 2013 on cooperation and capacitybuilding. Furthermore, a joint UNAMID and United Nations country team working
group was recently formed to enhance collaboration. Overall, the review found that
an analysis of the impact of the Mission’s work in that area is in need of
strengthening.
23. The Mission’s efforts to help address grievances arising from human rights
violations and abuses involve monitoring, reporting and advocating for greater
respect for such rights. Insufficient cooperation by the Government, particularly in
terms of access, seriously constrains the Mission’s ability to carry out those tasks,
especially when it comes to verifying and reporting on alleged violations and abuses
in a timely manner, advocating for corrective action and contributing to an early
warning system. Nevertheless, while not easily quantifiable, the Mission’s work has
had some impact on raising awareness and promoting respect for human rights,
including through the holding of workshops for civil society organizations, which
themselves face major constraints. In addition, of late the authorities have shown
increased interest in receiving capacity-building support from UNAMID, including
assistance in participating in international human rights courses and training.
24. The Mission supports arms control by providing technical advice to the
authorities and armed movements, including those engaged in the mediation
process, on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration planning and security
arrangements. It also provides technical advice on regional arms control measures to
the Government of the Sudan, including on the provisions of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur regarding the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
LJM and JEM-Bashar combatants. Meanwhile, in an effort to offer alternative
opportunities to youth who are at risk of joining armed groups or gangs, UNAMID
supports the implementation of community-based, labour-intensive programmes to
equip them with vocational skills. A total of 5,000 youth have participated in the
initiative since its inception in July 2011. Surveys conducted by the Mission at the
end of the training show a marked increase in their employment prospects and a
reduced inclination to join armed groups or gangs.

IV. Key challenges to effective operations
25. In the light of the political and security environment in Darfur, the review
identified three major challenges faced by UNAMID in the effective discharge of its
mandate: (1) the cooperation and partnership of the Government in mandate
implementation, (2) major shortfalls in several troop- and police-contingent
capabilities and (3) the need for improved coordination and integration structures
within the Mission and between the Mission and the United Nations country team.
Cooperation by the host Government
26. While cooperation with UNAMID by the host Government has improved with
regard to the issuance of visas, restrictions of access and delays in the issuance of
customs clearances for contingent-owned equipment continue and significantly

14-24520

7/17

S/2014/138

undermine the Mission’s effectiveness. Access restrictions have three dimensions:
(1) the denial of access to areas in crisis when required by the Mission and
humanitarian actors, (2) the halting of patrols at checkpoints and (3) denials or
delays relating to travel permits for the United Nations country team.
27. The authorities typically restrict access to areas in crisis in the early stages.
The restrictions then tend to decrease after three to five weeks. While the number of
restrictions imposed on the Mission’s movements are small relative to the total
number of patrols conducted, their impact is significant because they tend to occur
in situations where protection and humanitarian assistance needs are acute. With
regard to the halting of patrols at checkpoints, it was recognized that responsibility
sometimes lies with Mission personnel who too easily turn back rather than
assertively insisting on proceeding.
28. Humanitarian actors face particular restrictions that constrain and delay the
delivery of assistance, which take the form of denials of access, delays in the
issuance of staff work permits and the cancellation of field missions, particularly in
the context of new emergencies. Access often varies significantly according to
geographical location, assisting organization, sector and prevailing security
situation. Access to areas of active fighting is generally not possible and includes
the East Jebel Marra region, where an estimated 100,000 people have been cut off
from United Nations assistance since early 2010. The restrictions affect the capacity
of humanitarian actors to assess needs, implement projects, monitor impacts and
consult with affected people. Those effects are compounded by the reduced
availability of funding for humanitarian actors (the Consolidated Appeal for South
Sudan in 2013 was less than 60 per cent funded) which reduces the humanitarian
presence in Darfur, despite the deteriorating humanitarian situation. Despite those
challenges, the United Nations and partners reached at least three million people
with humanitarian assistance in 2013.
29. Delays by the authorities in the issuance of customs clearances for contingentowned equipment have constrained the force by hindering the deployment of units
and creating gaps in the force configuration. At the time of writing, clearances had
been pending for an infantry reserve unit and a military utility helicopter unit since
July and November 2013, respectively. Those delays prevent the force from
reaching its full strength and effectiveness.
30. Over the last year, cooperation between the Mission and the Government of
the Sudan, including the timelier issuance of visas, has resulted in improvements in
mandate implementation. That indicates that more progress may be possible,
including with regard to access, through the building of working relations with the
authorities from team sites to the national level.
Troop- and police-contingent capabilities
31. The review identified shortfalls in the operational capabilities of the Mission’s
military and police components as another key challenge to effective mandate
implementation, particularly with respect to the protection of civilians and ensuring
unhindered humanitarian access. Those shortfalls seriously constrain the force’s
mobility, effectiveness and ability to deter attacks. They pertain mainly to force
mobility constraints; deficiencies in the contingent-owned equipment, training and
readiness of some contingents; and the need for improved planning and coordination

8/17

14-24520

S/2014/138

between Mission components (military, police and civilian) and between the
Mission and humanitarian actors.
32. The review team assessed the force’s mandated strength and capabilities as
adequate and necessary for the operational environment. However, the actual
capabilities of several contingents on the ground fall well below operational
requirements. As at 28 February 2013, 20 of the 27 military units deployed to
UNAMID have major equipment serviceability rates below 90 per cent, and 5 units
are at or below 44 per cent. The deficiencies pertain mainly to the serviceability of
armoured personnel carriers. Of the 17 formed police units deployed to UNAMID,
5 also fall well below operational requirements: one armoured personnel carrier unit
has a serviceability rate of 50 per cent, another has a rate of 20 per cent and three
have a rate of 0 per cent. Steps are being taken by four of the units to urgently
address the shortfalls. Repatriation and replacement of the remaining unit is under
way.
33. In addition, several military contingents have yet to field the self-sustainment
capabilities needed to establish temporary operating bases away from team sites.
Others have not deployed with the authorized higher calibre weapons. In addition, a
number of authorized military assets have yet to be deployed, including eight muchneeded military utility helicopters. While the deployment of three helicopters is
expected in the first half of 2014, five remain unpledged. The deployment of an
infantry battalion and a reserve infantry unit are on hold pending the issuance of
customs clearances for contingent-owned equipment.
34. Regarding the overall deployment of the force, the review noted that the
reconfiguration carried out in line with the recommendations of the 2012 uniformed
personnel review remain appropriate given the location of conflict incidents and
potential flashpoints. Those adjustments saw the force reconfigured in such a
manner that the infantry units are now mainly concentrated along a north-west to
south-east axis through the centre of Darfur. In addition, the number of personnel
deployed to more secure areas was reduced while still maintaining the overall force
footprint. Because nearly half of all incidents occur more than 100 km from the
nearest team site, however, there is a need for the force to more regularly and
effectively project a presence through increased mobility, engage with the local
population, protect civilians and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance
over a commensurate range.
35. In addition, there is a need for the force to move from a routine and reactive
posture to one that is preventive and pre-emptive. The force has taken some positive
steps in that regard, but there is a need to maximize available resources in the
Mission by improving coordination and synergy between military, police and
civilian personnel. Patrolling must also be more closely linked to its intended
purpose and effect, prioritized according to the population’s protection needs and
informed by joint planning and coordination between Mission components, in
conjunction with humanitarian actors, at the team site level.
Mission coordination and integration structures
36. The Mission’s effectiveness is also hampered by shortcomings in coordination
structures within UNAMID and integrated assessment and planning between
UNAMID and the United Nations country team. With regard to integration and
coordination within UNAMID, the Mission would benefit from a clearer strategic

14-24520

9/17

S/2014/138

vision based on ongoing integrated analysis of the situation in Darfur, a set of
priorities, a strategic and operational planning system mobilizing all resources
around the defined priorities and a strong, integrated and timely reporting and
analysis system that allows all key actors and decision makers to have a single
picture of the short- and long-term developments in the area of operations. In
addition, there is a need for UNAMID to more clearly define the impact of its work
in the implementation of its mandate. A system is needed to more effectively
monitor and evaluate its impact, particularly when it comes to the protection of
civilians and ensuring unhindered humanitarian access. Further, the Mission should
more effectively convey its achievements to the public, the United Nations Security
Council, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, Member States and
the African Union and United Nations Headquarters. The review also found a strong
need for the Mission to improve, in conjunction with the United Nations country
team, its early warning and response mechanism, joint threat and risk analysis and
the coordination of protection of civilian activities more generally.
37. With regard to cooperation between the Mission and the United Nations
country team, there are several mechanisms for coordination or liaison. However,
while most facilitate consultations and some information exchange, there is little
joint decision-making on joint operational planning, the shared delivery of results
and the evaluation of activities of common interest. The review found that, for the
most part, the various UNAMID components and the United Nations country team
are doing what they consider best to fulfil the parts of the mandate that fall within
their areas of expertise. While there is some collaboration, the extent of that
collaboration is generally more dependent upon the people involved than on
effective and well-functioning systems of joint operational planning, coordination
and evaluation. In that regard, there is a need to streamline and make more actionoriented the coordination mechanisms between the two entities so that they facilitate
planning, joint action to deliver results and regular reporting and evaluation in line
with the United Nations policy on integrated assessment and planning.
38. As far as the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union in
the hybrid peacekeeping operation is concerned, UNAMID is an unprecedented
undertaking that brings with it several challenges and opportunities for both
organizations. One of the challenges facing the United Nations Secretariat and the
African Union Commission is the need to coordinate with one another on the
provision of joint strategic guidance to UNAMID. The review found that the Joint
Support and Coordination Mechanism, based in Addis Ababa, performs important
coordination, support and liaison functions effectively. The Mechanism also plays
an important role in raising awareness and enhancing the engagement of the Peace
and Security Council and African troop- and police-contributing countries in the
situation in Darfur and UNAMID operations.

V. Strategic options and recommendations
Revised strategic priorities
39. The political environment in and around the Sudan has changed since the
deployment of UNAMID. New conflict dynamics have emerged and old ones
remain unaddressed. In that context, the Mission’s strategic priorities in terms of
mandate implementation need to be revised to reflect the changing environment and

10/17

14-24520

S/2014/138

to increase its effectiveness in creating a more secure environment for the
population of Darfur.
40. Accordingly, three strategic priorities have been identified: (1) mediation
between the Government and non-signatory armed movements on the basis of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, while taking into account ongoing
transformation at the national level; (2) the protection of civilians, the facilitation of
the delivery of humanitarian assistance and the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel; and (3) the provision of support, in conjunction with the United Nations
country team, to the mediation of community conflict, including through measures
to address its root causes. The implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur relates to all three priorities, which need to be further defined on the basis of
an integrated conflict assessment. Decision-making on Mission activities must be
governed by those overarching priorities. Each is already provided for in the
mandate authorized by the Security Council in its resolution 2113 (2013). The
review found that the mandate remains appropriate for the requirements of
peacekeeping operations in Darfur.
Options and recommendations for improving the Mission’s effectiveness
41. The review concluded that there is a strong need and much potential for
UNAMID to improve across the full spectrum of its work if the key challenges to
mandate implementation are addressed. In that context, the review recommends a
range of measures to improve the Mission’s effectiveness in mandate
implementation.
42. While the implementation of the recommended measures must happen quickly
and as a matter of high priority, a period of time will be needed to allow them to
take effect and for the changes to be realized. In addition, more time is needed for
the Mission to fully adapt to and account for the new conflict dynamics and for the
recent and extensive changes to the Mission leadership to take full effect. The
review recommends that a period of one year following the Council’s consideration
of the findings be taken to implement the measures in order for the effects to be
seen.
43. During that time, efforts to address troop- and police-contingent shortcomings
would be redoubled so that the contingents fully meet the requirements set out in the
memoranda of understanding. The assistance of Member States is vital in that
regard. The African Union and United Nations Headquarters would increase their
engagement with troop- and police-contributing countries and their support to
UNAMID to help address the challenge. Improvements would lead to greater force
mobility and an expanded patrol footprint. Guidance for troops and police in
predeployment training and on convoy procedures, freedom of movement and
ambush drills would be strengthened. Coordination between the military, police and
civilian components and between the Mission and the United Nation country team
would be enhanced, in particular at the team site level. Capacity-building
requirements of Government police would be reviewed and UNAMID police
officers with commensurate skills would be deployed, as appropriate.
44. The Government of the Sudan would be called upon to build on the recent
improvements in cooperation with UNAMID with respect to implementation of the
mandate. Support from the Peace and Security Council of the African Union and the
Security Council would be requested to support host country partnership and

14-24520

11/17

S/2014/138

cooperation. Progress on that front would lead to more effective and increased
support from the Mission for building the capacity of police, corrections and judicial
institutions, as well as protection, including human rights monitoring. In the absence
of improvements, such support would be of limited effectiveness and be reduced
accordingly. Where freedom of movement to areas in crisis is denied, the Mission
would immediately send a comprehensive report to the African Union and United
Nations Headquarters immediately in order to ensure timely political engagement at
all levels. Mission personnel would do more to develop the working relations
needed to engage the authorities locally to address denials of access as and when
they arise.
45. Gaps in the integrated strategic and operational architecture of the Mission
would be addressed. To improve coordination between UNAMID and the United
Nations country team and enable both to achieve more than the sum of their parts,
the full requirements of the United Nations Policy on Integrated Assessment and
Planning would be put in place. That includes: (1) the articulation of a common
United Nations (and African Union) vision, including priorities and respective
responsibilities in support of peace consolidation; (2) the establishment of integrated
mechanisms for joint analysis, planning, coordination, monitoring and decisionmaking; and (3) the development and implementation of an updated integrated
strategic framework.
46. The Mission leadership and the Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator for the
Sudan, with the participation of the heads of agencies, funds and programmes,
would address and review the planning and implementation of strategic work. The
Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator would be the primary source of strategic
advice to the Joint Special Representative on all matters relating to humanitarian
assistance, recovery and development in Darfur.
47. The framework for African Union and United Nations facilitation of the Darfur
peace process would continue to guide the Mission’s efforts to increase the
inclusiveness of the political process. The Joint Chief Mediator would continue to
coordinate with the African Union High-level Implementation Panel and the United
Nations Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan to synchronize their
mediation efforts, while also taking into account ongoing transformation at the
national level. The United Nations Secretariat would assess separately, in
consultation with the Government of the Sudan, the feasibility and appropriateness
of providing United Nations support to national, state and local elections.
48. The findings and recommendations of the civilian staffing review requested by
the General Assembly in its resolution 66/264 would be aligned with the revised
strategic priorities and recommendations set out in the present report. Moreover, a
joint vision and strategy to enhance the coherence and effectiveness of UNAMID
and the work of the United Nations country team in support of the police,
corrections and judicial systems would be developed through the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and UNDP global focal point arrangement. UNAMID
would maintain a capacity to advise, in coordination with UNDP, the authorities and
armed movements on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration planning,
community arms control and regional arms control mechanisms. Additional capacity
would be mobilized, should the circumstances dictate, to support the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of LJM, JEM-Bashar or other armed groups. The
Mission would continue to oversee, in collaboration with UNDP where appropriate,

12/17

14-24520

S/2014/138

the implementation of community-based violence reduction projects for youth who
are at risk of joining armed groups or gangs.
Monitoring mechanism
49. An effective system that would monitor and evaluate the Mission’s
effectiveness in terms of mandate implementation is required in order to better track
the progress and measure the impact of its activities. The coordination of protection
of civilian activities would be strengthened and an early warning and response
mechanism established in conjunction with the United Nations country team. In that
context, military and police patrols would be prioritized according to “must
protect”, “should protect” and “could protect” areas.
50. I propose that the benchmarks outlined in my report of 16 October 2012
(S/2012/771) be adjusted to reflect the revised strategic priorities of the Mission.
That would provide a framework by which progress can be more meaningfully
measured in accordance with the strategic priorities for peace in Darfur and with the
Mission’s mandate. The fulfilment of those priorities requires the commitment of all
concerned, most notably the Government of the Sudan, local authorities and rebel
and community leaders. For UNAMID and its contributors, progress requires
attention to the operational and managerial challenges outlined in the present report.
Reporting to the Security Council should be structured in accordance with the
revised benchmarks, emphasizing the impact that the Mission’s activities have in
relation to each of the strategic priorities. The fulfilment of the benchmarks is not
exclusively tied to the proposed 12-month period, however. I recognize that more
time will be required. However, the measures taken to address the challenges facing
UNAMID will enable the Mission to work more effectively with its partners in
achieving them. As the situation evolves, the benchmarks will be refined as
necessary. The proposed benchmarks, with progress indicators, can be found in the
annex to the present report.
Scenarios
51.

After one year, the Security Council would be faced with three scenarios:

(a) The political and security situation has not changed and the Mission has
not improved its effectiveness, and a thorough assessment of the way forward
requiring hard decisions on the future of UNAMID will be necessary;
(b) The political and security situation has not changed but the Mission has
nevertheless measurably improved its effectiveness, and streamlining continues
within the civilian and uniformed components based on effectiveness;
(c) The political and security situation has improved and the Mission has
improved its effectiveness, in which case consideration should be given to
strengthening, accordingly, the peacebuilding and support to early recovery mandate
of the Mission.

VI. Conclusion
52. Eleven years since the rebellion began, the situation in Darfur remains deeply
troubling. The updated conflict analysis in the present report describes how new
dynamics have altered the nature of conflict in Darfur and significantly affected the

14-24520

13/17

S/2014/138

population. The assessment of existing Mission capacities points to a need for
UNAMID to adjust in response to the changes. At the same time, the assessment
highlights several key challenges that seriously constrain the Mission’s operational
effectiveness. I have therefore recommended a set of revised strategic priorities for
the Mission and a range of measures to address those challenges over the course of a
12-month period in order to enable their implementation and allow their effects to
be seen.
53. Taken together, the recommendations set out in the present report provide a
plan for a redoubled effort by UNAMID, the African Union Commission, the United
Nations Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries, the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union and the United Nations Security Council to improve
the Mission’s effectiveness. I urge the members of the Security Council to support
the recommendations as part of the collective effort to enable UNAMID to reach its
full potential. Despite the many challenges facing the Mission, it is making muchneeded contributions to the protection of civilians, facilitating the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and supporting the political process. The review sees the
potential for the Mission to have a greater impact. I call upon the members of the
Security Council to endorse the recommendations in the present report so that
UNAMID can more effectively assist the many civilians affected by violence,
insecurity and deprivation in Darfur.

14/17

14-24520

S/2014/138

Annex I
Proposed adjustment of benchmarks
Benchmark 1: Inclusive peace process through mediation between the
Government and non-signatory armed movements on the basis of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur
Requirements for progress would include a commitment on the part of the
Government of the Sudan and non-signatory movements to reach a comprehensive
negotiated political settlement to the conflict and adhere to its full and timely
implementation, and credible Darfur-based internal dialogue and consultations that
seek to reflect the views of the civilian population, including women, on Darfur in
the peace process.
Indicators
High-level mediation:
• The Government and the non-signatory movements enter into direct
negotiations brokered by the Joint African Union-United Nations Chief
Mediator for Darfur over an all-inclusive comprehensive settlement to the
Darfur conflict.
• The Government and the non-signatory movements conclude and observe a
comprehensive and inclusive cessation of hostilities.
• The outcomes of the Darfur peace process are reflected in a national
constitutional process supported by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel for the Sudan, as provided for in the framework for
African Union and United Nations facilitation of the Darfur peace process.
Darfur-based internal dialogue and consultations:
• Darfur-based internal dialogue and consultations take place in an inclusive and
transparent environment that ensures the proportional representation of
Darfuris and respect for the human rights of participants, as monitored by the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
• The outcomes of the Darfur-based internal dialogue and consultations are
widely disseminated and implemented in a manner that promotes and
consolidates peace and stability in Darfur.
• A functioning Darfur Regional Authority that oversees the implementation of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, in conjunction with the Government
of the Sudan.
Benchmark 2: Protection of civilians and unhindered humanitarian access and
the safety and security of humanitarian personnel
Requirements for progress would include the demonstrated commitment of the
parties to the conflict, including Government forces, non-signatory movements and
other armed groups, to cease hostilities and respect and implement ceasefire and
security arrangements; the demonstrated commitment of the parties to the conflict to
implement measures to protect civilians (or promote/respect human rights); the
demonstrated commitment of the parties to the conflict to allow unrestricted

14-24520

15/17

S/2014/138

humanitarian access; the willingness of local actors to facilitate the safe, voluntary
and sustainable return, reintegration or resettlement of internally displaced persons
and refugees; support by the international donor community for humanitarian
activities and, where appropriate, early recovery and rehabilitation; and the
commitment of the Government of the Sudan at the national and local levels to
improve the capacity of its security, judicial and penal institutions to promote and
protect human rights.
Indicators
Protection of civilians from imminent threats of physical violence:
• Civilians facing imminent threats of physical violence are protected by
UNAMID.
• Civilians at risk of physical attack, in particular women and children, carry out
livelihood activities safely and securely under UNAMID protection.
• Civilians receive emergency medical assistance from UNAMID, including
through evacuation to medical facilities, in extreme circumstances (i.e., when
humanitarian actors are unable to assist).
Protective environment:
• Security and stability (as indicated by an absence of serious crime or violent
conflict) for civilians within camps for internally displaced persons and
temporary settlements.
• Security and stability (as indicated by an absence of serious crime or violent
conflict) for civilians in areas outside of camps for internally displaced persons
and temporary settlements, including in particular in areas adjacent to camps.
• Reduction in the number of violent crimes against civilians.
• Reduction in human rights violations, including incidents of sexual and
gender-based violence, as recorded by UNAMID.
• Reduction in the use or recruitment of child soldiers by armed groups.
• Trials monitored by UNAMID are fair and in accordance with international
legal standards and practices.
• The prevalence of arms and armed actors is reduced through the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of combatants in accordance with the
provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
• Threats to civilians posed by unexploded ordnance are addressed through, inter
alia, the safe disposal of such materials and through risk awareness training.
Safe, timely and unhindered humanitarian access and safety and security for
humanitarian personnel:
• Humanitarian actors requesting UNAMID protection and other support are
able to conduct operations (e.g., aid delivery and distribution and needs
assessments) in a safe, timely and unhindered manner.
• Humanitarian actors and their property are safe and secure, in particular when
UNAMID protection is provided.

16/17

14-24520

S/2014/138

• Improved environment for the protection of civil and political rights, including
through the development of sustainable foundations for professional,
democratic policing and law enforcement.
• Parties to the conflict honour their commitments and international obligations
to combat all acts of sexual violence against women, men and children and put
an end to the recruitment and use of child soldiers.
Benchmark 3: Prevention or mitigation of community conflict through mediation
and, in conjunction with the United Nations country team, measures to address
its root causes
Requirements for progress would include willingness on the part of the authorities
and traditional community leaders to play a constructive role in resolving
intercommunal conflict peacefully; the provision of access to UNAMID to facilitate
mediation efforts; strengthened traditional conflict resolution mechanisms and
greater respect thereof; the inclusion of measures in reconciliation agreements to
address the root causes of intercommunal conflict; a willingness on the part of the
authorities and other parties to the conflict to fulfil their responsibilities with regard
to preventing or resolving intercommunal clashes; and the provision of access to the
United Nations country team to enable measures that address root causes related to
natural resources, recovery and reconstruction.
Indicators
• Dialogue between pastoralist and agriculturalist communities over peaceful
coexistence and shared access to natural resources, in particular prior to and
during the migration season.
• Interventions by the authorities and traditional community mediators,
facilitated by UNAMID, that prevent or resolve violent intercommunal
conflict.
• Dialogue between conflicting parties over local settlements to violent
intercommunal conflict.
• Conflicting parties enter into and adhere to local agreements that settle violent
intercommunal conflict.
• Reduction in the number of incidents of and new displacement resulting from
intercommunal conflict.
• Transitional justice mechanisms, including the National Human Rights
Commission, the Special Court for Darfur and the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, are established and operating in accordance with international
human rights standards and best practices.
• Improved access to justice through the adoption of measures aimed at
enhancing victims’ rights to truth, justice and remedy.

14-24520

17/17
