"Rule 99 A

"Article 99 A

"Any meeting of the General Assembly held in
pursuance of the Statute of the International Court
of Justice for the purpose of the election of members of the Court shall continue until as many candidates as are required for all the seats to be filled
have obtained in one or more ballots an absolute
majority of votes.",

"Toute seance de I' Assemblee generale tenue
conformement au Statut de Ja Cour internationale
de Justice pour proceder a !'election de membres
de la Cour se poursuivra jusqu'a ce que la majorite absolue des voix soit allee, en un ou plusieurs
tours de scrutin, a autant de candidats qu'il sera
necessaire pour que tous les sieges vacants soient
pourvus. ",
Decide:

Resolves:
1. To concur in the rule of procedure quoted
above;
2. To adopt the following rule of procedure:

1. D'approuver !'article susmentionne ;

2. D'adopter !'article suivant de son reglement interieur:

"CHAPTER XL RELATIONS WITH OTHER
UNITED NATIONS ORGANS

"CHAPITRE XI. RELATIONS AVEC LES AUTRES
ORGANES DE L'ORGANISATION DES NATIONS UNIES

"Rule 61

"Article 61

"Any meeting of the Security Council held in
pursuance of the Statute of the International Court
of Justice for the purpose of the election of members of the Court shall continue until as many
candidates as are required for all the seats to be
filled have obtained in one or more ballots an
absolute majority of votes." ;
Transmits this resolution to the General Assembly
for its information.

"Toute seance du Conseil de securite tenue conformement au Statut de la Cour internationale de
Justice pour proceder a !'election de membres de
la Cour se poursuivra jusqu'a ce que la majorite
absolue des voix soit allee, en un ou plusieurs tours
de scrutin, a autant de candidats qu'il sera necessaire pour que tous Jes sieges vacants soient pourvus.";
Transmet la presente resolution a l'Assemblee generale pour son information.

Adopted unanimously at the
138th meeting.

Adoptee a /'unanimite a la
138· seance.

33 (1947). Resolution of 27 August 1947

33_:(1947). Resolution du 27 aofit 1947

[S/5281

{S/528]

The Security Council

Le Conseil de securite

Resolves:

Decide:

1. That the sub-committee of the Committee of
Experts be instructed to negotiate with the General
Assembly's committee on procedure for its acceptance
of rule 58 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council as tentatively revised by the Committee of Experts, 31 and for its undertaking to effect
necessary accompanying changes in rules 113 and 117
(originally rule 116) of the provisional mles of procedure of the General Assembly as suggested by the
Committee of Experts ; and, if the negotiation is not
successful, to accept, on behalf of the Security Council,
the change in rule 58 as previously proposed by the
General Assembly committee ;

1. Que le sous-comite du Comite d'experts re':roive
pour instructions de negocier avec la commission de
procedure de l' Assemblee generale pour que cette
derniere accepte l'article 58 du reglement interieur
provisoire du Conseil de securite dans sa forme revisee
proposee par le Comite d'experts~ 1 et procede aux
modifications qui en resultent pour les articles 113 et
117 (anciennement 116) du reglement interieur provisoire de l'Assemblee generale proposees par le Comite
d'experts et, dans le cas ou les negociations n'aboutiraient pas, d'accepter au nom du Conseil de securite
la modification de l'article 58 deja proposee par la
commission de l' Assemblee generale ;

31 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplemeni No. 19, annex 44.

31 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
deuxieme annee, Supplement n• 19, annexe 44.

24

2. Que soient acceptees les recommandations suivantes du Comite d'experts relatives aux propositions
de la commission de l'Assemblee generale au sujet de
!'article 60 du reglement interieur provisoire du Conseil
de securite31 :
a) Refuser de substituer le mot "examine" au mot
·'decide";

2. That, as regards proposals made by the General
Assembly committee concerning rule 60 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, the
following recommendations of the Committee of
Experts 31 be accepted :
(a) That the change of the word "decide" to the
word "consider" in the first paragraph not be accepted;
(b) That the addition of two paragraphs as the
second and third paragraphs be accepted ;
(c) That the change of the word "recommendations"
from the plural to the singular be accepted ;
3. That the sub-committee of the Committee of
Experts be instructed to advise the General Assembly
committee that the proposed change in rule 114 and
the addition of a new rule 116 in the provisional rules
of procedure of the General Assembly are accepted.

b) Accepter d'ajouter deux paragraphes qui seraient
les deuxieme et troisieme de !'article ;
c) Mettre au singulier le mot "recommandation"
precedemment au pluriel [dans le texte anglaisl;
3. Que le sous-comite du Comite d'experts rec;oive
pour instructions de faire connaitre a la commission
de l'Assemblee generale que la modification proposee
pour !'article 114 et !'addition d'un article l lo nouveau au reglement interieur provisoire de l'Assemblee
generate sont acceptees.
Adoptee a la 197' seance

Adopted at the 197th meeting by 10 votes to none,
with J abstention (Australia).

par JO voix contre zero,
avec une abstention ( A 11stralie).

37 (1947). Resolution du 9 decembre 1947

37 (1947). Resolution of 9 December 1947
The Security Council
Decides to include in its rules of procedure the
following revised rules :

CHAPTER

X. -

Le C onseil de securite
Decide d'inclure dans son reglement interieur les
nouveaux articles suivants :

ADMISSION OF NEW MEMBERS

CHAPITRE

X. -

ADMISSION DE NOUVEAUX MEMBRES

"Rule 58

"Article 58

"Any State which desires to become a Member
of the United Nations shall submit an application
to the Secretary-General. This application shall
contain a declaration made in a formal instrument
that it accepts the obligations contained in the
Charter.
"Rule 59

"Tout Etat qui desire devenir Membre de l'Organisation presentc une demande au Secretaire general.
Cette demande doit contenir une declaration, faite
dans un instrument formel, par laquelle cet Etat
acccpte Ies obligations de la Charte.

[Text unchanged.]

[Texte sans changement.]

"Rule 60

"Article 60

"The Security Council shall decide whether in its
judgement the applicant is a peace-loving State and
is able and willing to carry out the obligations
contained in the Charter, and accordingly whether
to recommend the applicant State for membership.

"Le Conseil de securite decide si, a son jugcment,
l'Etat qui sollicite son admission est un Etat pacifique, capable de remplir les obligations de la Charte
et dispose a le faire et s'il convient, en consequence,
de recommander !'admission de cet Etat a l'Asscmblee generale.
"Si le Conseil de securite recommande !'admission
de l'Etat qui a presente la demande, il transmet a
l'Assemblee generale sa recommandation accompagnee d'un compte rendu complet des debats.
"Si le Conseil de securite ne recommande pas
!'admission de I'Etat qui a presente la demande ou
remet a plus tard l'examen de cettc demande, il
presente a l'Assemblee generate un rapport special
accompagne d'un compte rendu complet des debats.

"Article 5 9

"If the Security Council recommends the applicant State for membership, it shall forward to the
General Assembly the recommendation with a complete record of the discussion.
"If the Security Council does not recommend the
applicant State for membership or postpones the
consideration of the application, it shall submit a
special report to the General Assembly with a
complete record of the discussion.

25
