UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
UN LIBRARY
THIRTY-FIRST

1889

YEAR

th
MEETING: 18 FEBRUARY 1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/ Agenda/ 1889) ................. ; . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Communications from France and Somalia concerning the incident of 4 February 1976:
(a) Letter dated 4 February 1976 from the Permanent Representative of France
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11961);
(h) Letter dated 5 February 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Somalia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 11969) ....................... . .................... . : . . . .

1

S/PV.1889

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ ... ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1889th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 18 February 1976, at 11 a.m.
President: Mr. Daniel P. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America).
Present: The representatives of the following
States: Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan,
Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1889)

l.

Adoption of the agenda.

2.

Communications from France and Somalia concerning the incident of 4 February 1976:
(a) Letter dated 4 February 1976 from the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/11961);
(b) Letter dated 5 February 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Somalia to the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/11969).

The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m.
Adoption of the Agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Communications from France and Somalia concerning
the incident of 4 February 1976:
(a) Letter dated 4 February 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11961);
(b) Letter dated 5 February 1976 from the Permanent
representative of Somalia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11969)

I. The PRESIDENT: If I hear no objection, I shall
invite the representative of 5':>malia to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hussen (Somalia) took a place at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT: In addition, I should like to
inform the members of the Council that I have received a letter from the Permanent Representative of
Ethiopia in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion. Accordingly, I propose that
the Council agree, in accordance with the usual practice, to invite the representative I have just mentioned to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote.
3. There being no objection, I invite the representative of Ethiopia to take the place reserved for him
at the side of the Council chamber, on the usual
understanding that he will be invited to take a place
at the Council table whenever he wishes to address
the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ibrahim
(Ethiopia) took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT: Before the Council commences its consideration of the item just inscribed on
its agenda, I should like to inform members of the
Council that this morning I received a letter from the
representative of Somalia in which he confirms the
oral request made to me yesterday for the convocation of this meeting of the Council. This latest letter
will be circulated in the course of the meeting in document S/ll987.

5. Since receipt of the two letters inscribed on the
agenda, dated 4 and 5 February respectively, the
following additional -communications on this subject
have been received from the representatives of
France and Somalia: that in document S/11965, a note
verbale dated 5 February from the representative of
Somalia addressed to the Secretary-General; that in
document S/11974, a letter dated IO February from
the representative of Soinalia addressed to the President of the Security Council; that in document
S/1 l 977 and Corr. I and Add. I, a letter dated 11 February from the representative of France addressed to
the President of the Security Council and, finally,
that in document S/11979, a letter dated 13 February
from the representative of Somalia addressed to the
President of the Council.
6. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation
from French): The Council will recall that on 4 February the French delegation, acting on instructions

from its Government, addressed to you, Mr. President, a letter contained in document S/11961, in
which it informed you that a serious incident had on
that day occurred at the post of Loyada, situated on
the frontier between the French Territory of the
Afars and the Issas and the Somali Republic. French
forces which were engaged in freeing a bus in which
30 children were being held hostage were fired on by
heavy weapons from the Somali territory. They were
obliged to react in order to protect themselves and
the children. On the instructions of my Government,
I requested you to convene a meeting of the Security
Council as a matter of extreme urgency for the purpose of considering that serious incident. However,
since the incident did not lead to any immediate consequences, and since the situation on the scene returned to normal, we felt it was not necessary for the
Council to convene immediately. In the consultations which you initiated, we did, however, specify
that we reserved the right to ask you to act on our
request if circumstances should so require.

cements brought in by helicopter. Before even revealing their intentions the four terrorists demanded that
the bus be driven to the middle of the no man's land,
to a point midway between the two posts. They
threatened to kill the children if their demand was
not met, and they fired several warning shots inside
the vehicle to show their determination. As soon as
their demand was accepted, they forced the bus
driver, again threatening him with their weapons, to
place the bus some IO or 15 metres from the Somali
barrier, which is located right on the frontier and
parallel to it.
11. The terrorists then revealed the conditions, which
were political in nature, under which they would free
the children. They stated that if their demands were
rejected the children would not only be executed but
" their throats would be cut" . At the end of the morning of 3 February , Abdullahi Hadj Archi, who calls
himself the Vice-President of the FLSC, an organization whose headquarters is in Mogadiscio, claimed
that his movement was responsible for the kidnapping
of the 30 children. Also in Mogadiscio, another official of the FLSC confirmed to a correspondent of
Radio Monte Carlo the political demands of the kidnappers.

7. On 5 Rebruary, the Somali delegation, noting an
alleged agression committed by French forces against
the post of Loyada, brought the details of the matter
before the Council in a letter circulated in document
S/11969. On IO February, in a letter circulated in
document S/11974, that same delegation repeated its
accusation and furnished a list of Somali nationals
allegedly killed or wounded during the incident of
4 February.

12. Anxious to avoid any bloodshed, the French
authorities endeavoured to negotiate. The French
Minister for Foreign Affairs immediately requested
the Ambassador of Somalia in Paris to intervene with
his Government out of humanitarian considerations.
Furthermore, on 3 February the French Ambassador
in Mogadiscio asked to be received by Mr. Omar
Arteh, the Minister for Foreign Affairs. For 48 hours
he was unable to make any contact with the Somali
Government. It was not until 5 February at 7 p.m.
that he finally was able to see Mr. Arteh.

8. The French delegation rejects absolutely the
accusation of aggression. In order to dispel any ambiguity, it deems it necessary to present a detailed
account of the facts of the incident in question.
9. On Tuesday, 3rd February, at 7 a.m., four armed
terrorists claiming to be members of the Front for the
Liberation of the Somali Coast [FLSC], seized in a
suburb of Djibouti 30 children from 6 to 12 years of
age who were on board a school bus. They made an
adult charged with accompanying the children get off
the bus and forced the driver, by threatening him with
their weapons, to run through a police barrier and
head for the Somali frontier. As the alarm had been
given, among others by the person accompanying
the children, police forces immediately set out in
pursuit of the vehicle, b"ut it proved impossible for
them to catch up with it as the kidnappers were firing
at them with automatic weapons.

13. Throughout the day on 3 February the French
authorities who had arrived on the scene from Djibouti tried in vain to establish a dialogue with the four
terrorists in the school bus. The -latter demanded
that the Secretary-General of the FLSC be present;
failing that, they seemed to be awaiting the arrival of
other officials of the movement.
14. On the morning of 4 February the Somali Consul
in Djibouti, who had spent the night at the Somali
frontier post, brought before the French officials
following the situation at some distance from the bus
three messengers from the FLSC who he said had
arrived from Hargueissa. The messengers ·handed
over to those officials a typewritten list recapitulating
the political demands of the terrorists in more or less
the same terms as they had been formulated by the
kidnappers and repeated by the spokesmen of the
FLSC in Mogadiscio. They specified that the French
Government had 24 hours to comply , or else the children would be executed.

10. The road from the spot where the terrorists
seized the bus to the Somali frontier is about 15 kilometres long and in bad condition. Before the school
bus was able to reach the French frontier post, the
personnel guarding the post were able to place a car
across the road. This car was placed in front of a barrier leading to a no-man's land under French sovereignty separating the French post from the Somali
post about 250 metres away. The bus was thus forced
to stop and was immediately surrounded by reinfor-

15 . When he was asked to intervene as a mediator
and for humanitarian reasons , the Consul refused

2

It is also untrue that the French forces abducted

outright, saying that the matter concerned only
France and the FLSC and that he did not wish to be
involved in any way.

Somali customs officials or civilians. No one was
taken prisoner. However, when the children were
brought back to Djibouti, it was discovered that one
of them was missing. It was eventually established
that he had been taken across the frontier after the bus
had been brought up close to it.

16. The French authorities were prepared to let the
terrorists cross over into Somali territory if they
released the children, but at no time did the kidnappers seem ready to accept that offer. Furthermore,
the messengers who had come from Hargueissa
joined the terrorists in maintaining an armed guard
over the bus and the children.

21. The child was held for several days in northern
Somalia by terrorists who claimed to belong to the
FLSC. Fortunately, he was returned on 7 February
to the French Ambassador in Somalia, and we are
pleased to express our appreciation for the positive
contribution of the Somali authorities in securing the
child's return.

17. On the afternoon of Wednesday, 4 February,
the children·s plight was growing more and more
serious and their lives seemed gravely threatened by
the behaviour of the terrorists, who appeared increasingly nervous. The French authorities decided
to take action. Troops were ordered to take up the
appropriate positions. Infantry and light armoured
cars were arranged around the French post, approximately 200 metres from the school bus. Sharpshooters brought in specially from France were
posted under palm trees in front of the post, about
180 metres from the bus.

22. If Somali civilians were killed or wounded
during the brief encounter between French forces and
the accomplices of the terrorists stationed on Somali
territory, the French authorities regret if Undoubtedly, those persons were, unfortunately for them,
mixed in with armed elements positioned around the
Somali .frontier post and in the small wood nearby,
positions from which the French forces were attacked
by rifle artd machine-gun fire. They are the victims of
that attack and of the response which necessarily
followed . France rejects any accusation of aggression in this regard.

18. At exactly 3.45 p.m., five marksmen fired simultaneously and killed four terrorists whose silhouettes
were visible in the bus and a fifth who was on the
ground behind the bus. A sixth terrorist then rushed
from the Somali post; he reached the bus almost at
the same time as two French soldiers who had run up
from the palm grove to free the children . The sixth
terrorist managed to fire a machine-gun volley at the
children who had instinctively lain down inside the
bus; he killed one and wounded five others as well as
a social worker and the bus driver before being killed
himself by one of the soldiers .

23. While we are meeting here, talks are under way,
through a third party, to restore the atmosphere of
dctente between France and Somalia which is necessary for a constructive dialogue to develop between
our two countries on subjects of common interest.
The French Government wants nothing other than
relations of friendship and good neighbourliness with
Somalia. We, for our part, are prepared at any time
to enter into any talks the authorities in Mogadiscio
may desire.

19. In the seconds which followed those shots,
while the French soldiers rushed up from the palm
grove to save the children, two rapid-fire automatic
weapons opened fire from a small wood located in
Somali territory to the east of the frontier post. Also
at that same moment, several marksmen on the balconies of the Somali frontier post fired at the French
soldiers. A French lieutenant was severely wounded.
The French forces naturally returned the fire. In a
few minutes they silenced the two automatic weapons
and the marksmen on the balconies.

24. My delegation has no doubt that all members
of the Council will wish to help France and Somalia
restore between themselves harmonious relations
consistent with the interests of all States in the area.
25. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Somalia, on whom I now call.
26. Mr. HUSSEN (Somalia): Mr. President, my
delegation is grateful to you and to the other members
of the Council for responding promptly to our reque'it
for this meeting and for giving us the opportunity to
place before the Council the complaint of the Somali
Democratic Republic.

20. It cannot seriously be claimed that the French
forces attacked the village of Loyada, as is stated in
the Somali letter in document S/11969; the French
forces merely responded to fire directed at them by
troops in position on the Somali side of the frontier.
It is equally false to claim that "all the buildings" of
Loyada were destroyed. Eyewitnesses have been
able to ascertain that the village is still standing and
suffered no damage; this can be seeen from the aerial
photographs which are being distributed (S/ / /988]
and which were taken on 6 February from a helicopter
from the French Territory of the Afars and the Issas.

27. I should like at the outset to make a few remarks
about the reasons which. led me, more than once, to
request the postponement of the Council's meeting
regarding the complaint of the Somali Democratic
Republic against France.
28. In the first place, my Government decided to
conduct a thorough investigation of the Loyada inci3

dent by sending a high-ranking governmental inquiry
commission, which was on the scene from 5 to 7 February.
29. Secondly, as I indicated in my official note to the
President of the Council dated 11 February [S/ / /979],
my Government was approached by a third State
which offered its good offices with respect to the dispute between the two parties. Having regard to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and specifically to the provisions of Article 33, my Government welcomed the offer and
promptly accepted it in principle.
30. In the absence of any encouraging signs of
progress within a reasonable time-limit and also
taking into account the increasing tension in the area
following the Loyada incident, my Government has
finally decided to renew its request for a meeting of
the Council as a matter of urgency. However, my
Government wishes to inform the Council of its readiness to agree to any initiatives towards any serious
and meaningful negotiations.
31. Having said this, I shall now address myself to
the merits of the matter before the Council.
32. Members will recall that I appeared before the
Council only a few weeks ago when it had before it
the question of France's violation of the territorial
integrity of the newly independent State of the Republic of the Comoros and of France's interference in
its internal affairs. In my statement during the debate
on the Comoros [/8861/i 111eeti11g], I drew the attention
of the Council to the fact that a powerful State, itself
a member of the Security Council and as such a guardian of international peace and security. was threatening ·and intimidating a small nation. I am now
obliged to repeat a similar grave complaint against
France with regard to its actions against my country.
33. In essence, Somalia's complaint is that on 4 February, French troops supported by armoured ~ars.
positioned along the border of French Somahland
and the Somali Democratic Republic. launched an
unprovoked attack on the Somali Customs Post and
village of Loyada. The French arm~d units op~ned
intensive fire and crossed the border mto the territory
of the Somali Democratic Republic. People on the
Somali side were fired upon indiscriminately and, as
a result of the vicious attack. 15 men. women and
children were killed and 14 others wounded, some of
them very seriously.

check point, pursued by a number of military vehicles. When the bus came whithin about IO metres of
the frontier line, but within French Somaliland territory, it came to a halt. French military personnel, all
fully armed, were observed taking up positions around
the bus. In the background were a number of French
armoured cars.
36. From inquiries they made. officials in the Loyada
Customs Post on the Somali side learned that the bus
contained French school children and that the vehicle
had been hijacked by some members of the Front for
the Liberation of the Somali Coast.
37. When reports of the incident reached Mogadiscio the same day, the Somali Government instructed the Somali Consul in Djibouti to offer his
good offices to ensure that no harm came to the children and that they would be released. Accordingly,
the Somali Consul proceeded to Loyada that same
afternoon with the knowledge and co-operation of
the French authorities. At Loyada he contacted the
kidnappers but was told that they would not enter
into any negotiations in the absence of their leaders .
Accordingly. the Somali Consul sent an urgent message to Magadiscio and in response to his request
three FLCS emissaries arrived at Loyada from Hargueissa at I o'clock in the morning of 4 February.
The Consul immediately informed the French authorities of their arrival, and they were permitted to
approach the bus. Although the emissaries could not
obtain the immediate release of the children. they did
succeed in persuading the kidnappers to allow the
children to receive food and drink. medicine and
other comforts such as blankets.
38. The Somali Consul returned to Djibouti on the
morning of 4 February. encouraged by the successful
contact which had been made with the kidnappers.
He was hopeful that the children would be released
unharmed in due course. He urged the French authorities not to take precipitate action. as a high-level delegation would leave Mogadiscio by air that day · and
would arrive at Loyada in the afternoon to secure the
children's release. The delegation would be · led by
the Director-General of the Ministry of the Interior,
and he would be accompanied by one of the top
leaders of the liberation movement FLCS.

34. I shall now give in detail the facts relating to that
incident.

39. During the course of the morning of 4 February.
contacts between the FLCS emissaries and the
French authorities on the spot continued. It should
be noted that the customs police played no part in the
negotiations. However. they were able to keep the
regional headquarters at Hargueissa informed of their
observations through radio communication.

35. On the morning of 3 February. the occupants of
the Loyada Customs Post became aware ofa considerable commotion at the French check point located
about 250 metres from the border. Shots were heard
and eventually a bus was seen approaching the Somali

40. Nothing untoward happened in the vicinity of
the bus during the morning, although it was apparent
to the Loyada customs personnel that the French
authorities had brought considerable military reinforcements into the area. Although the terrain .in this

4

area is flat, the customs building provided a good
observation post because of the view offered from
the second-floor terrace.
41. The Loyada customs personnel consisted of a
civilian Director of Customs and IO customs policemen. There were no members of the Somali army at
the post, neither were there any Somali military establishments in the area.
·

42. While the customs staff awaited the arrival of
t~e high-level delegation from Mogadiscio, they contmued with their routine duties. At approximately
3.30 p.m. the quiet of the afternoon was broken by
the shattering sound of rifle, machine-gun and mortar
fire. The customs post found itself the target of an
intensive attack by the French armed units. Within
a matter of seconds two of the customs personnel,
including the Director, were killed instantly on the
terrace. They had been sitting there and were unarmed. Three other customs policemen in the customs compound were also hit and killed when machinegun fire raked the building. The initial burst of firing
did not last long. Within minutes the customs building
and compound were occupied by French legionnaires
accompanied by armoured cars. They fanned out in
all directions, firing intermittently, and made for the
bus as well as for Loyada village, which is located
about 100 metres behind the customs building. When
this bloody massacre was over, it was revealed that
the French troops had killed 15 innocent Somali citizens arn;i wounded 14 others. The authorities in Modagiscio did not learn of the attack, the radio transmitter having been destroyed.

independence in conditions of peace and harmony
becomes more remote as each day passes ...
45. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
of France on a point of order.
46. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation
from French): l should like to recall that the iCem on
our agenda is the incident on the border between the
French Territory of the Afars and the Issas and Somalia. I would request the representative of Somalia
to confine himself to that subject and not to enter into
considerations of France's policies pertaining to the
Territory of the Afars and the Issas, a subject which
falls. within French national sovereignty and which is
not on today's agenda.
47. The PRESIDENT: I ask the representative of
Somalia to remember the agenda we are discussing ..
48. Mr. HUSSEN (Somalia): I listened with attention to the statement just made by the French representative on a point of order. I should like to draw
the attention of the Council to the fact that what I am
trying to explain here is something which relates to
the peace and security of the area, and, as I said a
few minutes ago, the incident of Loyada cannot be
separated from its basic cause, which was the objective of the aggression itself. Therefore, I believe that
I am within my rights and within the scope of the item
on the agenda. With your permission, Mr. President,
I should like to continue my statement and also beg
of you not to allow me to be interrupted when I am
speaking.

49. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
43. No doubt members of the Council are
wonof France.
dering, after what I just said regarding the Loyada
incident, why France should have acted so brutally
50. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation
and in such an extreme manner. Taken in isolation,
from French): l cannot agree with what has just been
the acts of aggression may appear incomprehensible . . said by the representative of Somalia. As long as he
But those who have been following closely the trend
keeps to the Loyada incident, I shall listen to him with
of events in the region, and in particular in French
the greatest attention, as I have been doing since the
Somaliland during recent years, will undoubtedly
beginning of his statement. But I cannot agree that
recognize that the Loyada incident cannot be viewed
at this meeting of Council, which is devoted to the
in a vacuum. The incident was just one part of a systeLoyada incident, the representative of Somalia
matic plan by France to strengthen and perpetuate
should mention problems which are a matter of the
French political and strategic interests in the region,
domestic policy of the French Territory of the Afars
regardless of whether or not the territory would
and the lssas and which more generally come under
accede to independence.
the global question of decolonization. That is not on
the agenda today. I am ready to talk about it some
other time if the representative of Somalia so wishes.
44. France is aware that the international commuI am prepared to talk about it in the Council; I am
nity is opposed to colonial policies, be they in Fre~ch
prepared to talk about it with him directly; but I canSomaliland or elsewhere, and to the methods being
not concede that this subject should be brought
employed to give expression to those policies: This
before the Council at a time when we are having a
has been made abundantly clear ·by the General
debate which is limited to a frontier incident at Loyada.
Assembly, by the Organi~ation of African. Unity and
by the non-aligned movement. Y~t, despite ap~e~ls
51. The PRESIDENT: While we all recognize that
from those regional and world bodies, French pohc1es
there is a certain latitude in discussions in the Counin the territory continue -unchanged. · Those policies
cil, the item on the agenda is, I think, clear. I referred
have caused so much bitterness, injustice and· sufto the original letter from the representative of Sofering that the likelihood of that territory achieving

5

unconditional independence to the people of the
French Territory of the Afars and the lssas, has
nothing to do with the Loyada incident, which was
caused by the abduction of a school bus containing
30 children and by the activities of terrorists who were
trying to take possession of those children. I request
the representative of Somalia to be good enough to
keep to the subject, which is a discussion of the
Loyada incident.

malia, which does confine itself pretty much to the
attack in question. I would therefore ask the representative of Somalia to try to keep within the framework of the agenda for this meeting.
52. Mr. HUSSEN (Somalia): Mr. President, while
I thank you very much for your statement, I would
again insist that what I am trying to say is within the
wider context of the item on which I have asked for
a debate here. I am sure that if the Council will allow
me to proceed to the latter part of my statement, it
will realize that what I have been saying is within the
context of the aggression against which I am complaining. As I said earlier, the aggression did not take
place in a vacuum; there must have been some basis
for it. What I am trying to do is explain to the Council
the basis reason for the occurrence of the incident.
I would therefore appeal to the Council to allow me
to proceed with my statement. I strongly believe that
I am speaking within the area of the subject under
discussion.
·
53.

60. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan Arab Republic): I think it
is clear that it is very difficult to separate the incident
in Loyada from the political situation in the territory.
I believe it is appropriate for the representative of
Somalia to give the Council the political background
of that incident. I therefore appeal to the representative of France to allow the representative of Somalia
to continue his statement.
61. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation
from French): I am very surprised by the statement
just made by our colleague of the Libyan Arab Republic. I am astonished that he should consider that
the abduction of 30 children in a school bus could be
justified by any kind of political situation. No political
situation can justify the abduction of children or
blackmail with threats of murdering or cutting the
throats of 30 children. If the representative of Libya
meant that such things could be justified by a political
situation, I take note of that.

I await your ruling, Mr. President.

54. The PRESIDENT: I am sure that the Council
has taken note of the objection raised by the representative of France. As I stated earlier, there is a
certain latitude in Council debates. I would suggest,
however, that the representative of Somalia speak
without prejudice to our agreed agenda.
55.

62. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan Arab Republic) (interpretation from French): I think it will be difficult for us
to understand what happened in French Somaliland
if we do not take into account the general political
and historical situation. The Libyan delegation did
not say that the political situation justified the incident. However, in order for us to be able to understand clearly and give our views on that incident, we
have to study the whole problem and not merely take
into account an isolated incident, using it for purposes
of political propaganda against liberation movements
in general and the liberation movements of French
Somaliland in particular. What our colleague from
Somalia is going to say will perhaps help us to understand.

I now call on the representative of Somalia.

56. Mr. HUSSEN (Somalia): From what I have
said regarding the Loyada incident, members of the
Council will realize that France is aware that the
international community is opposed to colonial policies be they in French Somaliland or elsewhere, and
to the methods being used to give expression to those
policies.
'
57. It may be recalled that on 5 Decem?~r last year
President Mohamed Siad Barre, Samaha s head of
State appealed to the President of France to grant
inmediate and unconditional independenc~ to the
people of the territory. He called the attent10n of the
President of France, and the attention of all African
States, to the tense situation which had developed_ in
the territory as a result o~ the harsh_ and oppressive
measures being systematically earned out by the
local administration ...

63. I never said that the political situation justified
the abduction of the children.
64. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania):
I think the ruling given by the President was a wise
one; he said that our colleague from Somalia should
continue ..with his statement, without prejudice to the
item on the agenda. In other words, it gives him sufficient latitude to say certain things without going into
the details of the problem. I think it would be unfortunate if we were now to start a discussion on whether
or not our Somali colleague should continue .with his
statement. I think that the wiser course of action would
be to ensure that there should not be undue . interrup·
tions, and I should like to appeal to my colleague

58. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
of France on a point of order.
59 Mr. de GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation
·. ·,,, French): I am obliged flatly to oppose the repre/ '"
· g 1~
· a d'1scuss10n
. o f t he
·sentative
of Somalia's e~gagm_
. nsiderations that he 1s begmnmg to develop. The
t~egram which the President of the Republic of
Se m·ilia sent to the President of France, requesting
t h~,t 'the French Government give immediate and
6

from France, as well as to our colleague from Somalia,
in this regard.

which I am now complaining. Therefore, having
thanked the members of the Council I shall proceed
from where I had been stopped.

65. We have here two complaints. What the Council
is seized of is not just the question of the incident of
the kidnapping. The question of the kidnapping is a
complaint made by our colleague from France; that is
the first letter. But we have also a letter from the
Somali Government complaining about French
aggression against Somalia; that is the second letter.
If the representative of Somalia is to be able to explain
his position, I think it would not be realistic if he
could not make any reference whatsoever to what
he considers to be the source of the problem.

72.

It may be racalled that on 5 December ...

73. The PRESIDENT: I ask pardon of the representative of Somalia, as the representative of France
has asked to be allowed to speak ..
74. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation
from French): l do not want to prolong the discussion
pointlessy.
75. Our distinguished colleague from Tanzania
quite rightly pointed out that today's debate was not
a debat about decolonization or the political situation
in the French Territory of the Afars and the lssas,
but a debate confined to to Loyada incident. He
appealed to our colleague from Somalia to remain
· within these confines, with a certain latitude-and
I willingly concede that there can be a certain latitude....'.and I have every confidence in the representative of Somalia and feel sure that he will remain
within the limits of this reasonable latitude. If he
exceeds those limits, then I shall reserve my right to
react to what he says.

66. I appeal to my colleague from Somalia not to
use the forum of the Council to go into the details of
the question of the conditions in so-called French
Somaliland, because we do not want to discuss the
decolonization of French Somaliland in the Council.
But I think it would be a little unfair to expect that
the representative of Somalia should not say anything
about what in his Government's view led to the circumstances now prevailing.
67. I would go further and say that precedents in
the Council, when discussing issues which are perhaps
confined to specific incidents, have permitted members of the Council sufficient latitude to make statements which could be considered even irrelevant. It
was in that context that I thought the ruling made by
the President of the Council was sufficiently flexible
to allow the Council to go on.

76. The PRESIDENT: I call attention to the informative fact that the representative of Somalia has a
text from which he is reading to us, and I would
assume he wishes to read his text. In the absence of
any strong feeling to the contrary, I simply would say
that it will thereafter be altogether the right of the representative of France or any other member of the
Council to reply in as much detail as he may desire.

68. The PRESIDENT: I call to the attention of the
Council that the presidency has ruled and that the
representative of Somalia is free to continue his
statement, which I trust he will do in the spirit which
my colleague from Tanzania has just described.

77. With that ruling, I would like to ask the representative of Somalia to resume his presentation.

70. Mr. HUSSEN (Somalia): I should like to express
my gratitude and thanks to you, Mr. President, and
to the representative of the Libyan Arab Republic
and my brother the representative of Tanzania for
their interventions. And now, with your permission,
I shall continue and I hope that the French representative also will accede to the appeal made to him ty
various colleagues.

78. Mr. HUSSEN (Somalia): It may be recalled
that, on 5 'december of last year, President Mohamed
Siad Barre, Somalia's head of state, appealed to the
President of France to grant immediate and unconditional independence to the people of the territory. He
called his attention, and the attention of all African
States, to the tense situation which had developed in
the territory as a result of the harsh and oppressive
measures being systematically carried out by the local
administraton against the population of the territory.

71. I should like to add before I continue that, as
quite rightly observed by the members of the Council,
it is very difficult to separate the item on the agenda
from the background of that item. I think that if we go
back to the main issues of aggression we shall find that
most aggressions have a political motivation. Therefore it is very difficult, I maintain, to separate an
aggression as such from the cause of the aggression,
which is primarily of a political nature. It is in that
light that I thought it would be of interest to the Council to give the background of the aggression about

79. On 26 January of this year, President Barre.
disturbed that the situation in the territory was rapidly
deteriorating, serit another urgent telegram. this time
to Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim [S/ 1/965 ). again
drawing attention to the· dangerous situation reigning
in the territory.In particular, he noted the detcrn1ination of France to install a puppet Government and
ignore the wishes of the majority of the people. in
order to preserve and safeguard its strntegk interests
in the area. The Somali President further informed the
Secretary-General that the territory's opposition

69.

I call on the representative of Somalia.

7

parties and liberation movements were being subjected to constant harassment, arrest and torture.
President Barre also added that other oppressive
measure s . such as deportations and house-to-house,
searches, which had become almost a daily exercise,
had brought about a state of increasing tension and
explosive emergency situation.

on the Somali side of the border during the incident
belonged to the French forces who crossed into
Somali territory. It should also be pointed out that
there were at least nine French armoured cars in the
area, and not two as shown on the map just mentioned. We must also reject the assertion that the
Somali Consul in Djibouti did not co-operate with
the French authorities. As we have shown, he did
whatever he could under the circumstances . and
exerted evey possible effort on behalf of the children.
It is therefore a matter of regret that the French
authorities failed to appreciate the efforts he made.

80. The situation described by the Somali head of
State has become even more inflamed in the past few
weeks because of a series of outrages and actions of
the most provocative kind carried out by the colonial
authorities in French Somaliland. These actions have
been directed against the local population and, in
particular, against those who are demanding true
national independence for the territory free from the
military provisions which the French Government is
manreuvring to establish. A most notable example of
this kind of action was the complete destruction of the
shanty-town of Balbala, in the suburbs of Djibouti
city , and the subsequent expulsion from the territory
of the majority of its inhabitants. Numbering several
thou'>c1nd'> , and including women and .children, those
unfortunc1tc perc,ons were loaded on trucks and
dumped c1t remote parts of the frontier to fend for
thcm '> <.:l vc s in the desert. Reports from reliable source s i1ffirm th<1t many died in the course of this inhuman
riperi1tion . ·r hi'> c,tcp was embarked upon by French
c:,il,,nic1I troop<, and gendarmes under the pretext of
c.:<1rrying out what the French authorities call a birth
c.:crtificatc check-up. In this respect I should like to
draw the attention of members of the Council to the
photographs attached to my statement; I hope they
have been distributed [S/ / /989). Picture number 5
shows some of the people to whom I have just referred. It is no coincidence that the kidnapping of
the French school children was carried out immediately after that atrocious action of the French colonial
authorities. ·

83. My delegation cannot allow to pass without
comment the double standard of the French delegation
with regard to human life. Its statement emphasized,
on the one hand, the meticulous care the French
marksmen allegedly took when rescuing the French
schoolchildren and, on the other hand, dismissed, in
a matter-of-fact way, the indiscriminate killing of
Somali women and children. Those women and children were not, as has been alleged by the French
delegation, killed near any armed elements but were
shot down either when they were in their homes or
when they were fleeing for safety in the nearby bushes.
84. In this connexion it is also significant to recall
the statement reportedly .made by the French Minister for Overseas Territories, Mr. Olivier Stirn, who
on 4 February described the death toll in the assault
as "tragic" but justified it by saying that it saved
the lives of the children. This is indeed a clear admission on the part of the French Government that the
indiscriminate killing of Somali citizens at Loyada
was not an accident but part of a preconceived and
preplanned deliberate project.
85. I trust it is quite clear to all that the French Government is trying to cover up its own responsibility
for the high casualties suffered among the women
and children as a result of the reckless and precipitate
action of the legionnaires and gendarmes. It is also
trying to cover up the facts of its unprovoked armed
aggression against Somali territory and Somali citizens .

8 I. It is necessary for my delegation to give its
observations on some of the grave distortions of fact
concerning the Loyada incident presented by the
French delegation in document S/11977 and Corr. I.
The French assertion that it was Somali armed forces
which instigated the Loyada incident is completely
untrue. As already stated, there were. no Somali military units in the area. All the evidence shows that the
occupants of the customs post and the people in the
vicinity were completely unprepared for the French
attack. They had never considered they would be in
any way involved or become the victims of the measures taken by the French authorities in connexion
with the kidnapping incident.

86. The credibility of the French Government's
account of this matter is currently being challenged
in articles in a number of the leading newspapers in
France written by well-known journalists who visited
the scene of the aggression. They provide su.bstantial
evidence that the account my delegation has given
here is a true one. It is clear from these reports that
the French schoolchildren in the bus were killed or
wounded by shots fired by . French troops on the
French side of the border. They also provide evidence
which substantiates the charge of the Somali Government that French armed units crossed the border into
Somali territory, . killing defenceless people and
causing damage to property . . .
:, · ·

82. My delegation must point our the further distor:~
tions of fact contained in the map attached to document SI I I 977 and Corr. I. There were, in fact, no
marksmen on the hakonies of the Loyada customs
post, or, for that mailer, anywhere else in the area;
nor were there mac.:hine-gun ~ in !he possession of any
of t h·e <.:ll'>t,irn'> policemen. Any machine-guns fired

87. For example, Le Monde of 12 Febru~ry- ~lated
that the versions successively offered by the , French
8

officials did not explain all the aspects of the drama.
It went on to say that several factors cast doubt on
the theory that the ~hots which killed one child and
wounded four others came from the soldiers massed
along the border about 100 metres away from the bus.
The two factors cited in the article are sufficient not
merely to cast doubt on but to refute completely the
account given by the French Government. The article
stated that journalists authorized on 9 February to
visit the site of the incident saw that the impact of the
bullets was made not on the side of the bus facing
Somalia but on the side facing the French troops.
May I, at this point, be permitted to produce before
the members of the Council a photograph of the bus
taken from the Somali side, and I refer to pictures
numbered 10 and 11-which, I trust, are already
before the Council-of the pictures which I have distributed. They show no bullet holes on the body of
the bus. Le Monde also stated that, in addition, the
gauge and trajectory of the fatal bullet removed from
the dead child indicated that it had come from the
French side.

we believe that there is a pressing need for a full
debate on the matter. Certainly the armed attack
against our territory, the violation of our territorial
integrity , the brutal murder of our citizens and the
wanton destruction of property cannot be allowed to
go uncondemned by the international community.
My Government trusts that the Council will severely
censure the French Government, which ordered these
actions to be carried out, and will call upon France
to refrain from any further unlawful action against
my country. The Council should also call upon France
to withdraw all its military forces on and around the
Somali border.
91. Equally, the Council must take cognizance of
the inhuman measures being perpetrated by France
against the people of French Somaliland. The largescale uprooting and daily expulsion of the people of
the territory and the denial of their fundamental political rights can only continue at the price of regional
and international peace.
92. Since the delegation of France has drawn the
attention of the Council to the kidnapping incident
involving schoolchildren from French Somaliland,
I would like to make it clear that my Government
neither condoned this act nor was involved in any way
in its perpetration. Indeed, as has already been stated,
my Government was gravely concerned by the seizure of the children and had taken all the steps dictated by the circumstances in order to spare the lives
of the children and to obtain their release.

88. An a·r ticle in Le Quotidien of 10 February poses
this question:

"If, as the local military authorities declared a
short .while after the event, the two machinegunners who were behind the Somali frontier had
pounded the children's bus with shots, how is it
then explained that there was no trace to be found
on the side of the bus which was facing Somalia?"
89. An article in L 'Humanite of 10 February states
that many traces of the fighting are to be found inside
the Somali border, and these traces confirm the official Somali report that the French forces, and above
all two mounted machine-guns, had penetrated about
300 metres inside the village of Loyada. The intensity of the attack, the paper continues, could be seen
from the fact that 7,000 shots were fired from the
French side within a quarter of an hour. With regard
to the fact that the bus was marked by shots which
all came from the French side, the article said that
this was established by every journalist at the scene.
It added that the place where the little girl had probably been killed was marked by seven hits coming
from the same direction. Of particular significance
was the assertion, in the article, that one of the mounted
machine-guns which has penetrated inside Somali
territory took three Somali police in the rear, killing
them outr\ght.

94. I sincerely hope that the kidnapping incident
--deplorable and tragic as it was-will not divert the
Council from the substance of our debate, which is
the unprovoked and cold-blooded armed aggression
by France against the . territory and citizens of the
Somali D~mocratic Republic.

90. I am sure that the members of the Council will
now understand why the French Government decided not' to press ahead with its request for a Council
meeting when it sent its Jett~ of 4 February [S/ / 1961 ].
It can also be understood why the French Foreign
Minister stated at the time that he considered the
frontier incident closed and that the~e was no n~ed
for things to go a~y fu~her. In _the view of my Government, the incident 1s certainly not closed, and

95. Throughout the years, France has always resisted demands by the General Assembly for the
dispatch of observers to French Somaliland. My
Government believes that in view of the threatening
situation which still exists on our borders, and in view
of the conflicting versions of the Loyada incident that
have been given, the Security Council should arrange
for' the inmediate dispatch of a fact-finding mission
to the area so that the truth of the matter can be ascer-

93. However, the French authorities were bent on
taking dramatic action rather than on handling the
situation with the caution and restraint it demanded.
The mediators, ironically, were among those shot to
death by the so-called French sharpshooters. The
tragic death of one child in the assault on the bus and
the wounding of several other children were the direct
result of the intemperate and precipitous action of the
legionnaires whose bloody and mercenary-like
methods have long been familiar not only to the
people of French Somaliland but also to those in all
parts of the former French colonial empire.

9

tained. I can assure the Council that, if the Council
so decided, my Government would give the mission
its fullest co-operation. Another important function
of such a mission would be to assess the extent of the
damage to life and property at Loyada with a view to
determining the compensation France must pay to
the Somali Government.

reignty by maintaining the integrity of its frontiers,
by ensuring its security and by preserving the
dignity of its people.
"The Government is ready to guarantee the integrity and security of the Territory. It will also try
to seek the necessary guarantees from countries
directly concerned and international or regional
bodies. Furthermore, the Government, within the
framework of local institutions, calls upon political
authorities in the Territory to define collectively
the constitutional and democratic principles which
will, inter alia, guarantee the rights of minorities.
It is ready, finally, to improve the economic prospects of the future State by keeping it as a maritime
outlet for East Africa and ensuring that communications and trade guarantees are preserved. In
ensuring that the population of the Territory enjoys
its right to self-determination. the Government will
work out solutions to ensure for the new State its
place within the international community under
the best possible conditions. as well as its development in friendship and co-operation with France."

96. In conclusion, I ask the Council to take particular note of the General Assembly's finding that the
situation in French Somaliland has become a threat
to the peace and stability of the region and can potentially have .adverse effects on international peace and
security. The General Assembly's fears with regard
to the region have already been justified. One needs
no special wisdom to realize that French Somaliland is one of those trouble spots where local conflicts
can have serious international consequences. My
Government is confident that the Council will appreciate the gravity of the situation and take all measures
necessary for a just and urgent solution.
97. I sllould like, in conclusion, to express my gratitude to the members of the Council, and especially
to the representatives of Libya and Tanzania, for
their efforts to see to it that the debates of the Council
are conducted in a comprehensive manner.

100. Exactly one week ago. following the weekly
meeting of the Council of Ministers. the regular communique gave the following indications with regard
to the French Territory of the Afars and the Issas:

98. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation
Ji·om French): l reserve my right to reply in detail to

"The Government recalled that it had announced
on 31 December 1975. its willingness to lead the
French Territory of the Afars and the Issas to independence in respect for the principle of self-determination. This peaceful step toward independence
should be prepared for within the country by broad
and open uiscussions within the representative
institutions of the Territory in a spirit of broad
union. It would he facilitated abroad by the adoption of clear-cut positions with regard to respect for
the frontiers of the future State. To this end, the
French Government. as announced on 31 December 1975. together with representatives of the Territory. will undertake the.• necessary action with
States and interested instituti,lns in order to define
the guarantees whidt "·an fadlitate and accelerate
the progress of the Tc.•rrih,ry 1,, independence, in
regard to which the inlc.•rc.•st ,,f the region ·is that it
be brought about pc.·a"·cfully and ,km,lcratically."

the various references made by the representative of
Somalia contained in his version of the Loyada incident. He had recourse to quotations from French
reporters which have been very vigorously challenged in France and elsewhere. Subsequently I shall
demonstrate that those allegations are devoid of
foundation.
99. Since our colleague, the representative of Somalia, has deemed it necessary to give the Council an
"idea of the political background" to the Loyada
incident, I shall not pursue this discussion of French
policy in the Territory of the Afars and the Issas, but
I will read to the Council a statement made by the
spokesman of the French Government on 31 December 1975. That statement leaves no room for doubt as
to the intentions of the French Government with
regard to the Territory of the Afars and the Issas, and
I think it will render superfluous the points which the
representative of Somalia deemed it necessary to
make with regard to policy in that Territory. This is
the statement of the French Government:

101. The PRESIDENT: I call ,ln th'-' rc.•presentative
of Somalia.
102. Mr,. HUSSEN (Somalia): I sh,,uld like.' hl say
that I listened with care to the.• statc.•mc.·nt just .ma,k t,y
the French representative. and. whik I am t"l'S'-"r\"in~
the right of my Government l,l mak"• th"· "'-''-''-'ssar,
comments on that statement at a lalc.'r sta~'-'. I wish "'
mention that, first of all, the kind ,lt' in~kl''-''"kn,,·
which the French Government has s,, far ,,tli.·n-,1 "'
the territory could not, as far
my l l\lH'rtlllll'llt i~
concerned. be regarded as gc.·n11i1w and ~·,,111pk1,·
independence. From my interprc.•lati,m ,,f tlw stat,··

· 'The Government confirmed that the French
Territory of the Afars and the Issas is destined for
independence and stipulated the ways and means
of obtaining that end.
·• Aware of having participated by its presence in
Djibouti in the peace and equilibrium of this part of
Africa, France considers that it must ensure the
accession of the Territory to international sove-

as

10

ment just made by the representative of France, l see
that there is some truth in what I have just said. While
he said, on the one hand, that France is quite willing
to grant independence to that Territory, he admitted,
on the other, that it will be the responsibility of Fra.nce
to guarantee the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of that territory. I think that this is a contradiction.
Once there is an independent and sovereign State, it
is up to that sovereign State and not to any other sovereign State to maintain or guarantee the independence
and territorial integrity of its own territory.
103. The PRESIDENT: May I interrupt the representative of Somalia to say that the presidency has
sought to maintain the widest latitude for debate with
respect to the matter on the agenda. But there is a
point at which a discussion goes beyond that latitude
and over the horizon. Any matter that the representative of Somalia may wish to bring up-matters of

11 ·

the kind that he refers to-can of course be dealt with,
as is the right of any State Member of the United Nations. But, in the interest of pursuing our present
agenda, I hope that the representative would hew as
closely to the subject as reason permits and in the
spirit which my colleague from the United Republic
of Tanzania suggested earlier.
104.

I call on the representative of Somalia.

105. Mr. HUSSEN (Somalia): I think, then, that at
this stage and in view of the statement you have just
made, Mr. President, I shall reserve my right to
comment later on the statement just made by the representative of France with regard to the willingness
of the French Government to grant independence to
that territory.

The meeting rose at I ./5 p.m.

;...:JI (""~I ..:.,IJ~ .)s, J.,....JI 4.}-f

J;...,I

~ J-1.- _,:)I ~ I j- l+i ,...._, , ,JI.~ ,lo,.\~ ✓ !',J.P' JJ•J ,_.\,-;(.ll ..,- 0..__J1 l"'\'I -1:_.:..;. _fa
J-_
• .....- ,j JI t;,- _,.. ✓ e,-)1 ,...;, • ...._i1 l"'\'I . JI JI ,1
tDf•l IIIU ll ~[~lh~?tf
llft!ll:ta "~ t tit "~UJ ~rum ■ ttl!Jfi~ ■ . iar&l-lH!i ~lnl.ilt~fi'fl!i!'JAU:I ~.ltk")-~l11Wlll!ll.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout the world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales
Section, New York or Geneva.

COMMENT SE PROCl'RER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publit'slions des Nations Vnies sont en \'ente dans les librairies et les agent"es
depositaires du mon<.le entier. lnfonnez•\'ous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
A : Nations Unie,;. Section dea ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAR no.U'lfHTb Jl3..1AHHff oPr.-\HH3AUHH OI.oE,'\HHEHHf>IX HAU.HR

li3.l'.IRHHR OoraHH3RUHH 06~e.l'.IHHeHHblX H1uu1n NOll<H 0 K)'nHTI, B KHHlKHLIX M1ara•
3HHSX If areHTt'Teax· 80 Bt"eX paAoHSX MHpa. HaD0.l'.IHTe cnpaBKH ol! H3.1'.18HHRX B
eawcM KHH>KH0M l'!ara3HHe IUH nHWHTe no a.l'.lpel:'.y : OpraHH3&UHft 06'be.111HeHHhlX
Hllu1•(1 . CeKUHR no npo.:ia;Ke H3ll&HHA. H1,10-nopK H·: u, a:eneea.

COMO C'ONSEGVIR PL'BLICACIOSES DE LAS NACIONE.'- l:NIDAS
l..as publicat"iones de las Nal'iones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y c·asas distri buidoras en t_odaa parl4'& del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a : Naciones
llnidas. Scc·,·ion de- Ve-ntas. Nue,a York o Ginehra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

83·60801-May 1984-2,200
