A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly

Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/118
2 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 89
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/49/729/Add.6)]
49/118.

Fisheries by-catch and discards and their
impact on the sustainable use of the
world’s living marine resources

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that in relevant provisions of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea, 1/ States are called upon to take into consideration,
when establishing conservation and management measures for target fisheries,
the effects on associated or dependent species, taking into account the best
scientific evidence available,
Recalling that the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, held at Rio de Janeiro from 3 to 14 June 1992, 2/ and the
International Conference on Responsible Fishing, held at Cancún, Mexico, from

1/
Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3),
document A/CONF.62/122.

2/
See Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions Adopted by
the Conference, resolution 1, annex II, chap. 17.
95-76501

/...

A/RES/49/118
Page 2

6 to 8 May 1992, 3/ agreed to promote the development and use of selective
fishing gears and practices that minimized waste in the catch of target fish
species and minimized by-catch of non-target fish and non-fish species,
Recalling also that the World Fisheries Congress, held at Athens in
1992, discussed various aspects of the fisheries discard issue,
Noting the work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations on fisheries by-catch and discards in the development of an
international code of conduct for responsible fishing and the fact that the
United Nations Conference on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks is considering provisions on fisheries by-catch and discards,
Recognizing the efforts that international organizations and members of
the international community have made to reduce by-catch and discards in
fishing operations and the need for continued international cooperation in
this field,
Recognizing also that improvements in monitoring and assessing by-catch
and discards and in by-catch reduction techniques continue to be necessary,
1.
Notes the important role that fisheries play in contributing to a
sustainable food supply and livelihood of present and future generations;
2.
Believes that the issue of by-catch and discards in fishing
operations warrants serious attention by the international community;
3.
Also believes that a continued and effective response to the issue
of addressing fisheries by-catch and discards is necessary so as to ensure the
long-term and sustainable development of fisheries, taking into account the
relevant principles contained in the Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development; 4/
4.
Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations to formulate fisheries by-catch and discard provisions in its
international code of conduct for responsible fishing, taking into account
work being done elsewhere;
5.
Invites the United Nations Conference on Straddling Fish Stocks
and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks to elaborate fisheries by-catch and discard
provisions, taking into account work being done elsewhere;
6.
Invites relevant subregional and regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements and the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations to review, within their respective competences, the impact
of fisheries by-catch and discards on the sustainable use of living marine

3/

See A/CONF.164/INF/2, annex 2.

4/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions Adopted
the Conference, resolution 1, annex I.

by

/...

A/RES/49/118
Page 3

resources, taking into account, as appropriate, the relevant deliberations of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations with respect to
the international code of conduct for responsible fishing and the relevant
deliberations of the United Nations Conference on Straddling Fish Stocks and
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks;
7.
Decides to consider this question at its fiftieth session, under
the item entitled "Environment and sustainable development".
92nd plenary meeting
19 December 1994
