A/61/PV.43

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

43

rd plenary meeting
Monday, 30 October 2006, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Al-Murad
(Kuwait), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 81 (continued)
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/61/266)
Draft resolution (A/61/L.9)

perspective, the role of the IAEA has taken on even
greater importance than in the past.
Japan has utilized nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, gaining the confidence of the international
community and maintaining high transparency through
the faithful implementation of its IAEA safeguards
agreement, for nearly 30 years. As a result, in
September 2004 implementation of the integrated
safeguards commenced in Japan. Japan is committed to
fully cooperating with the IAEA in ensuring strict
implementation of the safeguards in Japan.

Mr. Kodera (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my gratitude to Mr. Mohammed ElBaradei,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), for his detailed briefing on the
activities of the Agency over the past year. The IAEA
will commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of its
establishment next year, and attention to and interest in
its roles have never been greater than they are today.
The fact that Mr. ElBaradei and the Agency were
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize last year testifies to the
continued strong interest of the international
community in the IAEA and the high regard in which it
is held.

The second matter I would like to raise is the
reinforcement of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
(NPT) regime. Notwithstanding achievements in this
area — including the progress made towards the
universalization of the additional protocol, the
amendment of the Nuclear Suppliers Group Guidelines
and the establishment of the Advisory Committee on
Safeguards
and
Verification
—
the
global
non-proliferation regime still faces serious challenges,
such as the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
Iranian nuclear issues. We must therefore redouble our
efforts to strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation
regime.

In recent years, the role of nuclear energy has
been re-evaluated, and the momentum for the
promotion of nuclear energy has grown across the
globe. Its use must be promoted in a manner that fully
takes into account the various elements of nuclear
proliferation, safety and security. From this

In order to address the issue of promoting the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, while ensuring
consistency with non-proliferation requirements,
various proposals to control nuclear fuel cycles under
an international or multilateral framework have been
put forward. They include the multilateral approaches
to the nuclear fuel cycle — multilateral nuclear

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

06-59167 (E)

*0659167*

A/61/PV.43

approaches — proposed by Mr. ElBaradei. Japan, for
its part, has proposed the establishment of an IAEA
standby arrangement system for nuclear fuel supply,
with a view to complementing the content of the
six-nation initiative on reliable access to nuclear fuel.
Finally, I would like to comment on two issues
that pose an imminent challenge to the international
community: the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and Iranian nuclear issues. The announcement
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on
9 October 2006, local time, that it had conducted a
nuclear test shocked the entire international
community. The announcement of the nuclear test,
despite the call by the Security Council in a
presidential statement that it refrain from testing, is
totally unacceptable, all the more so given that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea recently
launched ballistic missiles that can be used as a means
of delivery of weapons of mass destruction.
These actions by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea pose a serious threat to peace and
security in East Asia and to the international
community as a whole. Japan strongly calls upon the
Democratic People’s Republic to respect Security
Council resolution 1718 (2006), which was adopted
unanimously on 14 October. The Democratic People’s
Republic must refrain from actions that would further
aggravate the situation; abandon all nuclear weapons
and its existing nuclear programmes; act in accordance
with the conditions set out in the IAEA safeguards;
provide information on steps on transparency
measures; and implement the requirements set out in
the resolution, including returning without any
preconditions to the Six-Party Talks.
Japan, for its part, will fully implement resolution
1718 (2006), adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter,
and requests other Member States to do the same.
On Iran, it is regrettable that the country is
continuing uranium enrichment in defiance of Security
Council resolution 1696 (2006). The question here is
not whether Iran has the right to use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. Such a right can only be exercised
when Iran has taken the required steps to restore the
confidence of the international community lost as a
result of its past activities. Japan strongly urges Iran to
accept resolution 1696 (2006), immediately suspend
uranium enrichment-related activities and return to the
negotiating table. Japan believes this is the best option

2

and will benefit all parties concerned. Japan will work
in concert with the international community to achieve
a peaceful and diplomatic resolution of this issue.
Today I have stated my Government’s position on
some of the challenges that confront the Agency. There
are other important issues that have relevance to
nuclear energy, such as anti-nuclear-terrorism
measures; international cooperation for the promotion
of peaceful uses of nuclear energy; nuclear safety; and
transport of radioactive materials.
In 2007 the preparatory process of the 2010 NPT
Review Conference will begin. Japan will continue to
work closely with the IAEA to ensure a smooth start to
this process.
I conclude my statement by informing the
General Assembly that Japan co-sponsored the draft
resolution introduced by the representative of Slovenia,
and will vote in favour of it.
Mr. Hamidon (Malaysia): I join others in
thanking Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for
his presentation of the Agency’s annual report for
2005.
It was a year of notable success for the Agency in
its efforts to ensure that the benefits of nuclear
technology were shared globally for economic and
social development. My delegation commends the
excellent work and efforts of the Agency, under the
dynamic leadership of Mr. ElBaradei, in fulfilling its
mandate during the period under review.
Malaysia recognizes the value of nuclear
technology for the achievement of sustainable
development and the process of nation-building, and
the value of the role played by the Agency in that
regard. We reaffirm our support for the Agency in its
mission to promote and facilitate the development of
nuclear technology for peaceful uses, as embodied in
article II of its Statute. In that connection, the
Technical Cooperation Programme of the Agency
remains a crucial component of its mandate and
activities. Malaysia is both a donor to and a recipient
of the Programme, and we commend the Department of
Technical Cooperation of the IAEA for its continuous
efforts in discharging its statutory mandate for the
benefit of recipient member States, as well as for its
creditable achievements.

06-59167

A/61/PV.43

The Director General of the IAEA, during his
opening statement at the fiftieth regular session of the
IAEA General Conference, identified three distinct
phases: the establishment of mechanisms for the
assurance of supplies of fuel for nuclear power plants
as the first phase; the development of assurances of
supply for the acquisition of nuclear power reactors as
the second phase; and the conversion of existing
uranium enrichment and spent nuclear fuel
reprocessing facilities from national to multilateral
operations as the third phase.
Although we support such a move towards
improving assurances of supplies in the field of nuclear
power generation technology, while also reducing the
risks of the further proliferation of sensitive
technologies that can be used in the development of
nuclear weapons, that should by no means lead to any
unilateral adoption of a norm that will affect the
fundamental inalienable rights of the States parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) to engage in research, production and
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, without
discrimination. Such a move should also not distract
global attention from the obligations of nuclearweapon States to undertake to pursue negotiations in
good faith on effective measures relating to the
cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and
to nuclear disarmament. Despite the overwhelming
global attention to nuclear non-proliferation, Malaysia
remains firmly convinced that the pursuit of general,
complete and irreversible nuclear disarmament under
strict and effective international control is the most
effective way of removing the threat of nuclear
weapons proliferation.
Nevertheless, my delegation believes that such a
multilateral approach to the nuclear fuel cycle should
provide a more economically attractive option for
developing countries embarking on a nuclear power
generation programme, particularly for those countries
with a relatively small nuclear power programme
involving only a handful of nuclear power plants.
Malaysia also believes that the strengthening of
the existing nuclear-weapon-free zones and the
establishment of new nuclear-weapon-free zones in all
regions of the world, on the basis of arrangements
freely arrived at among the States of the region
concerned, constitute a positive step towards attaining
the objective of global nuclear disarmament.

06-59167

In that regard, Malaysia welcomes the signing of
the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central
Asia by the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and
Uzbekistan in Semipalatinsk on 8 September 2006.
Malaysia considers the establishment of that newest
nuclear-weapon-free zone to be an effective
contribution to the strengthening of regional and global
peace and security, and urges the nuclear-weapon
States to provide unconditional assurances against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons against all the
States of that Zone.
In that connection also, Malaysia reiterates its
call for the prompt establishment of a similar nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East, in accordance
with Security Council resolutions 487 (1981) and 687
(1991) and relevant General Assembly resolutions
adopted by consensus. Malaysia calls upon Israel to
promptly place all its nuclear facilities under IAEA
full-scope safeguards, in accordance with the
resolution 487 (1981).
Closer to home, my delegation remains concerned
over the continued unwillingness of a majority of the
nuclear-weapon States to sign the Protocol to the
Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone, which was signed by all 10 Member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Malaysia appreciates the high premium placed by
the global community on the issue of nuclear security,
in view of the serious threats of mass transnational
terrorism, including that of nuclear and radiological
terrorism. However, this has led to the development of
a multitude of overlapping initiatives by a number of
international organizations, including the IAEA, in the
same area. Such overlapping nuclear and other related
international security initiatives have since imposed a
heavy burden on the work of the relevant Government
agencies, and posed new challenges to inter-agency
coordination in member States.
In order to optimize the utilization of resources
and ensure effective inter-agency coordination between
the responsible authorities in member States, my
delegation calls upon the IAEA to coordinate the
implementation of its nuclear security initiatives with
that of other relevant multilateral organizations,
especially within the framework of the United Nations,
such as between the IAEA and the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate of the Security Council. That is

3

A/61/PV.43

imperative, since different international organizations
have different counterpart agencies in the member
States.
On the implementation of the NPT Safeguards
Agreement with the Islamic Republic of Iran, Malaysia
again reiterates its recognition of the IAEA as the sole
competent authority for the verification of the
safeguards obligations of that country and other
Member States, and further stresses that there should
be no undue pressure or interference in the activities of
the IAEA in that regard — particularly on
verification — which could jeopardize its efficiency
and credibility. While Malaysia took note of the
assessment of the IAEA Director General that all
nuclear material declared by Iran had been accounted
for, we nevertheless urgently encourage Iran to
continue to cooperate actively and fully with the IAEA,
within the Agency’s mandate, in order to resolve the
outstanding issues towards the promotion of
confidence and a peaceful resolution of the matter.
Turning to the issue of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Malaysia deplores the nuclear test
which that country claims to have conducted on
9 October 2006. Malaysia believes that the test is a
serious setback to efforts aimed at keeping the region
and the world free from nuclear weapons. It could also
trigger an arms race in the region. Therefore, we call
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to cease
developing its capability to produce nuclear weapons
and to return to the moratorium on nuclear testing.
We also strongly believe that the continued
existence of nuclear weapons presents a grave threat to
humanity, particularly by increasing the risk of
proliferation. We therefore reiterate the importance of
achieving the universal goal of complete and general
disarmament. Malaysia urges all countries in the region
to exercise maximum restraint and refrain from actions
that could further heighten tension in the region. In that
context, Malaysia further urges all parties concerned to
return to the Six-Party Talks and resume negotiations
with a view to resolving all outstanding issues
amicably.
Finally, Malaysia would like to express once
again its appreciation to Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei,
Director General of the IAEA, as well as to the IAEA
secretariat, for their significant and valuable work in
fulfilling the three pillars of the Agency’s mandate.
Malaysia pledges its full support to the IAEA, as one

4

of the organizations of the United Nations system that
continue to uphold and maintain their central and
universal role in addressing the enormous challenges
ahead.
Mr. Musa Daffalla (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like at the outset to express my profound
gratitude and appreciation to the President for her
efforts in organizing today’s debate and guiding the
Assembly’s work so judiciously and skilfully, in
fulfilment of the great aspirations and responsibilities
of this major organ of our international Organization.
We also express our thanks and appreciation to
Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for his
comprehensive report, which contains a detailed
account of the Agency’s work and programmes in the
area of the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear
technology and ensuring the safety of nuclear and
radiological facilities. The warm reception he received
and the honours bestowed upon him by numerous
academic and scientific institutions reflect the growing
trust placed in the Agency, and show how much the
Director General is appreciated in higher scientific
circles and by civil organizations’ personalities.
Fifty years after the creation of the IAEA, despite
the enormous transformations witnessed in the world,
the Agency has remained a haven of cooperation for
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and for
development. My delegation welcomes the final
statement of the meeting organized by the Agency in
Paris in March last year to study the role of nuclear
power in the future, which affirmed that nuclear power
can contribute significantly to meeting the energy
requirements of a large number of developing and
developed countries in the twenty-first century and
enhancing international development.
We pay tribute to the Agency for its efforts to
heed international public opinion regarding the use of
nuclear energy to generate electricity. The report
highlights the growing importance of nuclear energy in
improving standards of living in developing countries,
given that such energy provides 16 per cent of the
world’s electricity.
My delegation also supports the Agency’s efforts,
undertaken in cooperation with various scientific
partners, to create new and improved vaccines in the
context of the nuclear medicine programme, especially

06-59167

A/61/PV.43

with regard to cancer, which is one of the most deadly
diseases.
Despite the fact that the report indicates that 156
States have concluded safeguards agreements with the
Agency, and that their nuclear programmes and
facilities have remained peaceful, my delegation recalls
the Final Document of the meeting of Heads of State or
Government of the Non-Aligned Movement, held in
Cuba, which reaffirmed the right of States to engage in
research, production and use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes, without discrimination, in
accordance with international obligations. It also
reaffirmed that the IAEA should remain the only
competent authority to verify the obligations of
member States regarding safeguards. States must
therefore refrain from bringing pressure to bear on the
Agency or interfering in its activities, so as not to
undermine its credibility or subvert its effectiveness.
We therefore call for an approach based on equity
and justice in dealing with outstanding issues in
relation to certain countries in this regard. Double
standards must be renounced and dialogue and
constructive negotiation reaffirmed, with a view to
reaching an effective solution in accordance with
international obligations.
My delegation supports the statement made by
the Director General this morning. We support peaceful
solutions and believe that international concerns and
expectations in the area of peace and security must be
upheld. Every year my delegation reaffirms that the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) is the linchpin of international peace and
security. The Sudan supports the aspirations of all
geographic regions to declare themselves free from
nuclear weapons. However, the Middle East has been
spinning its wheels for decades because of the refusal
of Israel, the only country in the Middle East that
possesses nuclear weapons, to sign the Treaty and its
additional protocol. Many members of the international
community have appealed to Israel to change its
position and sign the Treaty so as to put an end to the
tension in the region and pave the way for
comprehensive peace, which benefits everyone. If
Israel does not do so, the causes of tension will remain
and States will seek to possess nuclear weapons for
self-defence and deterrence purposes. Declaring the
Middle East a nuclear-weapon-free zone would be the
best way to bridge the gap and consolidate regional
security and international peace.

06-59167

My delegation greatly appreciates the efforts of
the Technical Cooperation Department in assisting
countries to upgrade their country and regional
programme frameworks. We take note of the budget set
by the Agency for the African continent. However,
greater funds are required if the continent is to achieve
its goals. Additional resources must be provided in the
general budget of the IAEA, and donors must be
encouraged to provide grants in support of relevant
programmes in Africa. We are hopeful that Africa will
receive the major share this year, as Europe did last
year. We call on the Agency to increase its funding to
the least developed countries, which account for only
16 per cent of general expenditure. Helping developing
countries to upgrade their legislative systems
complements the efforts of the Agency in
implementing technical cooperation programmes.
We hope that effective efforts will be made to
combat malaria-transmitting mosquitoes, since malaria
is the deadliest disease in Africa, and to eliminate the
tsetse fly, with sophisticated technologies. Great hopes
are pinned on these efforts to achieve social and
economic development in developing countries.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset I thank Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), for his presentation of the report on the
activities on the Agency last year. As it approaches its
fiftieth anniversary, the Agency, under the guidance of
Mr. ElBaradei, has demonstrated its effectiveness and
dedication in the control and monitoring of the nuclear
energy activities of all States.
I would like to touch on a central aspect of what
my country, Argentina, is currently doing in
conjunction with Brazil. The Brazilian-Argentine
Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear
Materials (ABACC) celebrates its fifteenth anniversary
this year. ABACC is the result of a process of mutual
confidence and transparency in a very sensitive and
important technological area: the development and
application of nuclear technology. It is a substantive
mechanism that reflects the convergence of the nuclear
policies of Brazil and Argentina and their integration in
that area.
The process began many years ago. Milestones
along the way include the joint presidential Declaration
of Foz de Iguazú of 1985, the Declaration of Viedma in
1987 and the Declaration of Ipero of 1988. These were

5

A/61/PV.43

followed by others in 1990 — in particular, the joint
declaration of Argentina and Brazil on a common
nuclear policy.

report on the work of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). Iceland is one of the sponsoring States
of the draft resolution on the IAEA report.

Over these 15 years, ABACC has successfully
applied the Common System for Accounting and
Control of Nuclear Materials, obtaining positive
conclusions regarding nuclear activities under its
control. This has been made possible thanks to the
Argentine and Brazilian staff, whose expertise and
commitment to the objectives and spirit of ABACC
have been, and continue to be, essential to its
continuity and growth.

This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the
IAEA, and on this occasion we look back with
appreciation on its accomplishments and important
work. The IAEA is the world’s focal point for peaceful
nuclear cooperation and nuclear safety, and it has an
indispensable global role in preventing the spread of
nuclear weapons and countering new threats of nuclear
terrorism.

Another point to be highlighted is ABACC’s
credibility at the national and international levels,
which is closely linked to the characteristics I have
described and the unflagging support of successive
Governments of both countries for this important
confidence-building mechanism.
In this anniversary year, it is particularly
important to highlight also the importance of the IAEA
and ABACC continuing their joint efforts to avoid
duplication in the work of introducing new,
strengthened international safeguards. Both the
Common System and ABACC have a growing role in
the framework of the Quadripartite Safeguards
Agreement; both the Common System and the
organization established by the two countries for its
administration, ABACC, are of the utmost importance
in the current context, in which there is a new impetus
for nuclear development for peaceful purposes in both
countries and in the world. They are also of particular
relevance with regard to safeguards at the international
level at a complex moment of change. ABACC has
actively participated in the framework of the
safeguards agreement with the IAEA, carrying out
coordinated inspections and auditing, sharing
equipment and technology with the Agency, designing
control approaches, establishing joint inspection
procedures and taking steps to avoid unnecessary
duplication of efforts.
Before concluding, I would like to stress that this
Argentina-Brazil bilateral mechanism was made
possible by the fact that, after years of competition and
rivalry, the two countries decided to act together to
make a reality of the integration of the countries of
South America.
Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): At the outset let me
thank the Director General, Mr. ElBaradei, for his

6

The accomplishments of the Agency and its
valuable work were highlighted by the Nobel Peace
Prize received by the IAEA and its Director General
for 2005. Iceland congratulates Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei and his staff on this recognition of their
important work.
We reaffirm our commitment to the three pillars
of the IAEA Statute: verification, safety and
technology, which form the basis for the activities of
the Agency. States must honour their commitments,
and we urge member States to comply transparently
and
effectively
with
the
Treaty
on
the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and
IAEA safeguard obligations, and allow full IAEA
verification of all nuclear activities.
In this context, Iceland strongly condemned the
recent nuclear test carried out by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to return to compliance
with the NPT and IAEA safeguards obligations, and
allow for full IAEA verification of all its nuclear
activities.
Iceland supports the Director General and the
IAEA in their efforts to seek clarifications from Iran
and to verify its nuclear programme. It is of concern
that the Director General’s assessment is that, after
four years of intense inspections, the Agency remains
unable to make further progress in its efforts to verify
the correctness and completeness of Iran’s declaration,
in order to confirm the peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme.
Iceland attaches the greatest importance to a high
level of safety in all nuclear and radiation applications.
Safety is a national responsibility, but has implications
well beyond national boundaries. International
cooperation is therefore indispensable in order to

06-59167

A/61/PV.43

maintain and improve safety in all nuclear and
radiation applications.
Iceland appreciates the activities of the IAEA in
fostering a global nuclear safety regime, and welcomes
the efforts over recent years to update and extend the
IAEA safety standards to cover all important thematic
areas, facilities and activities. To assist in this effort,
Iceland has undertaken to chair the IAEA Radiation
Safety Standards Committee for the period 2005 to
2007.
On a national level, Iceland has this year ratified
the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel
Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste
Management, and urges other Member States to do so
as well. Iceland has also ratified the Convention on
Assistance in the Case of Nuclear Accident or
Radiological Emergency.
Finally, Iceland attaches great importance to the
IAEA efforts to improve the quality of technical
cooperation, in the interest of all Member States — in
particular,
the
developing
countries.
Iceland
contributes annually to the IAEA Technical
Cooperation Fund.
Mr. Rachkov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of the Republic of Belarus has considered
with satisfaction the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) for 2005. The Government of
Belarus appreciates the activities of the IAEA during
this period.
The work of the IAEA over recent years has
proved that the Agency has become a truly leading
international organization, entrusted with ensuring the
secure development and use of nuclear energy in civil
activities, as well as the effective monitoring of the
implementation of international obligations on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons.
Member States of the Agency and its secretariat
have done significant work in the nuclear sphere.
Thorough measures are being undertaken to secure a
global regime of nuclear and radiation safety. A plan of
action against nuclear terrorism is being implemented.
Measures to strengthen the physical security of nuclear
and radioactive materials are being taken.
There are also consistent steps to universalize the
nuclear non-proliferation regime and increase the
effectiveness of the IAEA safeguards system, together
with activities to accumulate knowledge in the sphere

06-59167

of nuclear sciences and training of experts in this field.
Within the framework of the Technical Cooperation
Programme, member States receive multifaceted
assistance in the use of advanced nuclear technologies
in medicine, power engineering and other fields, in
order to promote socio-economic development.
The sense of purpose and professionalism of the
IAEA staff and its Director General, Mohamed
ElBaradei, were duly rewarded when they received the
2005 Nobel Prize. This high recognition of the results
of their work should give an additional impetus to the
joint activities of the secretariat and member States
within the framework of the mechanisms provided for
in the IAEA Statute for the full implementation of the
IAEA’s main motto — Atoms for Peace.
Being a member of the Board of Governors, the
Republic of Belarus actively promotes the achievement
of the IAEA’s objectives and the fulfilment of its tasks.
We consider the IAEA technical cooperation
mechanisms to be important tools to introduce
innovative ideas, technologies and experience in the
nuclear sphere. The implementation of IAEA technical
cooperation projects in Belarus significantly supports
national efforts in a number of spheres, from health
protection to the prevention of illegal trafficking in
nuclear materials.
In the context of IAEA efforts to accumulate
knowledge in the nuclear sphere, Belarus is
particularly interested in IAEA training courses related
to radiation safety. Belarus actively participates in this
process and has for several years hosted annual
regional training programmes on source radiation
protection and security, with the participation of
experts from the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) and Eastern European countries.
Belarus is a staunch and consistent supporter of
the strengthening and universalization of the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime. It
unswervingly fulfils its obligations under the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and the IAEA
comprehensive safeguards agreement. In November
2005, the Republic of Belarus and the IAEA signed the
additional protocol to the agreement. This step
reconfirmed our adherence to the principles of nonproliferation of nuclear weapons.
In the development of nuclear technologies, we
pin our hopes on the project for innovative nuclear
reactors and fuel cycles implemented under the aegis of

7

A/61/PV.43

the IAEA. Belarus has expressed its interest in
participating in this project, and we are prepared to
contribute effectively to its implementation.
In
resolution
60/14,
“Strengthening
of
international cooperation and coordination of efforts to
study, mitigate and minimize the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster”, the General Assembly noted with
satisfaction the assistance rendered by the IAEA to
Belarus, the Russian Federation and Ukraine on
remediation of agricultural and urban environments,
cost-effective agricultural countermeasures and the
monitoring of human exposure in areas affected by the
Chernobyl disaster. That is a fair assessment of the
IAEA efforts.
The successful completion of work of the
Chernobyl Forum, in which the IAEA played an
organizational and coordinating role, was of great
importance to Belarus. Significant work has been done
to assess the health, ecological and socio-economic
consequences of the Chernobyl disaster, whose
twentieth anniversary was commemorated in April this
year. Numerous comprehensive recommendations for
actively encouraging international cooperation in these
spheres were developed by the Forum. We call on the
IAEA to make a constructive contribution to the
implementation of those recommendations. Belarus is
ready to broaden its interaction with the IAEA with a
view to overcoming the Chernobyl legacy more rapidly
and returning the region that has suffered from the
disaster to a normal life.
Mr. Owoseni (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
welcomes the status report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), presented this morning by its
Director General, Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, and
commends him for his consistent diligence, dedication
and effective leadership over the years. We note the
broad variety of activities conducted over the year that
he reported upon, relating to the three main areas of the
Agency’s core mandate: nuclear technology, safety and
security, and verification.
Nigeria enjoys a robust relationship with the
IAEA, and strongly supports the efforts of the
international community in strengthening the Agency’s
work and its capacity to discharge its vital role in the
development and practical application of nuclear
energy for peaceful uses, in technology transfer to
developing countries, and in ensuring that peaceful
nuclear energy is used in the safest possible way.

8

The Agency’s activities and the scope of its
mandate will naturally continue to attract increased
global interest in the years ahead, as well as pose
greater, and sometimes newer, challenges, some of
which I shall touch upon.
As we note from the report, there are rising
expectations for the expansion of nuclear power,
emphasizing the need for energy for development,
including nuclear applications for human benefits.
Topical issues, such as progress and new initiatives in
nuclear safety, security and verification, the strides
made under the Technical Cooperation Programme, the
Agency’s management and funding, as well as the need
for a new multilateral framework for the nuclear fuel
cycle, will all continue to actively engage the serious
attention of the IAEA and member States. In these
areas, it is impossible to overemphasize the need for
effective international cooperation in order for
humanity to harness the full benefits of peaceful
nuclear technology.
Nigeria appreciates the crucial role which the
IAEA continues to play as a catalyst for the transfer of
nuclear technology for the peaceful purposes of socioeconomic development, especially for developing
countries: nuclear energy, application of nuclear
techniques and radioisotopes to increase food
production, disease control and eradication, water
resources management, protection of the environment,
and industrial applications. We thus call upon the
Agency to continue to exploit and expand the vistas of
opportunities which nuclear technology portends in
these and other fields.
To this end, the Nigerian Government, under the
current Country Programme Framework with the
IAEA, has given priority to some core projects aimed
at exploring the role of nuclear power as part of our
future national energy plans: strengthening national
infrastructure in nuclear science and technology
through the installation and commissioning of an
accelerator facility and the use of a miniature neutron
source reactor; expanding technical capabilities in
nuclear medicine diagnosis; and strengthening
radiotherapy services. Other areas include efforts to
strengthen
the
national
radiation
protection
infrastructure; groundwater investigation through the
use of isotope hydrology techniques; developing crop
varieties and enhancing food safety; and human
resource development and nuclear technology support.

06-59167

A/61/PV.43

Our quest for nuclear energy is explained by
Nigeria’s large population of some 150 million people,
its present low installed total energy generation
capacity and the urgent need for diversification of our
energy resources to meet future requirements for rapid
industrialization and provision of mass employment for
our people. These demand a reasonable energy mix,
including the exploration of nuclear power, as part of
the benefits Nigeria can derive from the Agency, while
being fully conscious of our unequivocal commitment
to the spirit and letter of the Non-Proliferation Treaty
(NPT) and the Treaty of Pelindaba on the African
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone.
To this end, President Obasanjo reconfirmed
Nigeria’s non-proliferation credentials on 31 July 2006,
during the activation and inauguration of the Board of
the Nigerian Atomic Energy Commission (NAEC), as
the specialized agency to formulate and implement, in
collaboration with the IAEA, Nigeria’s nuclear energy
programme. On that occasion, President Obasanjo
charged the Commission, in line with the provisions of
Act 46 of 1976 creating the Commission, to provide
the requisite institutional framework and technical
pathway to explore, exploit and harness atomic energy
for peaceful applications in all its ramifications for the
socio-economic development of Nigeria.
Nigeria is mindful that the adoption of nuclear
energy has global implications requiring both bilateral
and multilateral cooperation for a coordinated approach
within the IAEA’s framework. We are thus working in
partnership with the Agency to create the requisite
linkages with other interested member States for
cooperation in the development of a sustainable energy
programme from the start. We also wish to state that
key components of Nigeria’s obligations to the
international community in the areas of safety and
security, as well as the safeguards system, are being
entrenched in the programme.
To that end, and in a bid to reassure our
neighbours in Africa and the international community
of the peaceful nature of our future nuclear energy
plans, Nigeria organized an international workshop on
the Treaty of Pelindaba, which established the African
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, in Abuja from 8 June to
9 June this year, with the objective of sensitizing
African States on the need to bring the Treaty into
force, 10 years after it was opened for signature.
Representatives from African diplomatic missions in
Nigeria, and those of the five permanent members of

06-59167

the Security Council, as well as Spain, Portugal and the
IAEA, were all invited and participated in the
workshop. Needless to say, Nigeria was one of the first
African countries to sign and ratify the Treaty.
In a similar effort, the Nigerian Nuclear
Regulatory Authority has commenced the process of
developing the requisite national regulatory capacity to
cope with the eventual emergence of a nuclear power
reactor programme. The process of ratifying and
acceding to the relevant treaties and additional
instruments necessary for the implementation of a
successful national nuclear power programme,
including the Convention on Early Notification of a
Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in
the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological
Emergency, has been set in motion.
Furthermore, Nigeria has established its State
system of accounting for and control of nuclear
material, and it submits annually to the IAEA the
material accounting and balance of all safeguarded
materials in Nigeria. The national policy and
regulations on radioactive waste management are in
place, as well as the commencement of activities for
the designation and establishment of a radioactive
waste management facility. Above all, adequate control
over transportation and transborder movement of
radioactive sources has been developed, and the
requisite regulations were issued this year, with the
cooperation of the IAEA and in conformity with its
code of conduct on safety and security of radioactive
sources.
In other areas of food and agriculture and human
health, Nigeria continues to be concerned about the
devastating effects of insect pests, such as tsetse flies
and malaria-transmitting mosquitoes, on human and
livestock development in Africa. These are a major
obstacle to poverty alleviation in our continent. Nigeria
notes with appreciation the IAEA efforts in using both
Technical Cooperation Funds and extra-budgetary
contributions to support the African Union’s Pan
African Tsetse and Trypanosomiasis Eradication
Campaign (AU-PATTEC). We are also grateful to those
countries that have made extrabudgetary contributions
to the objectives of AU-PATTEC. In addition, my
delegation thanks other development partners, as well
as international organizations such as the Food and
Agriculture Organization and the World Health
Organization, that have participated in the campaign.

9

A/61/PV.43

Nigeria is happy to note the remarkable success
achieved in the area-wide application of the sterile
insect technique against tsetse flies, aimed at creating a
tsetse-fly-free-zone in Africa. Similarly, we welcome
the feasibility study on developing the technique for
the control and eradication of malaria-transmitting
mosquitoes. We note that research and development on
its use in this area has commenced both in the
laboratory and in the field. We urge our development
partners to allocate sufficient financial, technical and
material resources to promote the implementation of
the feasibility study at the earliest opportunity.
As a measure of Nigeria’s commitment to the
AU-PATTEC and the development of the sterile insect
technique for the control and eradication of malariatransmitting mosquitoes, I wish to restate the offer by
my Government to the IAEA of the multi-purpose
gamma irradiation facility, which is useful for both
industrial and research applications, at the Sheda
Science and Technology Complex in Abuja, to serve as
a regional sterile insect breeder for the African
continent and its neighbouring region. The facility has
an innovative design with significantly enhanced
versatility, and thus possesses the flexibility to irradiate
a wide spectrum of products.
Turning to the Agency’s management and
financing, Nigeria continues to underline the need for
the IAEA to broaden its staff recruitment and
disposition to encompass various regions of the world
and underrepresented Member States, in a fair and
balanced manner. We also urge that, as it is one of the
largest United Nations specialized agencies, but has
perhaps the lowest gender representation, the
employment of women, especially from the developing
countries, must be given priority consideration for the
acquisition of knowledge, expertise, experience and
capacity-building,
which
are
invaluable
and
indispensable to developing countries’ requirements.
On financing, Nigeria notes that the IAEA
General Conference, at its fiftieth regular session in
September 2006, decided on a figure of $80 million for
the Technical Cooperation Fund target for each year of
the 2007-2008 biennium. Numerically speaking, this
represents an increase over the target for 2005-2006,
but in real terms it reflects the principle of zero growth,
taking into account the increasing needs and requests
of member States for technical cooperation assistance.
We thus call for more resources to be made available to

10

the Fund in a manner that will promote its assurance,
predictability and sufficiency.
Considering the magnitude of the challenges
facing the IAEA, Nigeria takes the position that the
time has come to enhance its funding, with a view to
making greater resources available to it to carry out its
very important activities in order to meet these
challenges in the future.
The IAEA continues to face mounting challenges,
perhaps the greatest of which is in the area of detection
of proliferation of nuclear technology for weapons
purposes. The international community must
realistically grapple with this situation in order to
strengthen international peace and security, to which
all Member States are committed under the Charter.
Nigeria
regards
the
1968
Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) as the cornerstone of
the global non-proliferation regime, with the IAEA
safeguards system as an essential instrument for
applying and ensuring compliance with the provisions
of the safeguards system under the NPT. Nothing
should be done to erode or weaken non-proliferation
commitments under the Treaty, which we believe will
strengthen confidence in the Treaty and enhance the
attainment of international peace and security.
Nigeria reiterates its position that, judging from
the history of the proliferation of nuclear weapons, by
failing to curb or stop their own vertical proliferation
and the technical sophistication of their nuclear
arsenals the nuclear Powers have inadvertently
encouraged other States to proliferate horizontally.
From one nuclear Power in 1945, we now have nine
nuclear-weapon States, the latest dating from October
this year. That represents consistently at least one or
two States becoming nuclear-weapon States every
decade over the past 61 years, with no end seemingly
in sight. The time is ripe for credible action on
reversing this trend through effective nuclear
disarmament, including the conclusion of a legally
binding agreement to extend negative security
assurances against the use and threat of use of nuclear
weapons to the developing States that voluntarily
renounced the possession of nuclear weapons.
The Nigerian delegation believes that the work of
the IAEA would be greatly facilitated if there were a
recommitment to genuine nuclear disarmament. The
NPT
ascribed
asymmetrical
obligations
and
responsibilities to nuclear and non-nuclear States

06-59167

A/61/PV.43

parties alike, by emphasizing that nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation should both be pursued
vigorously, and not one at the expense of, or replacing,
the other. As a first tangible demonstration of good
faith in this regard, we call on the five nuclear Powers
under the NPT to take the necessary action to ensure
the early entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
In conclusion, Nigeria will continue to support
the laudable role of the IAEA and global efforts to
achieve its mandate under the Statute. We have thus
again decided to co-sponsor the enabling draft
resolution A/61/L.9, introduced by the representative
of Slovenia.
Ms. Phua Mei Pin (Singapore): My delegation
thanks the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, for
his comprehensive report. Singapore was recently a
member of the IAEA Board of Governors. We fully
appreciate and support the Agency and its work.
Given the world’s growing energy needs, there
appears to be something of a nuclear revival. Nuclear
power is seen as an important alternative source of
energy. We can expect an expansion in its use and the
concomitant growth of nuclear power installations. The
largest growth is likely to be in Asia.
Unfortunately, there are also risks of nuclear
proliferation. For example, we remain deeply
concerned about the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s defiance of the will of the international
community. We hope that that country will heed
Security Council resolution 1718 (2006) and abandon
its nuclear weapons programme and return to the
Six-Party Talks, without preconditions. We also urge
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to return to
the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), resume
cooperation with the IAEA and accept full IAEA
safeguards.
These developments underline the increased
relevance and importance of the IAEA. Let me state
clearly that the IAEA has done a tremendous job since
1957. The award of the 2005 Nobel Peace Prize to the
Agency and to Mr. ElBaradei is testimony to that. But
to deal with the challenges of the future the IAEA will
have to strengthen its three pillars: nuclear safety,
nuclear verification and nuclear technology.

06-59167

The IAEA promotes high and consistent levels of
nuclear safety. We recognize and support these efforts
in providing clear benchmarks through instruments like
peer reviews, assistance and review missions. The
development and implementation of high standards in
nuclear safety are key conditions to maintain as
demand for nuclear energy grows.
In
tandem,
transboundary
emergency
preparedness and response capabilities become
important, given the grave consequences of a nuclear
accident. Singapore sees the establishment of such
response capabilities as a priority. We commend the
setting up of the Incident and Emergency Centre by the
IAEA last year. We also support greater regional
cooperation in nuclear safety to complement and
strengthen national and international efforts. This
would contribute to confidence-building in the use of
nuclear power.
The promotion of nuclear safety goes hand in
hand with ensuring nuclear security. Whether nuclear
resources fuel growth or wreak unimaginable harm
depends on who wields them. States must be vigilant in
protecting nuclear materials and installations from
falling into the wrong hands, through national efforts
and international cooperation. Singapore is committed
to supporting efforts to combat terrorism in all forms
and at all levels.
We support the full and effective implementation
of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) to step up
domestic controls and international cooperation against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Singapore will expand its strategic goods control list to
take in the full lists of items controlled by the four
multilateral export control regimes: the Nuclear
Suppliers Group; the Wassenaar Arrangement; the
Australia Group; and the Missile Technology Control
Regime. The expanded list will take effect from
January 2008.
The spread in the use of nuclear power brings
with it greater risks of nuclear proliferation. The IAEA
must ensure that States exercise their right to nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes, in compliance with their
non-proliferation obligations under articles I, II and III
of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). There
must also be full and transparent implementation of the
IAEA’s safeguards system. Its verification regime must
remain central in providing safeguard assurances. It is
also crucial that the safeguard regime be able to

11

A/61/PV.43

respond to new challenges effectively and in a timely
manner.

remarks to a few issues of particular interest to my
country.

Singapore is working to put in place the
necessary instruments required to ratify our additional
protocol and to modify our small quantities protocol.
To better ensure non-diversion of nuclear material, we
believe in the universalization of the comprehensive
safeguards agreement and the additional protocol. We
urge other IAEA member States to sign on to these
commitments as soon as possible.

At the beginning, on behalf of the Government of
Ukraine, I congratulate the new member States of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) — the
Republic of Malawi, the Republic of Mozambique, the
Republic of Palau and the Republic of Montenegro —
and wish them every success in their activities within
the Agency. The enlargement of IAEA membership is
further evidence of the Agency’s growing prestige.

The proliferation risks entailed by sensitive
aspects of the nuclear fuel cycle have gained
international attention. It is imperative to find a
balanced approach to prevent clandestine proliferation
activities, while upholding the rights of States to
pursue peaceful uses of nuclear power. Member States
have tabled several proposals, and Mr. ElBaradei has
also suggested a multinational approach to the nuclear
fuel cycle. These proposals merit serious consideration.

In the course of the year marking the fiftieth
anniversary of the IAEA, I have the privilege to speak
on behalf of Ukraine, a State in which the peaceful use
of nuclear energy is one of the determining conditions
of sustainable development of the national economy.

Singapore supports the IAEA’s activities to bring
socio-economic benefits to developing countries
through
nuclear
application. These
activities
encompass areas such as medical diagnoses and
treatment; industrial applications; animal production
and health; food quality and safety; and the
management of water resources. They contribute to the
Millennium Development Goals.
Singapore also remains committed to supporting
the IAEA’s Technical Cooperation Programme. We are
pleased with the expansion of the Programme, and we
commend the Agency for establishing partnerships
with
international
and
regional
development
organizations. We support regional activities organized
under the Regional Cooperative Agreement for the Asia
Pacific region. We remain committed to continuing our
bilateral cooperation with the IAEA through our
Memorandum of Understanding for outreach efforts.
The IAEA has had a challenging year. Yet the
Director General and his staff have risen to the task,
and we commend them. Singapore will also do its
share, nationally and in cooperation with the
international community.
Mr. Kryzhanivskyi (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union and
associated countries. Therefore, I shall limit my

12

Taking into account the rising prices of
hydrocarbon raw materials, nuclear energy remains an
important component of ensuring our energy
independence in the medium and long term, as stated in
Ukraine’s energy strategy for the period to 2030.
Ukraine possesses enough supplies of uranium, which
is an argument for the extensive use of nuclear energy.
Moreover, proven deposits of uranium ore in Ukraine
might be used for the needs of other countries as well.
That is why we are open to international cooperation in
this area.
In the context of the safe use of nuclear energy,
demonstrating the highest level of reactor reliability
and management of waste nuclear fuel and radioactive
waste are of the highest priority for Ukraine’s State
bodies. This fully corresponds to the medium-term
strategy of the Agency, whose tasks we completely
share. In particular, Ukraine takes part in IAEA
activities in the area of fuel cycle and new safe-reactor
developments, in the framework of the Generation IV
International Forum. Last year, Ukraine joined the
international project on innovative nuclear reactors.
Ukraine, having great potential in the sphere of nuclear
technologies, supports the Agency’s efforts aimed at
conservation of nuclear knowledge and sustainable
support for human knowledge for national programmes
of nuclear energy development. We also actively
support the Agency’s activities to strengthen
cooperation in nuclear science, especially those
connected to radiation biology and radiation medicine.
We welcome the Agency’s activities aimed at
raising nuclear security. Currently, Ukrainian nuclear
power plants, including those for research, fully meet

06-59167

A/61/PV.43

the demands of domestic and international standards in
this sphere. Ukraine continues to improve relevant
legislation and strengthen the capability of regulatory
authorities. In this connection, we would like to
mention such an important part of the Agency’s
activities as development of guidance and
recommendations, which are taken into account when
creating national legislation all over the world.
An important part of the IAEA’s activities is the
work on assurance of radiation security and on
radioactive waste management. This year, our national
strategy foresees particularly solving the problems of
radioactive
waste
management
during
decommissioning of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant
and conversion of the shelter object into an
ecologically safe system. All those matters take a great
portion of the State budget, and the final solution of
this task cannot be performed without international aid.
I take this opportunity to call upon the
Governments of the States members of the IAEA,
which are donors to relevant funds, to make additional
efforts aimed at early solving of all the problems
connected with the creation in Ukraine of facilities for
nuclear-waste processing and building storage for spent
nuclear fuel and new confinements.
Notwithstanding the expiration of the mandate of
the Chernobyl Forum, which acted within the United
Nations framework, we hope that the Agency will
continue to pay due attention to issues connected with
the mitigation of the Chernobyl disaster. We are
particularly grateful to the IAEA for taking an active
part in preparation for the international conference,
“Twenty Year After Chernobyl Accident — Future
Outlook”, which was held in April this year in Ukraine.
Ukraine is concerned about the new threats posed
by nuclear terrorism, which have risen recently in the
world. In this context, we support the aim and
objectives of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism and the Global Threat Reduction Initiative,
as well as other international and regional programmes
in this area. That is why we highly appreciate the
Agency’s activities in strengthening nuclear and
radioactive materials management and preventing their
illegal circulation, and we advocate strengthening the
regime for physical protection of nuclear materials.
Regarding the basic principles of the Code of
Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive
Sources, Ukraine created and manages the State system

06-59167

for registration and control of physical protection of
the sources of ionizing irradiation. Relevant legislation
on export-import controls has also been improved.
Ukraine welcomes the IAEA’s efforts to improve
the safeguards system’s effectiveness. An important
element of strengthening the non-proliferation regime
is application of the additional protocol — which
Ukraine ratified last year — to the safeguards
agreement with the IAEA in connection with the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. We are grateful to
the Agency for the practical assistance given during
our preparation of the initial declaration under the
protocol.
Ukraine especially appreciates the results of the
IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme, which
demonstrates the Agency’s ability to react adequately
and quickly to its member States’ demands. In this
regard, we draw attention to the fruitful work of the
Department of Technical Cooperation and its European
Section.
In conclusion, I endorse the words of support for
the IAEA report and state once again our appreciation
of the activities of the Director General, Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei. We are also grateful to the secretariat for
strengthening international cooperation in the peaceful
use of nuclear energy. Ukraine will continue to take
part in the Agency’s activities in order to help achieve
its important mission.
Our delegation, of course, fully supports the draft
resolution.
Mr. Wibowo (Indonesia): The delegation of
Indonesia expresses its sincere appreciation to
Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for his
presentation of the report of the IAEA for 2005. The
report provides a broad picture of all the activities and
important work that the Agency has undertaken in the
course of that year.
My delegation commends the excellent work of
the Agency in fulfilling its mandate, particularly its
efforts to ensure that the benefits of nuclear technology
are shared globally for economic and social
development through the harnessing of nuclear
technology for a myriad of peaceful applications, such
as in the areas of health, food and agriculture, water
resources management, and environmental protection.

13

A/61/PV.43

In the year of its fiftieth anniversary, we can see
that, despite the challenges and difficulties experienced
in the last 50 years, the IAEA has carried out
significant
work
and
realized
remarkable
achievements. The excellent work undertaken in the
preservation and expansion of the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy was recognized through the award of
the 2005 Nobel Peace Prize to the IAEA and its
Director General.
Indonesia lauds the endeavours of the IAEA, in
particular its Technical Cooperation Programme, now
covering areas ranging from power generation to a
diverse array of industrial, environmental, medical and
agricultural applications. Indonesia has been working
closely with the IAEA for many years, and continues to
support the Programme as an important component of
the Agency’s activities.
Nuclear technology has been successfully used in
Indonesia to cultivate biofuel plants, such as Jatropha
curcas L. for bio-diesel and sweet sorghum for
bio-ethanol. This achievement is in line with the
Indonesian Green Energy Action Plan, recently
formulated to develop alternative sources of energy,
especially in the transportation and power generation
sectors.
In the areas of food and agriculture, we note that
over 25 new and improved varieties of staple food
crops were released in 2005. In this context, highquality rice mutant varieties have been planted in
Indonesia in an area of over 0.4 million hectares. It is
expected that by the end of this year the planted area
will be expanded to 1 million hectares.
We have also benefited from training and
scientific visits, as well as international technical
meetings and seminars conducted under the Agency’s
Technical Cooperation Programme. In addition, we
welcome the step taken by the Agency in increasing the
effectiveness of the Programme in recent years, by
shifting from a technology-driven approach to a needsdriven approach focused on the achievement of
tangible socio-economic benefits in member States. We
also concur with the current strategy highlighting three
elements essential for the successful delivery of the
Programme — strong Government commitment, high
quality of technical cooperation projects and adequate
funding.

assured funds for technical cooperation. We believe
that this objective can only be achieved through a
genuine commitment by all member States, particularly
the developed countries, in providing greater financial
support. My delegation expresses its gratitude to those
member States of the Agency that have contributed to
the Technical Cooperation Fund. Their continued
support and commitment will undoubtedly bring us
closer to the attainment of the Programme’s objectives
through the value of the Fund decided for 2007-2008.
Furthermore, as to the Programme and the use of
its Fund as a whole, we stress that careful
consideration should be given to maintaining an
adequate balance between the Agency’s various
statutory activities and the need to promote technical
cooperation.
The annual report stresses the importance of the
Agency’s activities to improving nuclear security for
member States, including through increasing awareness
and their ability to control and protect nuclear and
other radioactive materials, nuclear installations and
transport from terrorism and other illegal activities. In
this regard, Indonesia has been strongly supportive of
the Agency’s nuclear security activities, in particular
its assistance to the member States in improving
nuclear security. In the domain of nuclear safety, my
delegation commends the Agency’s measures to
strengthen its role of enhancing nuclear, radiation and
transport safety and waste management, through the
development of nuclear safety standards.
As mentioned in the annual report, the Agency
conducted a number of missions in Indonesia through
its Integrated Safety Assessment of Research Reactors
service. We thank the Agency for the implementation
of project INS/9/022, “Inspection Procedures and
Methods for Assessing Reactor Tank Liners”, which
has helped Indonesia to further improve the operational
safety and security of its three research reactors.
Indonesia has successfully established an information
system on the licensing and inspection of radiation
facilities and radioactive sources. With regard to
emergency situations, after conducting the field
exercise on the radiation dispersal device in Jakarta
Province, in cooperation with the Agency, we have also
successfully conducted the Asia and Pacific regional
training course “Practical Response to a Radiological
Emergency Preparedness: First Responder”.

In this connection, it is important to stress that
the IAEA must maintain sufficient, predictable and

14

06-59167

A/61/PV.43

As the report rightly observes, 2005 was a year of
increased expectations for nuclear energy, driven by,
among other things, the growing need for energy
around the world, coupled with rising oil and natural
gas prices. Over the past few years we have witnessed
a considerable change in attitudes towards nuclear
energy. Nuclear power continues to account for a
significant share of world electricity generation,
contributing substantially to world economic
development.
Indonesia believes that nuclear energy as an
energy option has the potential to have a major socioeconomic impact on Member States, especially those
of the developing world. With that in mind, Indonesia
is embarking on its nuclear energy programme, and the
construction of nuclear power plants is under way, with
a view to their being operational in 2016. To this end,
Indonesia is in the process of establishing Government
regulations on the licensing of nuclear reactors, soon to
be signed by the President.
Presidential Decree No. 5 for 2006 concerning
Indonesia’s national energy policy, covering nuclear
power plant activities, was enacted earlier this year to
enable their timely construction. In this connection, we
would like to record our gratitude to the Agency for
providing us with three nuclear-power-related technical
cooperation projects, which hopefully will be further
enhanced in the next technical cooperation cycle,
especially in an effort to enhance the capability of our
regulatory authority to develop standard specifications
and qualification of manpower to supervise and operate
the nuclear power plants.
Remarkable progress has been achieved over the
years in defining and implementing the IAEA
safeguards system. Indonesia has consistently
supported the IAEA’s efforts to strengthen its
safeguards system, which is a fundamental component
of the nuclear non-proliferation regime. For its part,
Indonesia has signed and ratified the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and
concluded a comprehensive safeguards agreement and
additional protocol with the Agency, and it is
particularly pleased that the IAEA has drawn a positive
conclusion with regard to nuclear material and
activities in Indonesia. I also reaffirm our commitment
to the additional protocol, as it constitutes the
centrepiece of the Agency’s response in strengthening
and improving the effectiveness of the safeguards
system.

06-59167

Given the urgent and serious challenges we face
in preserving international peace and security related to
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, much
remains to be done. We share the disappointment at the
lack of progress at the 2005 NPT Review Conference
and at the omission of a nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament section from the 2005 World Summit
Outcome. For Indonesia, the NPT remains the
cornerstone of the global non-proliferation regime and
an essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear
disarmament. We look forward to the commencement
of a new cycle in the review process of the NPT next
year.
In the preparations for the 2010 NPT Review
Conference, there is an urgent need to strengthen the
integrity of the NPT. A successful outcome of the
Review Conference is vital for the strengthening of the
nuclear non-proliferation regime and nuclear
disarmament for the purposes of maintaining
international peace and security.
The past two years have proved challenging for
the IAEA with respect to safeguards and verification.
In fact, some issues have preoccupied the Agency. We
note with appreciation that it has maintained its
professionalism in dealing with all the verification
challenges, and thereby has strengthened its credibility
and integrity.
The Iranian nuclear issue will continue to capture
our attention, and it deserves our resolute action. In
view of the serious implications of this issue, wisdom,
statesmanship and the need to preserve peace and
security in the region should be given due
consideration. We believe that diplomacy, negotiations
and other peaceful means are the best and most suitable
approaches in dealing with this issue. We strongly
support the Director General in continuing and
completing his work on the issue. At the same time, we
urge Iran to continue to cooperate fully and actively
with the Director General in his efforts to resolve this
issue.
Israel’s nuclear capabilities and threat, and the
nuclear adventures of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, are other issues of grave concern
for us, as they pose serious threats to regional peace
and security. While the threat of nuclear weapons has
subsided in other regions, we may be exposed to the
danger of such weapons in West and East Asia. The

15

A/61/PV.43

international community should therefore give high
priority to dealing with these two dangerous problems.
In this regard, the return of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to the NPT, and the
accession of Israel to the Treaty, as well as the
placement of their nuclear programmes under IAEA
safeguards, are the most urgent and critical steps
towards reducing tension and the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East and the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
In this connection, we are very disappointed by
the continued Israeli refusal to cooperate with the
Director General in implementing the General
Conference resolutions regarding the application of
full-scope Agency safeguards in the Middle East, as
that does not help to create the conditions for lasting
peace and security, and will certainly deepen suspicion
of its motives and policies.
Indonesia supports and lauds the efforts of the
Agency in enhancing nuclear safety and security, as
well as safeguards and verification in ensuring the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. We share the
growing concern over the challenges on those issues,
and we have noted several initiatives and proposals put
forward in this regard.
We believe, however, that proliferation concerns
and all safeguards issues are best addressed through
multilaterally negotiated, universal, comprehensive and
non-discriminatory agreements under the auspices of
the IAEA. We could not agree more that
non-proliferation control arrangements should be
transparent and open to participation by all States, and
should ensure that they do not impose restrictions on
the access to material, equipment and the development
of nuclear technology and know-how for peaceful
purposes required by Member States, particularly
developing countries, for their continued development.
In this regard, the proposal of the Group of Experts
entrusted by the Director General in 2005 with
exploring the possibility of developing a region-based
multinational facility has its own merit and deserves
further consideration by member States in addressing
their prevailing concern regarding assurances of supply
and non-proliferation.
Indonesia believes that the inalienable right of all
States parties to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in
accordance with article IV of the NPT, constitutes one
of the fundamental objectives of the Treaty, and that

16

nothing in the Treaty shall be interpreted as affecting
the inalienable right of all parties to it to develop,
research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, without discrimination. We reiterate that
each country’s choices and decisions in the field of the
peaceful use of nuclear energy should be respected,
without jeopardizing international agreements and
arrangements for peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
My delegation reaffirms its continued support for
the efforts of the IAEA and the Director General in the
advancement of the uses of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes and in the furtherance of the non-proliferation
regime, through its strengthened safeguards system. We
also believe that the agenda and concerns over
international peace and security, as well as nuclear
proliferation, should not overshadow the great
challenges we face in promoting peaceful uses of
nuclear energy for sustainable socio-economic
development.
Mr. Martirosyan (Armenia): At the outset, I join
others in thanking Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei for his
presentation of the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA).
This year has been truly fraught with challenges
in the areas of nuclear disarmament and the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. As a neighbouring country, we
are hopeful that the international community will be
able to find a resolution to the Iranian nuclear issue
through diplomacy and dialogue. We were very
concerned about the nuclear test conducted by North
Korea and hope that the international community’s
reaction to that problem will be demonstrative of its
resolve not to allow the nuclearization of the Korean
peninsula.
Armenia attaches great importance to nuclear
energy in both the economic and security aspects. Its
cooperation with the IAEA to ensure the uninterrupted
and safe operation of the Armenian nuclear power plant
has been remarkable.
In December 2005, a special technical meeting to
coordinate international assistance to the Armenian
nuclear power plant was organized by the Agency’s
Director General, Mr. ElBaradei, with the participation
of donor countries. It presented a comprehensive
summary of the analysis of different aspects related to
the Armenian power plant: design, seismic and
operational safety issues, and regulatory issues, as well
as the relationship between IAEA Technical

06-59167

A/61/PV.43

Documents safety issues and the programme to
upgrade the Armenian nuclear power plant.
In its power plant programme, Armenia made
commitments to implementing a number of additional
measures aimed at upgrading the safety of the nuclear
power plant. The sum of $1.8 million was allocated by
the Government of Armenia to that end, and the
measures will be carried out in the fall of this year,
when the Metsamor nuclear power plant will undergo
an annual outage and refuelling. A technical meeting
for the coordination of international assistance will
follow to assess the measures taken and come up with
additional recommendations.
Armenia pays great attention to the protection of
radioactive sources. In 2006, an inventory of existing
radioactive sources was made and an investigation of
orphan sources is currently under way. This year,
Armenia assumed the chairmanship of the WWER
Regulators Forum and hosted the thirteenth annual
meeting in Yerevan in June. The Forum welcomed
three new member States — China, India and Iran —
and made its contribution to further improving
regulators’ activities, making them more efficient and
transparent.
The sustainability of energy sources is a major
issue for my country. Armenia is very interested in the
International Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel
Cycles project, which drafts new standards for new
nuclear stations, the safety and security of the fuel
cycle, ecological aspects and non-proliferation issues.
The project is of special importance to those countries
planning to develop their nuclear energy sector. In that
respect, I would like to underline that a feasibility
study for nuclear energy development in Armenia was
approved by Director General ElBaradei for the next
biennium. The project will make an analysis of the
expenditures for the construction of new nuclear
reactors based on the existing infrastructure and the
expertise of the current staff of the Metsamor nuclear
power plant. Meanwhile, in collaboration with the
European Union and under the Technical Assistance to
the Commonwealth of Independent States and Georgia
programme for 2006-2007, the Armenian Government
is working on a project that will set the timetable and
expenditures for the decommissioning of unit 2 of the
nuclear power plant.
The Armenian Government’s progress in ensuring
the safe and secure operation of the Armenian nuclear

06-59167

power plant would have been very difficult, and in
certain instances almost impossible, without the
support and assistance of our partners and donors. In
that respect, I would like to express my gratitude to the
Governments of the United States, the Russian
Federation, France, the United Kingdom, Bulgaria and
Slovakia for their financial and professional support.
Mr. Tulbure (Moldova): First of all, I would like
to thank Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for
his comprehensive report.
The Republic of Moldova aligns itself with the
European Union statement, but I would like to
highlight some additional subjects related to my
country.
Today, humanity is entering an era of rapid
scientific and technological development. As related to
global economic expenditures, the need for energy
sustainability and new technologies is becoming
increasingly pressing. In that context, more and more
countries have begun to review the role of nuclear
technologies in their economic development. The
IAEA has an important mission to promote the
peaceful uses of nuclear technologies. Convinced that
this policy will continue, the IAEA provides as much
assistance as possible to the developing countries via
technical cooperation, expert consultancy and
personnel training.
Special attention is paid in our country to the
development and adoption of our own legislative
framework to harmonize it with European Union
standards. That will guarantee the accomplishment of
those objectives in the nuclear field as well. The
Republic of Moldova is deeply attached to the peaceful
uses of nuclear technologies. That is reflected in a
major political option taken by our country that is
clearly outlined in the recently adopted national law
concerning the safe implementation of nuclear
activities and those involving ionizing radiation
sources.
All countries that go through the transition to a
market economy face a decline or stagnation in their
economic development. Our country was no exception.
Moldova is facing a very complicated situation of
scarce energy resources. Almost all our energy is
imported from Ukraine and Russia and prices continue
to rise, affecting our economy. Thus, the Government’s
goal is to find alternative energy sources, both

17

A/61/PV.43

renewable and nuclear. The IAEA could take the
following actions to provide technical assistance or
finance projects in those fields in developing countries.

The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We
shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/61/L.9.

Moldova has signed a new Country Programme
Framework, reflecting our major interests related to the
Agency. In the Framework, the following priority areas
of cooperation were identified: nuclear equipment in
human health, radiation processing, radiation safety,
emergency preparedness and radioactive waste
management. It is necessary to underline that, within
the framework of our cooperation assistance projects,
around $3 million have been provided through the
IAEA. For the next biennial cycle, three national
projects have been submitted. Two are related to the
implementation of proton linear accelerator technology
in cancer treatment and to the establishment of new
industrial sectors based on radiation processing
technology. The third national project is related to the
upgrading of radiation monitoring capability.

I call on the representative of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, who wishes to speak in
explanation of vote before the voting. I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

I would like to express our gratitude to the IAEA
and the United States Government for their support
regarding the safety of radioactive sources. Those
activities were undertaken successfully, and the storage
of sources is in keeping with international standards.
We will be very grateful to our partners for their
assistance in the implementation of the national project
to establish an industrial radiation processing centre.
This project will have a considerable impact on the
development of such branches of the economy as
pharmaceuticals, medicine, the food industry and the
sciences.
We are aware of the importance of nuclear
security and will pursue further cooperation with the
IAEA Department of Safeguards concerning the
implementation of the respective international norms
and practices. In this context, our Government has
presented an official letter to the Agency regarding our
readiness to sign the additional protocol.
The IAEA has been playing an indispensable role
in the peaceful use of nuclear technologies and
preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. That
is why it has become one of the most dynamic
international organizations. I reiterate the support of
our Government for the IAEA’s activities.
Moldova co-sponsored the draft resolution
introduced by the representative of Slovenia and will
vote in favour of it.

18

Mr. Sin Song Chol (Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea would like to clarify its
position on the draft resolution.
First, it is totally unreasonable for the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to
mention the so-called nuclear issue of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in its report. We would like
to draw attention to the fact that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is neither a member of the
IAEA nor a party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty (NPT).
Secondly, the IAEA addresses the nuclear issue
on the Korean peninsula in a biased manner. The
nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula is a political and
military issue between the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the United States, which cannot
be dealt with by the IAEA.
The nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula is an
outcome of the hostile United States policy towards the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. For more than
half a century the United States has made nuclear
threats to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
In particular, President Bush, immediately after
assuming power, designated the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea part of an “axis of evil” and a target
of the United States nuclear pre-emptive strike.
Moreover, as soon as the 19 September Beijing
Joint Statement was made public the United States
imposed financial sanctions upon the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and stepped up its pressure
from every angle. In addition, the United States
hindered the implementation of the Joint Statement by
every means, with such threats and blackmail as largescale military exercises targeting the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
The possession of nuclear weapons and nuclear
testing by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

06-59167

A/61/PV.43

is actually attributable to the United States nuclear
threats, sanctions and blockade against my country.
It is important to evaluate exactly how the IAEA
has dealt with the nuclear issue. This matter has
emerged as a political and military issue between the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which is a
very small country, and the United States, which is a
pretend super-Power, with both still technically at war.
The IAEA, under United States instructions, has
addressed the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula
with prejudice and double standards, abandoning its
impartiality, which must be its lifeline as an
international organization.
Denuclearization of the Korean peninsula is the
ultimate goal of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, whose will to denuclearize the Korean
peninsula through dialogue and negotiations, to which
it committed itself in the 19 September Joint
Statement, remains unchanged. But it should be clearly
understood that denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula cannot be realized through the unilateral
abandonment by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea of its nuclear programme, and that it can be
realized only when the United States also implements
its own obligations.
My delegation stresses that the Beijing Joint
Statement stipulates the obligations of not only the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, but also the
United States and South Korea, which are parties
directly concerned in the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea opposes the draft resolution, since it
is intended to mislead about the substance of the
nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula and does not
help to solve the problem at all.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/61/L.9.
Since the introduction of the draft resolution, the
following countries have become sponsors: Angola,
Cape Verde, Montenegro, the Philippines and Peru.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

06-59167

In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada,
Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar,
Malaysia,
Maldives,
Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen
Against:
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Abstaining:
Zambia
Draft resolution A/61/L.9 was adopted by 114
votes to 1, with 1 abstention (resolution 61/8).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bolivia,
Cyprus, Liberia and Zambia informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): Before
giving the floor to the speaker in explanation of vote
after the vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.

19

A/61/PV.43

I call on the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote
on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Taleb (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution, on the basis of its belief in the importance
of the IAEA in monitoring nuclear non-proliferation
and guaranteeing the right of Member States, large and
small, to the peaceful uses of atomic energy.
Yet my delegation would like to place on record
its regret and disappointment at the positions taken by
many States in the IAEA General Conference during its
fiftieth session on the item concerning the Israeli
nuclear capacity and the Israeli nuclear threat. Those
positions led to a postponement of the discussion of the
item until next year, while major international
pressures are being brought to bear on other States that
are exercising their sovereign right to acquire nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes.
This item has been on the agenda of the General
Conference for more than a decade, during which
resolutions in favour of establishing a zone free of
nuclear weapons in the Middle East have accumulated.
Those resolutions have called on Israel to renounce its
nuclear option and place its nuclear installations under
international inspection and the safeguards agreement,
and to seek to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
which has no room for policies of nuclear terrorism.
Our disappointment is also caused by the failure
of the international community to send a clear message
to Israel affirming its sincere will and vigorous efforts
to implement the principle of nuclear non-proliferation,
rather than continue to follow the policy of nuclear
hypocrisy pursued by some States, which will only lead
to further risk to international peace and security. My
delegation stresses that silencing the voice of right this
time, in the face of the Israeli nuclear threat and risk in
the Middle East region, through aborting the draft
resolution will not be repeated ad infinitum. The day
will come when the voice of right will be heard.
The voting in the First Committee on draft
resolution A/C.1/61/L.2, “The risk of nuclear
proliferation in the Middle East”, is sure evidence of
the invalidity of the positions of those States that have
hindered the discussion of the aforementioned item in
the IAEA General Conference, especially since the

20

seventh preambular paragraph of that draft resolution,
adopted by the First Committee on 23 October 2006
with 151 votes in favour, expresses concern at the
continued existence in the Middle East of
unsafeguarded nuclear facilities, and since the eighth
preambular paragraph notes that Israel remains the
only State in the Middle East that has not yet become
party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. Moreover,
operative paragraphs 2 and 3 reaffirm the importance
of Israel’s accession to the Treaty without further delay
and placement of all its nuclear facilities under
comprehensive IAEA safeguards, and call upon Israel
not to develop, produce, test or otherwise acquire
nuclear weapons, but rather to renounce their
possession as an important confidence-building
measure among all States of the region and as a step
towards enhancing peace and security.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 81?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to inform members that tomorrow morning, at
10 a.m., the General Assembly will consider, as the
first item, a report of the Fifth Committee on agenda
item 133, financing of the United Nations Operation in
Burundi. As the second item, the Assembly will resume
its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 103,
election of five non-permanent members of the
Security Council.
I would also like to inform members that, in
addition to the item already scheduled for the afternoon
of Wednesday, 1 November, the Assembly will
consider, as the first item, agenda item 156, extension
of the terms of the ad litem judges of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

06-59167
