Reaolutiona adopted on the reportll 0£ the Third Committee

Commending the encouraging results achieved in the
field of ip.ter-agency co-operation with the support of
the Governments concerned and the other members
of the United Nations system and noting with appreciation the untiring activities of the non-governmental
organizations working on behalf of refugees,
Noting that the Executive Committee of the High
Commissioner's Programme has approved an increased
programme to cover additional needs of refugees, particularly in Africa,
Noting with appreciation the sizable increase in
contributions from certain countries, and also the increase in the number of contributing countries,
Expressing concern, however, about the difficulties
still facing the High Commissioner in financing his
programme,
1. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to provide international protection and assistance to refugees who are his concern,
while giving special attention to new groups of refugees,
particularly in Africa, in conformity with the relevant
General Assembly resolutions and the directives of the
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme;
2. Urges States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies to continue to lend
their support to the High Commissioner's humanitarian
task by:
(a) Facilitating the voluntary repatriation, local integration or resettlement of refugees who are the High
Commissioner's concern;
( b.) Improving the legal status of refugees residing
in their territory, inter alia, by acceding to the international instruments relating to refugees and by treating
new refugee situations in accordance with the principles and spirit of the Declaration on Territorial
Asylum and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights;
(c) Providing the High Commissioner with the
necessary means of accomplishing the. task incumbent
upon him and, in particular, by enabling him to reach
the financial targets established with the approval of the
Executive Committee ;
( d) Drawing the attention of the governing bodies
of other organs in the United Nations system to the
need to support the High Commissioner in his efforts
to ensure that the requirements of refugees, including
education and training, are taken into full account.
1735th plenary meeting,
6 December 1968.
2432 (XXIII), United Nations Children's Fund
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter XIII, section B, of the
report of the Economic and Social Council,11 dealing
with the United Nations Children's Fund,
Welcoming the emphasis placed by the United Nations
Children's Fund upon considering the needs of the
child as a whole and, tc, that end, aiding programmes
to improve the health, nutrition, education and general
well-being of the younger generation in developing
countries,

Recognizing that these programmes are essential in
achieving the goals of the United Nations in promoting
development,
11 Ibid., TWfflt,-third Session, Supplement No. 3

(A/7203).

43

Noting that the Executive Board of the United
Nations Children's Fund at its June 1968 session,
continuing its practice of periodic reviews of programmes of the Fund, considered an assessment of
education projects jointly assisted by the Fund and the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,
Noting further with satisfaction the prominence given
by the United Nations Children's Fund to supporting
national training schemes in many fields which contribute directly to the preparation of human resources
essential for social as well as economic development,
Observing with approval that the United Nations
Children's Fund continues to respond to the emergency
needs of mothers and children,
Deeply concerned, however, at the magnitude of the
unfulfilled needs of children in the developing countries
and at the increasing demands on the United Nations
Children's Fund for long-range aid and, more recently,
for emergencies,
1. Endorses the policies and programmes of the
United Nations Children's Fund to aid countries to
protect and prepare the young,r generation within the
larger context of national development ;
2. Commends the United Nations Children's Fund
for its continued close co-operation with other members of the United Nations system of organizations;
3. Appeals to Governments and other donors to
increase substantially their contributions to the United
Nations Children's Fund so that its present goal of an
annual income of $50 million can be attained no later
than the end of the present United Nations Development Decade ;
4. W elcoines the appeal of the Executive Board of
the United Nations Children's Fund for special contributions to mee.t the emergency needs of mothers
and children ;
5. Calls upon national and international bodies with
responsibility for multilateral and bilateral aid to consider how their programmes might take account of
the needs of children and youth to the fullest possible
extent.
1748tli plenar·y meeting,
19 Decen1,ber 1968.
2433 (XXIII). International control of
psychotropic subl!ltancel!I
Tire General Assembly,
Concerned at the epidemic spread of the abuse of
psychotropic substances not yet under international
control and considering the responsibilities exercised
by the United Nations in that field under Chapter IX
of the Charter of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the reports of the Economic and
Social Council and of the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs issued in 1966, 12 196713 and 196814 and the work
of the World Health Organization,
12 Official Records Qf the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/6303); Official Records of th,
Economic and Soci11l Council, Portieth Session, Supplement
No. 2 (E/4140).
lS Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-s,c"""
Session, Suppltmfflt No. 3 ( A/6703) ; 0 fficial RecMds of IM
Economic and Social Council, Forry-stcond Session, Sll,tllment No. 2 (E/4294).
14 Official Records of the General Assembl}•, Twnty-thirtl
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/7203); Official Records of th,
Economic and Social Council, Forty-third Sessio11, Supplement No. 2 (E/4455).
