General Assembly-Sixteenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SPECIAL
POLITICAL COMMITTEE

CONTENTS

1629 (XVI). Report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects
of Atomic Radiation (27 October 1%1) (item 24) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1661 (XVI). The status of the German-speaki~g element in the Province of
Bolzano (Bozen) (28 November 1961) (item 74) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1662 (XVI). Treatment of people of Indian and Indo-Pakistan origin in the
Republic of South Africa (28 November 1961) (item 75) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1663 (XVI). The question of race conflict in South Africa resulting from the
policies of apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South Africa
(28 November 1961) (item 76) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1725 (XVI). Report of the Director of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East ( 20 December 1961 )
(item 25)
...................................................

Page

9
10
10
10
11

the International Commission on Radiological Protection and the International Commission on Radiological
Units and Measurements, in compliance with General
Assembly resolutions 1376 (XIV) of 17 November
1959 and 1574 (XV) of 20 December 1960;
4. Reaffirms the desirability of continuing full international co-operation through the Scientific Committee and interchanges of the results and experience
of research conducted at the national level, so that man's
knowledge of the hazards of radiation will constantly
improve and in particular so that the second comprehensive report to be presented in 1962 by the Committee
will be as scientifically authoritative and informative
as possible;
5. Invites countries wishing to do so to take advantage of the offers of laboratory facilities which. have
been made by Member States, the World Health Organization and the International Atomic Energy Agency
for the analysis of samples of air, water, bone, soil and
food collected in their territories, as envisaged in section IV of resolution 1376 (XIV) ;
·6. Requests the Scientific Committee to examine
the possibility of accelerating its second comprehensive
report and to consider at the earliest possible time
whetht>r the facts at its disposal call for the submission
of an interim report;

1629 (XVI). Report of the United Natiom Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic
Radiation

The General Assembly,

I
Deeply concerned that as a result of the renewed
discharge into the earth's environment of radio-active
debris there have been sharp increases in the levels of
radio-active fall-out in many parts of the world,
Fearful that the prolonged exposure of mankind to
increasing levels of radio-active fall-out would constitute a growing threat to this and future generations,
Recognizing the great importance of the contribution
made by the United Nations Scientific Committee on
the Effects of Atomic Radiation in the study of the
extent and nature of this hazard,
1. Declares that both concern for the future of mankind and the fundamental principles of international
law impose a responsibility on all States concerning
actions which might have harmful biological consequences for the existing and future generations of
peoples of other States, by increasing the levels of
radio-active fall-out;
2. Approves the annual progress report of the United
Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of
Atomic Radiation 1 and draws particular attention to
the Committee's view that the resumption of nuclear
test explosions since the publication of its last comprehensive report increases the urgency for the intensification of relevant scientific studies ;
3. Expresses appreciation for the valuable information on radio-active contamination, radiation levels and
radio-biological questions which has been furnished to
the Scientific Committee by Member States, the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency,

II
Noting that, in accordance with procedures and practices established by the World Meteorological Organ~zation, the countries of the world have for many years
operated a system for the routine reporting of atmospheric conditions from a world-wide network of meteorological stations for the prompt dissemination of these
reports by telegraphic and other means,
1. Invites the World Meteorological Organization,
in consultation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the United Nations Scientific Committee
on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, as necessary, to

1
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session
Annexes, agenda item 24, document A/4881.
'

9

10

General Assembly-Sixteenth Session

examine urgently the feasibility of extending the present
meteorological reporting system to include measurements of atmospheric radio-activity with the following
aims in mind :
(a) To ensure that reliable and standardized measurements of atmospheric radio-activity are made at a
world-wide network of stations;
(b) To ensure the day-to-day exchange of this information by telegraphic and other means with a view
to its prompt reception at appointed national centres;
( c) To ensure that national and/or international
arrangements be made for these observations to be
stored as permanent records of atmospheric radioactivity and to be published in appropriate forms at
suitable intervals;
2. Invites the \Vorld Meteorological Organization
to implement the above-mentioned scheme, if found
feasible, at the earliest possible elate.
1043rd plenary meeting,
27 October 1961.

1661 (XVI). The status of the German-speaking
element in the Province of Bolzano ( Bozen)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1497 (XV) of 31 October
1960,
Noting with satisfaction the negotiations which are
taking place between the two parties concerned,
Noting further that the dispute remains as yet unresolved,
Calls for further efforts by the two parties concerned
to find a solution in accordance with paragraphs 1, 2 and
3 of the above-mentioned resolution.
1067th plenary meeting,
28 November 1961.

1662 (XVI). Treatment of people of Indian and
Indo-Pakistan origin in the Republic of
South Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1179 (XII) of 26 November 1957, 1302 (XIII) of 10 December 1958, 1460
(XIV) of 10 December 1959 and 1597 (XV) of 13
April 1961,
Having considered the reports of the Governments
of Inclia2 and Pakistan, 3
1. Notes that the Governments of India and Pakistan have once again reiterated their readiness to enter into negotiations with the Government of the Republic of South Africa in accordance with the expressed desires of the United Nations, and with the
express declaration that such negotiations would be
without prejudice to the juridical stands taken by the
respective Governments;
2. Notes with deep regret that the Government of
South Africa has repeatedly ignored the resolutions of
the General Assembly, has not replied to the communications from the Governments of India and Pakistan on this subject and has not shown any disposition
• Ibid., agenda item 75, documents A/4803 and Add.1.
• Ibid., document A/4817.

to arrive at a solution to this problem in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the repeated recommendations of the Assembly;
3. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
enter into negotiations with the Governments of India
and Pakistan, in conformity with the repeated resolutions of the General Assembly;
4. Invites Member States to use their good offices
in such manner as may be appropriate to bring about
the negotiations envisaged by the General Assembly
in this matter;
5. Invites the parties concerned to report to the
General Assembly, jointly or separately, regarding any
progress which may be made.
1067th plenary meeting,
28 November 1961.

1663 (XVI). The question of race conflict in
South Africa resulting from the policies of
apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South Africa
The General Assembly,
R eca/ling its previous resolutions on the question
of race conflict in South Africa resulting from the
policies of apartheid of the Government of the Republic
of South Africa,
Considering that in its resolutions 616 B (VII) of 5
December 1952, 917 (X) of 6 December 1955 and 1248
( XIII) of 30 October 1958 the General Assembly
has declared that racial policies designed to perpetuate
or increase discrimination are inconsistent with the
Charter of the United Nations and with the pledges
under Article 56 of the Charter,
N otinq that in its resolutions 395 (V) of 2 December 1950, 511 (VI) of 12 January 1952 and 616 A
(VII) of 5 December 1952 the General Assembly has
successively affirmed that the policy of racial segregation (apartl1eid) is necessarily based on doctrines of
racial discrimination,
Recalling that the Security Council in its resolution
of 1 April 19604 recognized that the situation in South
Africa was one that had led to international friction
and, if continued, might endanger international peace
and security,
Recalling further that the Security Council in its
aforesaid resolution called upon the Government of
South Africa to initiate measures aimed at bringing
about racial harmony based on equality in order to
ensure that the present situation does not continue, or
reettr and to abandon its policies of apartheid and racial
discrimination,
Recalling in particular that the Government of South
Africa has completely disregarded General Assembly
resolution 1598 (XV) of 13 April 1961 and, far from
bringing its policies and conduct into conformity with
its obligations under the Charter, has continued to reinforce its racial policies in disregard of those obligations,
• Official Records of the Security Council, Fifteenth Year,
Supplement for April, May and June 1960, document S/4300.
