UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/22
3 May 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3372nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 3 May 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "An agenda for
peace: preventive diplomacy, peacemaking and peace-keeping", the President of
the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"Aware of its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council has begun its
consideration of the report of the Secretary-General entitled ’Improving
the capacity of the United Nations for peace-keeping’ of 14 March 1994
(S/26450). The Security Council welcomes the useful account the report
provides of the measures the Secretary-General has taken to strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations to undertake peace-keeping operations. The
Security Council notes that this report follows the report of the
Secretary-General entitled ’An Agenda for Peace’ (S/24111) and that it
responds to the statements made by successive Presidents of the Security
Council on ’An Agenda for Peace’, including in particular the statement
made by the President of the Security Council on 28 May 1993 (S/25859).
"The Security Council notes that the report ’Improving the capacity of
the United Nations for peace-keeping’ has been transmitted to the General
Assembly and also notes that the Special Committee on Peace-keeping
Operations has made recommendations on the report.
"Establishment of Peace-keeping Operations
"The Security Council recalls that the statement made by its President
on 28 May 1993 (S/25859) stated, inter alia, that United Nations peacekeeping operations should be conducted in accordance with a number of
operational principles, consistent with the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations. In that context, the Security Council is conscious of
the need for the political goals, mandate, costs, and, where possible, the
estimated time-frame of United Nations peace-keeping operations to be clear
and precise, and of the requirement for the mandates of peace-keeping
operations to be subject to periodic review. The Council will respond to
situations on a case-by-case basis. Without prejudice to its ability to do
so and to respond rapidly and flexibly as circumstances require, the

94-20290 (E)

030594

/...

S/PRST/1994/22
English
Page 2

Council considers that the following factors, among others, should be taken
into account when the establishment of new peace-keeping operations is
under consideration:
-

whether a situation exists the continuation of which is likely to
endanger or constitute a threat to international peace and security;

-

whether regional or subregional organizations and arrangements exist
and are ready and able to assist in resolving the situation;

-

whether a cease-fire exists and whether the parties have committed
themselves to a peace process intended to reach a political
settlement;

-

whether a clear political goal exists and whether it can be reflected
in the mandate;

-

whether a precise mandate for a United Nations operation can be
formulated;

-

whether the safety and security of United Nations personnel can be
reasonably ensured, including in particular whether reasonable
guarantees can be obtained from the principal parties or factions
regarding the safety and security of United Nations personnel; in this
regard it reaffirms its statement of 31 March 1993 (S/25493) and its
resolution 868 (1993) of 29 September 1993.

"The Security Council should also be provided with an estimate of
projected costs for the start-up phase (initial 90 days) of the operation
and the first six months, as well as for the resulting increase in total
projected annualized United Nations peace-keeping expenditures, and should
be informed of the likely availability of resources for the new operation.
"The Security Council emphasizes the need for the full cooperation of
the parties concerned in implementing the mandates of peace-keeping
operations as well as relevant decisions of the Security Council.
"Ongoing Review of Operations
"The Security Council notes that the increasing number and complexity
of peace-keeping operations, and of situations likely to give rise to
proposals for peace-keeping operations, may require measures to improve the
quality and speed of the flow of information available to support Council
decision-making. The Security Council will keep this question under
consideration.
"The Security Council welcomes the enhanced efforts made by the
Secretariat to provide information to the Council and underlines the
importance of further improving the briefing for Council members on matters
of special concern.

/...

S/PRST/1994/22
English
Page 3

"Communication with Non-Members of the Security Council (including Troop
Contributors)
"The Security Council recognizes the implications which its decisions
on peace-keeping operations have for the Members of the United Nations and
in particular for troop-contributing countries.
"The Security Council welcomes the increased communication between
members and non-members of the Council and believes that the practice of
monthly consultations between the President of the Security Council and
competent groups of Member States on the Council’s programme of work (which
includes matters relating to peace-keeping operations) should be continued.
"The Security Council is conscious of the need for enhanced
consultations and exchange of information with troop-contributing countries
regarding peace-keeping operations, including their planning, management
and coordination, particularly when significant extensions in an
operation’s mandate are in prospect. Such consultations can take a variety
of forms involving Member States, troop-contributing countries, members of
the Security Council and the Secretariat.
"The Security Council believes that when major events occur regarding
peace-keeping operations, including decisions to change or extend a
mandate, there is a particular need for members of the Council to seek to
exchange views with troop contributors, including by way of informal
communications between the Council’s President or its members and troop
contributors.
"The recent practice of the Secretariat convening meetings of troop
contributors, in the presence, as appropriate, of Council members, is
welcome and should be developed. The Council also encourages the
Secretariat to convene regular meetings for troop contributors and Council
members to hear reports from Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral or Force Commanders and, as appropriate, to make situation reports
on peace-keeping operations available at frequent and regular intervals.
"The Security Council will keep under review arrangements for
communication with non-members of the Council.
"Stand-by Arrangements
"The Security Council attaches great importance to improving the
capacity of the United Nations to meet the need for rapid deployment and
reinforcement of peace-keeping operations.
"In this context the Security Council welcomes the recommendations in
the Secretary-General’s report of 14 March 1994 concerning stand-by
arrangements and capabilities. The Security Council notes the intention of
the Secretary-General to devise stand-by arrangements or capabilities which
Member States could maintain at an agreed state of readiness as a possible
contribution to a United Nations peace-keeping operation and welcomes the
commitments undertaken by a number of Member States.
/...

S/PRST/1994/22
English
Page 4

"The Security Council welcomes the request by the Secretary-General to
Member States to respond positively to this initiative and encourages
Member States to do so in so far as possible.
"The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to include civilian personnel, such as police, in the present
stand-by arrangements planning initiative.
"The Security Council also encourages the Secretary-General to ensure
that the Stand-by Arrangements Management Unit carry on its work, including
the periodic updating of the list of units and resources.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to report by
30 June 1994 and thereafter at least once a year on progress with this
initiative.
"The Council will keep this matter under review in order to make
recommendations or take decisions required in this regard.
"Civilian Personnel
"The Security Council welcomes the observations made by the SecretaryGeneral in his report in respect of civilian personnel, including civilian
police, and invites Member States to respond positively to requests to
contribute such personnel to United Nations peace-keeping operations.
"The Security Council attaches importance to full coordination between
the different components, military and civilian, of a peace-keeping
operation, particularly a multifaceted one. This coordination should
extend throughout the planning and implementation of the operation, both at
United Nations Headquarters and in the field.
"Training
"The Security Council recognizes that the training of personnel for
peace-keeping operations is essentially the responsibility of Member
States, but encourages the Secretariat to continue the development of basic
guidelines and performance standards and to provide descriptive materials.
"The Security Council notes the recommendations of the Special
Committee on Peace-keeping Operations on training of peace-keeping
personnel. It invites Member States to cooperate with each other in the
provision of facilities for this purpose.
"Command and Control
"The Security Council stresses that as a leading principle United
Nations peace-keeping operations should be under the operational control of
the United Nations.
"The Security Council welcomes the call by the General Assembly
(resolution 48/43) that the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the
/...

S/PRST/1994/22
English
Page 5

members of the Security Council, troop-contributing States and other
interested Member States, take urgent action on the question of command and
control, notes the comments of the Secretary-General in his report of
14 March 1994 and looks forward to his further report on the matter.
"Financial and Administrative Issues
"Bearing in mind the responsibilities of the General Assembly under
Article 17 of the Charter, the Security Council notes the SecretaryGeneral’s observations and recommendations on budgetary matters relating to
peace-keeping operations in his report of 14 March 1994 and notes also that
his report has been referred to the General Assembly for its consideration.
"The Security Council confirms that estimates of the financial
implications of peace-keeping operations are required from the Secretariat
before decisions on mandates or extensions are taken so that the Council is
able to act in a financially responsible way.
"Conclusion
"The Security Council will give further consideration to the
recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General."

-----
