United Nations

A/RES/64/47

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 January 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 96 (y)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 2 December 2009
[on the report of the First Committee (A/64/391)]

64/47. Renewed determination towards the total elimination of
nuclear weapons
The General Assembly,
Recalling the need for all States to take further practical steps and effective
measures towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons, with a view to achieving
a peaceful and safe world, without nuclear weapons, and renewing the determination
to do so,
Noting that the ultimate objective of the efforts of States in the disarmament
process is general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international
control,
Recalling its resolution 63/73 of 2 December 2008,
Convinced that every effort should be made to avoid nuclear war and nuclear
terrorism,
Reaffirming the crucial importance of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons 1 as the cornerstone of the international nuclear non-proliferation
regime and an essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament and for
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, welcoming the results of the third session of the
Preparatory Committee for the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to be held in 2010, the year of the sixtyfifth anniversary of the atomic bombings in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan, and
noting the importance of achieving the success of the Review Conference,
0F

Recalling the decisions and the resolution of the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons 2 and the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty, 3
1F

2F

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.
3
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final
Document, vols. I-III (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I-IV)).
2

09-46465

*0946465*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/47

Recognizing that the enhancement of international peace and security and the
promotion of nuclear disarmament are mutually reinforcing,
Reaffirming that further advancement in nuclear disarmament will contribute
to consolidating the international regime for nuclear non-proliferation, which is,
inter alia, essential to international peace and security,
Welcoming the recent global momentum of nuclear disarmament towards a
world without nuclear weapons, which has been strengthened by concrete proposals
and initiatives from political leaders of Member States, in particular by the Russian
Federation and the United States of America, which currently together hold most of
the nuclear weapons in the world,
Welcoming also the United Nations Security Council Summit on Nuclear
Non-proliferation and Nuclear Disarmament, held on 24 September 2009, which
confirmed the vision for a world without nuclear weapons,
Expressing deep concern regarding the growing dangers posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, inter alia, nuclear weapons, including
that caused by proliferation networks,
Recognizing the importance of implementing Security Council resolution
1718 (2006) of 14 October 2006 with regard to the nuclear test proclaimed by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on 9 October 2006 and Council resolution
1874 (2009) of 12 June 2009 with regard to the nuclear test conducted by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on 25 May 2009, while calling upon the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to return immediately and without
preconditions to the Six-Party Talks, and reiterating strong support for the early
resumption of the Talks,
Reaffirms the importance of all States parties to the Treaty on the
1.
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons1 complying with their obligations under all
the articles of the Treaty;
0H

2.
Stresses the importance of an effective Treaty review process, and calls
upon all States parties to the Treaty to work together so that the 2010 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
can successfully strengthen the Treaty regime and can establish effective and
practical measures in all the Treaty’s three pillars;
Reaffirms the importance of the universality of the Treaty, and calls upon
3.
States not parties to the Treaty to accede to it as non-nuclear-weapon States without
delay and without conditions and, pending their accession to the Treaty, to adhere to
its terms as well as to take practical steps in support of the Treaty;
Encourages further steps leading to nuclear disarmament, in accordance
4.
with article VI of the Treaty, including deeper reductions in all types of nuclear
weapons, and emphasizes the importance of applying the principles of irreversibility
and verifiability, as well as increased transparency, in a way that promotes
international stability and undiminished security for all, in the process of working
towards the elimination of nuclear weapons;
Calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to undertake reductions of nuclear
5.
weapons in a transparent manner, and invites all nuclear-weapon States to agree on
transparency and confidence-building measures, while noting in this regard the
increased transparency demonstrated by nuclear-weapon States on their nuclear
arsenals, including the current number of their nuclear warheads;

2

A/RES/64/47

6.
Encourages the Russian Federation and the United States of America to
fully implement the obligations under the Treaty on Strategic Offensive Reductions 4
and to undertake further steps in nuclear disarmament with greater transparency,
including the conclusion of a legally binding successor to the Treaty on the
Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms (START I), 5 which is due to
expire in December 2009, while welcoming the progress that has been made
recently;
3F

4F

Encourages States to continue to pursue efforts, within the framework of
7.
international cooperation, contributing to the reduction of nuclear-weapons-related
materials;
Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to take measures to reduce the risk
8.
of an accidental or unauthorized launch of nuclear weapons and to also consider
further reducing the operational status of nuclear weapons systems in ways that
promote international stability and security;
Stresses the necessity of a diminishing role for nuclear weapons in
9.
security policies to minimize the risk that these weapons will ever be used and to
facilitate the process of their total elimination, in a way that promotes international
stability and based on the principle of undiminished security for all;
10. Urges all States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 6 at the earliest opportunity with a view to
its early entry into force and universalization, stresses the importance of maintaining
existing moratoriums on nuclear-weapon test explosions or any other nuclear
explosions pending the entry into force of the Treaty, and reaffirms the importance
of the continued development of the Treaty verification regime, including the
international monitoring system, which will be required to provide assurance of
compliance with the Treaty;
5F

11. Welcomes the adoption by the Conference on Disarmament of a
programme of work for its 2009 session, 7 and calls upon the Conference to start its
substantive work when it convenes in January 2010, while taking into due
consideration the increasing global momentum in favour of nuclear disarmament as
well as progress and active engagement in deliberations at the Conference;
6F

12. Calls for the immediate commencement of negotiations on a fissile
material cut-off treaty at the 2010 session of the Conference on Disarmament and its
early conclusion, and calls upon all nuclear-weapon States and States not parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to declare and maintain
moratoriums on the production of fissile material for any nuclear weapons or other
nuclear explosive devices pending the entry into force of the treaty;
13. Calls upon all States to redouble their efforts to prevent and curb the
proliferation of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery;
14. Stresses the importance of preventing nuclear terrorism, and encourages
every effort to secure all vulnerable nuclear and radiological material;
_______________
4

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2350, No. 42195.
The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 16: 1991 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.92.IX.1), appendix II.
6
See resolution 50/245.
7
See CD/1864.
5

3

A/RES/64/47

15. Also stresses the importance of further efforts for non-proliferation,
including the universalization of the comprehensive safeguards agreements of the
International Atomic Energy Agency to include States which have not yet adopted
and implemented such an agreement, while also strongly encouraging further works
for achieving the universalization of the Model Protocol Additional to the
Agreement(s) between State(s) and the International Atomic Energy Agency for the
Application of Safeguards approved by the Board of Governors of the Agency on
15 May 1997, 8 and the full implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 1540 (2004) of 28 April 2004;
7F

16. Encourages all States to undertake concrete activities to implement, as
appropriate, the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations study on disarmament and non-proliferation education,
submitted to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session, 9 and to voluntarily
share information on efforts they have been undertaking to that end;
8F

17. Commends and further encourages the constructive role played by civil
society, including the International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and
Disarmament, in promoting nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fifth session the
item entitled “Renewed determination towards the total elimination of nuclear
weapons”.
55th plenary meeting
2 December 2009

_______________
8
9

4

International Atomic Energy Agency, INFCIRC/540 (Corrected).
A/57/124.
