UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/57
23 December 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3845th meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 December 1997 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Somalia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the situation in Somalia,
including the recent developments in the political, military and
humanitarian fields.
"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to a comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the crisis in Somalia, bearing in mind respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Somalia, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations. In this context, it stresses that the
responsibility for achieving genuine national reconciliation and peace
rests with the Somali people themselves.
"The Security Council expresses its full support for the efforts of
regional and other interested States as well as those of international and
regional organizations, particularly the Organization of African Unity, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the League of Arab States, the
European Union, and the Organization of the Islamic Conference to promote a
direct political dialogue and facilitate the emergence of a broad-based
central Government in Somalia.
"The Security Council welcomes the outcome of meetings between the
Somali leaders held in Cairo concluded on 22 December 1997, in particular
their decision to adopt a federal system with regional autonomy and their
agreement to form a transitional government of national unity and to hold
an inclusive conference of national reconciliation in Baidoa through which
a presidential council and a Prime Minister will be elected. It also
welcomes the signing of the Cairo Declaration on Somalia (S/1997/1000,
annex) and other important agreements attached thereto, particularly on the
creation of an elected Constituent Assembly, the establishment of an
independent judicial system and the preparation of a transitional charter.
The Security Council calls upon all Somali leaders to contribute positively
to the current momentum for peace and reconciliation created by the

97-37828 (E)

231297

/...

S/PRST/1997/57
English
Page 2

significant progress achieved in Cairo, and by the other previous
initiatives of Sodere, Nairobi and Sanaa, through the widest possible
participation in the planned conference and to cease immediately all acts
of violence and to observe the ceasefire.
"The Security Council urges all States to contribute generously to the
appeals of the United Nations to ensure continued relief and rehabilitation
efforts in all regions of Somalia, including those aimed at the
strengthening of civil society. It also stresses the urgent need to
address the humanitarian situation in those areas affected by the recent
floods.
"The Security Council reiterates its call upon all States to fulfil
their obligations to implement the embargo imposed by resolution 733 (1992)
of 23 January 1992 on all deliveries of weapons and military equipment to
Somalia. In this context, it calls upon all States to refrain from any
actions which might exacerbate the situation in Somalia.
"The Security Council expresses also its support for the efforts
exerted by the Secretary-General aimed at exploring means for the United
Nations to assist in restoring peace and stability in Somalia. It notes
with appreciation the decision of the Secretary-General to strengthen the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) in Nairobi. In this
regard, it stresses the need for closer coordination of all efforts for
peace in Somalia.
"The Security Council expresses again its appreciation to all United
Nations agencies, other organizations and individuals carrying out
humanitarian activities in all regions of Somalia. It calls upon the
Somali factions to ensure the safety and freedom of movement of all
humanitarian personnel and to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
relief, including through the immediate reopening of the airport and
seaport of Mogadishu.
"The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General to continue his
consultations with the Somali parties, interested and regional States and
organizations concerned on means for the United Nations to support peace
and reconciliation efforts, including through specific options contained in
his report of 17 February 1997 (S/1997/135). It requests the SecretaryGeneral to keep it regularly informed and submit a report about these
consultations and developments in the situation in due course.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
