A /69/PV.3

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

3rd plenary meeting

Friday, 19 September 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 124
Global health and foreign policy
Letter from the Secretary-General (A/69/389)
Draft resolution (A/69/L.2)
The President: I should like to remind members
that the debate on agenda item 124 is scheduled to take
place on 10 December 2014.
Over the past six months, the Ebola outbreak has
ravaged countries in West Africa in an unprecedented
manner. Today, we come together as a family of nations
in solidarity with the most affected countries — Liberia,
Guinea and Sierra Leone — which have demonstrated
great resolve and determination in the face of this
daunting challenge.
Later on, the Secretary-General will brief the
Assembly on the response of the United Nations system
to the outbreak of Ebola in West Africa. I commend
him for his personal efforts on this matter. I also thank
Dr. Margaret Chan, Director-General of the World
Health Organization, and Dr. David Nabarro, the
Senior United Nations System Coordinator for Ebola
Virus Disease, for their dedicated efforts.
The World Health Organization reports that of the
nearly 5,000 people infected by the Ebola virus, about
2,500 have died so far. As shocking as those statistics
are, the actual number of casualties from Ebola is
likely to be even higher, since many deaths are going

unreported. The virus is spreading exponentially,
with half of all current cases recorded in just the last
three weeks. The predictions from the World Health
Organization are ominous. Given the current rate of
infection, as many as 20,000 people could be infected
with the Ebola virus over the next few months.
The time to act in a swift, coordinated and
purposeful manner is now. Without quick and decisive
action, the trail of devastation that this outbreak leaves
behind will reach far beyond the parts of West Africa
most affected up to now. Ebola is no longer a subregional
or even regional calamity; it is an international crisis.
Our immediate focus must be on containing the
outbreak, both in terms of its geographical spread and
the number of victims. As the Secretary-General has
pointed out, the Ebola crisis has evolved into a complex
emergency, with significant political, social, economic,
humanitarian and security dimensions. The outbreak
is unmatched, both in terms of lives lost and damage
to already fragile health systems. Precious resources
are being diverted from the treatment of other critical
diseases, and the affected countries are struggling
to maintain basic health services, with people dying
from otherwise treatable medical conditions. Women
are particularly at risk, given their roles as primary
caregivers and community leaders. In Liberia, estimates
indicate that as many as 75 per cent of the fatalities are
women, while in Sierra Leone their number is around
59 per cent. Women are much more likely to be frontline health workers, which also puts them at higher risk.
The outbreak could also have far-reaching,
destabilizing effects, and it comes at a time when the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U‑0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-54165 (E)

*1454165*

A/69/PV.3

three countries most affected have started to enjoy
relative peace, security and stability. Prior to the
outbreak, all had made collective efforts to enhance
socioeconomic development and to consolidate hardwon peacebuilding achievements. We must not allow
Ebola to turn back the tide of progress for those
countries.
In the light of those tragic developments, we have
before us a draft resolution (A/69/L.2), in which the
General Assembly welcomes the Secretary-General’s
plan to establish the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response (UNMEER). As envisioned, the
Mission will harness capabilities and competencies
across the United Nations system in a single, unified
structure, in order to ensure a rapid, effective, efficient
and coherent response to the crisis and to support
national, regional and international efforts. The draft
resolution also calls on Member States and relevant
United Nations bodies to provide their full support
to this critical Mission. In due course, the SecretaryGeneral will submit a detailed report for consideration
by the Assembly during this session.
Today, the General Assembly should add its
powerful voice to that of the Security Council in calling
on the international community to take immediate
steps to support the countries affected by this deadly
virus. While a high price has already been paid, the
cost of inaction could reach unimaginable proportions.
Together, we must take immediate, coordinated,
decisive action to combat this destructive outbreak.
I commend the draft resolution to the Assembly for
adoption.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I thank the General
Assembly for convening on such short notice to address
the Ebola outbreak at a time of busy preparations for
the new Assembly session. We are all aware of the
immensity of the suffering in West Africa and the
enormity of the challenge. This crisis demands the
attention of the entire membership of the United Nations.
We must show solidarity as one United Nations and one
global community. We must break through institutional
barriers and any other hurdles that could impede rapid
action. The General Assembly has a key role to play in
showing the world the effective, responsive, caring face
of the United Nations.
Earlier this year, I visited Sierra Leone in order to
mark the closing of the United Nations peacekeeping

2/23

19/09/2014

operation there and to celebrate the country’s
remarkable turnaround from years of war and atrocities.
In so doing, Sierra Leone has demonstrated the value of
sustained international engagement and solidarity. Its
neighbour Liberia has also known the depths of conflict
and misery. It, too, wrote a new chapter in its history
with the help of United Nations peacekeepers and other
international support for its own painstaking efforts.
Guinea, for its part, has achieved inroads against
hunger and made progress towards some of the other
Millennium Development Goals. The solidarity that
made those gains and transformations possible is now
needed to preserve that progress and help the people
who have been thrust into the turmoil and uncertainty
of the Ebola outbreak.
A crisis that started as a public-health emergency has
taken on much wider scope, with significant economic,
social, humanitarian, political and security dimensions.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO),
there are nearly 5,000 cases of Ebola virus disease in
the region. But WHO also indicates that, given the
shortfalls in reporting and monitoring, the real number
is likely to be much higher. More than 2,500 people
have died, and, as in so many other areas, women bear
the brunt of the impact. They make up 70 per cent of the
victims, reflecting the fact that it is women who form
the bulk of health-care workers and who are more likely
to care for sick relatives and prepare bodies for burial.
The number of cases is doubling every three weeks.
The fear of contagion is itself proving contagious,
disrupting economic activity and the provision of social
services. Spillover effects in the region and beyond
are increasingly evident. As the disease spreads, a
truth becomes clear. None of us can consider himself
insulated from the threat of Ebola; all of us must be part
of the response.
The Governments of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone are determined to do whatever they can to
address the crisis. They have also written to me, asking
the United Nations for assistance and support. We are
strongly committed to mobilizing the international
community and helping a full range of partners to
do what is needed to respond to this challenge. The
World Health Organization, under the leadership of its
Director-General, Ms. Margaret Chan, has developed
a response road map and is working with the affected
countries to identify the best possible epidemiological
ways to address the outbreak, including through a
combination of Ebola treatment centres and community
care centres.
14-54165

19/09/2014

The United Nations system is providing assistance
and expertise. At the same time, we must do much
more. There is an urgent need to take international
action to the next level. Members have before them my
letter outlining the scope of the new United Nations
mission that I have decided to establish (A/69/389). The
United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
(UNMEER) will provide a platform for wide-ranging
international efforts. It will have five priorities: first,
to stop the outbreak; secondly, to treat the infected;
thirdly, to provide essential services; fourthly, to
preserve stability; and, fifthly, to prevent outbreaks in
non-affected countries.
The Mission will support national efforts.
Reinforcing Government leadership will be one of its
guiding principles. The Mission will also emphasize
community outreach, training and education.
Misunderstandings about the disease and how it is
transmitted have hindered the response so far. Local
leaders, including traditional and religious leaders,
have important roles to play in raising awareness. This
morning, I spoke by telephone with His Excellency
Mr. John Dramani Mahama, President of Ghana. He
expressed his immediate and wholehearted support for
the efforts of the United Nations and agreed to host the
headquarters of UNMEER in Accra. UNMEER will
also have offices in each of the three most affected
countries. President Mahama is also allowing the
country’s international airport to be used for the vital
air bridge. I would like to express my profound gratitude
for those contributions.
Many Governments and organizations have come
forward with impressive contributions of military
assets, human resources, financing and supplies.
African countries and the African Union have shown
admirable solidarity. The United States has announced
that it will take a number of significant steps, including
the deployment of 3,000 troops to provide expertise
in logistics, training and engineering. I commend
President Barack Obama for his leadership.
I would also like to pay tribute to the Government
of Cuba for its announcement of plans to send a
165-member team of doctors and nurses to the region.
That is in addition to Cuba’s robust medical assistance
to Haiti and is a wonderful expression of global
solidarity. I appreciate the support and solidarity
of President Castro Ruz. I am also very grateful to
the Government of China for its generous support.
A 59-member Chinese laboratory team left Beijing

A/69/PV.3

for Sierra Leone earlier this week and will soon be
on the ground there, delivering much-needed care
and expertise. I thank President Xi Jinping for his
leadership.
Those contributions are important and highly
welcome. I hope other Member States, along with the
private sector and civil society, will do far more. Our
best estimate is that we need a twenty-fold increase
in assistance. Earlier this week, the United Nations
outlined a set of critical needs totalling almost $1 billion
over the next six months. The protection of staff and all
health responders must also be a top priority in halting
the transmission of the disease. In order to attract and
retain the doctors and medical professionals required
at this time, we need to be able to provide emergency
medical evacuation, should they become infected with
Ebola in the conduct of their duties.
I call on countries with the means to enable us to
provide such vital assurances. I also reiterate my appeals
to air and shipping companies not to isolate countries.
Travel and border restrictions will not prevent the virus
from getting out but will prevent supplies and health
responders from getting in. Beyond our current focus on
the emergency, there is a need to address fundamental
gaps in health care and other basic services. It is not too
soon to initiate a global discussion and to come up with
new ideas that will allow for more timely action and
prevent the next epidemic.
As each day passes, more people die. Many more
are infected. The demands of response and containment
become exponentially greater. To bring the crisis under
control, all of us will have to work in unorthodox ways,
break through barriers and leverage the best that each
of us can bring to bear. Speed is of the essence. Action
by the General Assembly today through the adoption
of draft resolution A/69/L.2 will enable the United
Nations to quickly increase its capacity to deliver in the
affected countries.
The establishment of UNMEER is only the
beginning. We will need to stay engaged and reach new
heights of cooperation. No single State or organization
can do that alone. I look forward to Members’ strong
and rapid support for the new United Nations health
emergency mission and for the countries and peoples
who have turned to us for help in a moment of critical
need.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

14-541653/23

A/69/PV.3

Before proceeding further, in view of the desire of
members to dispose of this item expeditiously, I should
like to consult the Assembly with a view to proceeding
immediately to considering draft resolution A/69/L.2.
In that connection, since the draft resolution was
circulated only this morning, it would be necessary to
waive the relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of
procedure, which reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be
discussed or put to the vote at any meeting of the
General Assembly, unless copies of it have been
circulated to all delegations not later than the day
preceding the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objections, I will take it that the
Assembly agrees with that proposal.
It was so decided.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/69/L.2.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Gettu (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/69/L.2, entitled “Measures to contain and
combat the recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa”, I wish
to put on record the following statement of financial
implications on behalf of the Secretary-General, in
accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
Under paragraphs 1 to 3 of draft resolution
A/69/L.2, the General Assembly would welcome the
Secretary-General’s intention to establish the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response;
requests the Secretary-General to take such measures
as may be necessary for the prompt execution of his
intention and to submit a detailed report thereon for
consideration by the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth
session; and calls upon all Member States, the relevant
United Nations bodies and the United Nations system to
provide their full support to the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response.
The Secretariat is in the process of preparing
the modalities for the implementation of the requests
contained in the aforementioned paragraphs of the draft
resolution. The related resource requirements are being
assessed and will be sought through the appropriate
budgetary mechanism of the Organization.

4/23

19/09/2014

The President: Before proceeding further, I would
like to make the following oral revision to the ninth
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution. The
paragraph will now read:
“Noting the adoption by the Security Council
of resolution 2176 (2014) of 15 September 2014, and
resolution 2177 (2014) of 18 September 2014.”
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.2, entitled “Measures to contain and
combat the recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa”, as
orally revised. May I take it that the Assembly decides
to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.2, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/69/L.2, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 69/1).
The President: We will now hear statements after
the adoption of the resolution.
Mr. Ngafuan (Liberia): Allow me to begin
by extending my personal congratulations to you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the General Assembly. We are proud as Africans to see
you in that position, and my delegation assures you of
our fullest cooperation to ensure the success of your
tenure.
I also extend Liberia’s deep appreciation to you,
Sir, for your initiative in proposing the positive and
forward-looking resolution 69/1, entitled “Measures to
contain and combat the recent Ebola outbreak in West
Africa”. Liberia wholeheartedly supports the resolution
adopted in this Hall today and calls on all Member
States to take practical actions to implement it, as it is
another significant step in the difficult battle to defeat,
once and for all, the deadly enemy called Ebola.
Since the disease invaded the subregion some
months ago, its rapid spread has confounded our national
Governments, as well as our partners. The outbreak
has come at a time when the affected countries were
enjoying a semblance of peace, security and stability
after many years of civil upheaval and had begun to
take some laudable strides amid challenges to respond
to the multifaceted development challenges inherited
from years of conflict. In Liberia, it came at a time when
the health system of the country was just beginning to
endure the shocks of the civil conversion and therefore
not adequately robust to withstand a pandemic of such
huge magnitude.
The toll that the epidemic is now exacting on the
country is enormous and incalculable. The already weak
14-54165

19/09/2014

health system has been plunged into further paralysis.
Many protected health workers, who have been at the
forefront of the fight against this deadly disease of a
scale of magnitude they have never seen before, have
become casualties themselves, and 80 per cent of those
infected succumb to the virus. Nearly 70 per cent of
those infected are women.
As the death toll increases, more children are being
orphaned, adding to the existing social problems. The
fear created by the outbreak among those who seek
non-Ebola-related health-care attention is having
a dreadful effect on the health sector and on the
country. The situation has seriously undermined the
country’s ability to sufficiently respond to other more
routine illnesses, such as malaria, measles, diarrhoea
and typhoid fever. Pregnant women seeking medical
assistance while trying to give birth are also dying,
owing to fears among health workers of contracting the
virus.
The Ebola disease poses a threat to the peace and
security of our country, as many Government functions
have been suspended to deal with the emergency. The
economic impact of the outbreak is undermining the
ability of the Government to continue to provide basic
services for the Liberian people. Meanwhile, measures
taken by the Government and our many partners,
notably the World Health Organization, Médecins Sans
Frontières and the United States Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention have thus far been unsuccessful
in disrupting the further transmission of the virus.
As if the situation were not debilitating enough,
the affected countries are facing virtual economic
sanctions and quarantine. The restriction of travel from
affected countries and the banning of flights can only
lead to an aggravation of the effects of the outbreak and
undermine efforts to contain the disease. Liberia wishes
to thank those countries that have lifted the measures
imposed earlier and are now opening their doors for the
coordination of global action in fighting the disease.
We encourage others to adopt that approach.
My Government is very encouraged by the various
actions taken in the past month or two to significantly
reinforce the international response to the continuing
spread of the Ebola virus disease in the affected
countries. Several high-level appointments are being
made by the Secretary-General to sharpen the focus of
the United Nations on what is now an issue of global
concern. The United States Government announced a
level of support to the region that we think will have

A/69/PV.3

a monumental impact. And yesterday the Security
Council adopted resolution 2177 (2014), sponsored by
some 134 States, recognizing the risks that the Ebola
epidemic poses to peace, security and stability at the
national and international levels and setting out some
measures to respond more robustly to the disease.
The recent meeting of the Security Council (see
S/PV.7268) afforded an opportunity that was seized
by an impressive number of Member States to indicate
the various levels and types of support that they
intend to provide. We extend the deep gratitude of the
Government of Liberia to all those who participated in
that open debate and for the various types of support
offered, including the words of solidarity, all of which
assured our people in Liberia and the diaspora that
they are not alone in the difficult struggle against the
disease.
The Secretary-General capitalized on that occasion
to announce his proposal to establish the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response in the region.
Keeping up that momentum, you, Sir, have lost no time
in submitting resolution 69/1 today, with the objective
of enabling the Secretary-General to move ahead in
defining the modalities for implementing his proposal.
We commend that prudent and swift action, because
lost time translates into lost lives. It is our expectation
that a new mission, coupled with other structures and
administrative arrangements that the Secretary-General
has put in place in New York, will ensure strong United
Nations leadership, effective coordination and efficient
delivery of goods and services with national ownership
at its core.
Liberia congratulates you, Mr. President, on this
effort, and we commend all our international partners
for joining us in putting an early end to this disease,
which has ravaged our part of the continent.
Mr. Motsoaledi (South Africa): South Africa joins
the other delegations that have spoken before us in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the role
of President of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth
session. We assure you of South Africa’s support and
cooperation. We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his initiative in the convening of this special
session.
South Africa welcomes the adoption of resolution
69/1, on measures to contain and combat Ebola in West
Africa. The unprecedented outbreak of the Ebola virus
disease in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone — which,

14-541655/23

A/69/PV.3

according to the World Health Organization, has
affected more than 4,300 people and killed more than
half of those who have contracted the disease — is a
serious indictment of all of us as members of the global
community. The Ebola virus outbreak painfully
highlights how a public-health issue can very quickly
turn into a foreign policy issue and have devastating
effects on a country’s economy, trade and international
relations.
Unfortunately, public-health issues attract our
attention only when they get out of hand and once a
large number of people have died. In the past three
weeks, cases have dramatically increased in the three
countries, with widespread and intense transmission.
That highlights the urgent need to enforce control
measures and increase capacity for case management,
safe burials, contact-tracing and social mobilization.
The outbreak continues to expand geographically. It
continues to escalate. There are still critical shortages of
Ebola treatment-centre beds in the three countries due
to the intense and widespread transmission. Although
laboratory capacity is gradually expanding, there are
still critical needs in a number of locations. Increased
laboratory capacity is essential for proper screening
and triage of patients.
In response, South Africa has provided a mobile
laboratory with experts to Sierra Leone. That
laboratory will be further expanded because of the
increased workload. Further laboratory support will
be provided for Liberia. We will establish a 40-bed
field hospital in Lakka, Freetown, close to the mobile
laboratory, which will assist in addressing the critical
shortage of beds. The field hospital will be staffed by
75 health professionals. The process of recruiting those
professionals is under way.
Through the procurement mechanisms of the World
Health Organization, we will purchase 9,600 basic sets of
personal protective equipment plus 6,400 sets of heavyduty personal protective equipment for health workers
in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea. We will provide
medical supplies plus commodities for infection control,
four ambulances, four 4x4 vehicles, 70 motorcycles and
four generators. We have as a country called on all
partners to work with the Government to respond to the
crisis. Many partners in the private sector, academic
institutions and civil society in South Africa have
responded positively. Today, we received pledges from
companies that are listed on the Johannesburg stock
exchange. Most of them will support logistics and
6/23

19/09/2014

provide in-kind donations, financial contributions, air
travel, ambulances and medical supplies.
At the request of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), South Africa is providing
training in Ebola preparedness for 94 participants
from 16 countries. That training, which will start
on Monday, 22 September, will further assist in
strengthening surveillance, case-finding and detection,
reporting and tracing, and information-sharing on the
Ebola virus disease in a timely manner. It will enhance
clinical management of infected patients. South Africa
is further providing support in conducting tests for
samples that may be sent from SADC countries to our
laboratory. The South African National Institution for
Communicable Diseases plays a leading role for the
whole SADC region in that regard. It is also worth
noting that, at the national level, South Africa has
already taken action to ensure comprehensive response
measures against Ebola should the virus be detected in
the country at any stage. For instance, 11 hospitals in
the country have been designated to be on standby in
case of Ebola outbreak.
The fact that the Ebola outbreak is the largest and
deadliest to date and that it is taking place in countries
that are in need of strong basic-services infrastructure
and health systems means that international support
to those affected countries is absolutely essential. We
welcome the support provided by other States and the
valiant efforts of civil society actors, such as Doctors
Without Borders and the World Health Organization.
They all need our assistance.
Mr. Msosa (Malawi): On behalf of the Group of
African States, I would like to begin by expressing
my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting, a day after the Security Council had a
debate and adopted a resolution on the scourge of Ebola
(Council resolution 2177 (2014)). It is vital that the Ebola
outbreak remain a high priority on the global agenda,
particularly because it is not a problem that affects
only the continent of Africa but one that affects us all.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his initiative aimed at establishing the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. In that vein,
the African Group welcomes the adoption of resolution
69/1, entitled “Measures to contain and combat the
recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa”.
The Ebola virus disease epidemic, as we are all
aware, has caused an unprecedented public-health
emergency that affects the African continent and
14-54165

19/09/2014

beyond. Since the outbreak of the deadly Ebola virus
in December 2013 in West Africa, citizens in affected
countries have been engulfed by absolute fear. Traders,
farmers and health officials can no longer go about
their daily business without the uncertainty of who
might be next in the Ebola trail, which could possibly
rob them of their very livelihoods. The Ebola crisis is
even more difficult for post-conflict countries that have
fought to make progress in community reintegration,
rehabilitation and the rebuilding of their social fabric.
The retardation of economic development is all the
more worrisome.
The African Group wishes to express its thanks
to the United Nations and its Member States for their
commitments in financial and human resources to
make sure that this deadly disease is tackled. The
African Group welcomes the initiative of the African
Union (AU) in spearheading continental efforts to
respond to the epidemic and its ongoing efforts,
including the invocation of article 6, subparagraph (f),
of the Protocol Relating to the Establishment of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union. That
sub-paragraph relates to the AU mandate with regard to
humanitarian action and disaster management, as well
as to the deployment of a joint public-health, military
and civilian mission to affected countries that was
authorized by the African Union Peace and Security
Council at its 450th meeting, on 19 August.
Furthermore, the Africa Group would like to
welcome the AU’s Interagency Task Force on Ebola,
whose functions include lobbying and advocacy for
ethical and effective responses to Ebola at various
levels. Currently, as part of its advocacy and lobbying
efforts, the AU is engaging African Union member
States that have closed their borders and placed
restrictive measures on air travel to ensure that
humanitarian principles of access, international health
regulations and the recommendations of the World
Health Organization are met.
The AU’s African Centre for Disease Control and
Prevention for early detection is a long-term approach
designed to enhance the process of operationalization
through information-sharing, tracking of the
development of the disease and implementation of
effective, coordinated responses.
It is worth emphasizing that continuous research,
assessment and analysis of Ebola will serve a very useful
purpose in the long run. I cannot emphasize enough
how important it is for us to listen and be guided by

A/69/PV.3

the realities on the ground. Yesterday, in the Security
Council debate on Ebola (see S/PV. 7268), we heard a
very personal and powerful testimony by Mr. Jackson
K.P. Niamah from Médecins Sans Frontières in
Monrovia. There is a need to continue to allocate
adequate resources, financial support and capacitybuilding as well as basic resources such as food, water
and clothing. Equally important is the need to provide
psychological support and love to the victims rather
than treat them like outcasts through their process of
isolation. As we move together in our common fight
against deadly Ebola, those stories should drive and
focus our efforts.
Finally, I wish to reaffirm the Africa Group’s
continuous support and efforts to ensure the adequate
coordination and harmonization of all strategic efforts
and implementation processes to achieve our desired
goals on the continent of Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): Since I believe that
this is the first time we are taking the floor at the current
session of the General Assembly, my delegation would
like to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
assumption of your important duties. We wish you the
very best in your endeavours and will fully support
you in all your efforts to move the General Assembly
agenda forward during what will be a key year for the
United Nations and the international community.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States. We thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his important statement and all
his personal efforts in trying to tackle the crisis caused
by the Ebola virus outbreak. We are deeply concerned
about the crisis, which is not only a regional problem
but one that affects us all, as confirmed yesterday in
the emergency meeting of the Security Council on
Ebola (see S/PV.7238). We deplore the loss of lives,
both among citizens of the affected countries and
among international responders. We pay tribute to all
humanitarian and health workers on the front line, who
are working tirelessly to bring the crisis to an end.
We welcome the United Nations coordination
system created by the Secretary-General, including the
establishment of the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response, to ensure that all relevant parts

14-541657/23

A/69/PV.3

of the United Nations system are activated and working
coherently.
The European Union is preparing a comprehensive
framework in response to the Ebola epidemic, which
will also include considerations on related impacts,
notably the food crisis, the health system crisis and
the negative macroeconomic impact. That document,
aligned with the Ebola response road map of the World
Health Organization (WHO), highlights the main
challenges and the ways in which the European Union
has assisted and will further assist with the response.
We will continue to assist the most affected areas in
particular, and to work with all actors involved — the
national authorities in the affected countries; WHO,
the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
parts of the United Nations system; regional partners,
including the Economic Community of West African
States; and the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies, Médecins Sans Frontières
and other non-governmental organizations — to help
tackle the disease as swiftly and efficiently as possible.
As it stands, the European Union has pledged
€150 million for the treatment of patients, training,
measures to contain the epidemic, medical laboratories,
maintaining basic health services and budget support.
As part of that package, the European Union has also
provided €5 million to the African Union to support
their efforts to provide assistance to the affected
countries. To that, one needs to add the very substantive
bilateral contributions made by EU member States, both
in funding and through in-kind assistance, including
the secondment of specialists. Some of their bilateral
contributions are coordinated through the Union’s Civil
Protection Mechanism.
The European Union and its member States are
working actively to find possible options to reduce
the growing isolation of countries in the region. The
European Union will address the urgent need to retain
and re-establish transport links and the necessary
medical evacuation. We all recognize the magnitude of
the challenge in front of us. The European Union and
its member States are committed to deploy all efforts
to step up support and assist in putting an end to this
outbreak.
Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): Let me commend you,
Mr. President, on your elevation to your present position
in what promises to be a momentous session for us all.

8/23

19/09/2014

Yesterday the Security Council spoke with one
voice by passing the historic resolution 2177 (2014).
Today, when given the opportunity, the General
Assembly has also made its voice heard. Beyond the
resolutions, it is now a time for action. Most of all, we
should bear in mind those on the front line: the doctors,
the medical workers, the nurses, the burial boys and
others who have volunteered to help others without
concern for their own safety. We should also bear in
mind the fallen. Names that were strangers to us are
now sadly familiar: Dr. Umar Khan, Dr. Modupeh
Cole, Dr. Olivet Buck and countless others who have
given their lives in the service of the victims.
When the current Ebola epidemic started, few in
West Africa knew about the extent of the danger it
posed. As we sit here today, we all fully realize that
it is now a global health emergency. That has been
certified by the World Health Organization, which
has been matched by the declarations of public health
emergencies in the States primarily affected. West
Africa, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone are united in
grief and united in suffering. But we are also united in
the hope and the conviction that this, as with the civil
conflict in our States in the recent past, will also pass.
This, too, shall pass.
With the help of the global community, we are
confident that all we hope for in terms of logistics
and material, both human and otherwise, will find its
way to the region. We are grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his leadership, and we are grateful for
the creation of the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response, which we hope will bypass the
normal institutional bureaucracy and be set up as soon
as possible.
When we look to the future, we know that those
countries, which were the victims of civil conflict, will
regain their development momentum. It is as a global
community that we will best be able to face a global
threat.
What started as a medical emergency has now
become an economic emergency, a humanitarian
emergency and, in certain circumstances, a public
security emergency. The World Bank has already
recorded a drop in the development levels of the three
countries, to varying degrees, and also projects further
drops in those indices.
The Ebola virus epidemic has had a disproportionate
impact in that women, who are the primary caregivers

14-54165

19/09/2014

in the homes to their ill and suffering family members,
are also disproportionately victims of the virus. We ask
that all initiatives and measures taken be not genderneutral, but gender-sensitive.
As we look to the future beyond the resolutions, and
as we look to the actions and measures that the United
Nations and States will take, we are mindful of those
who have pledged and already proposed support. Those
States are too numerous to mention, but in particular
I would like to single out the members of the Security
Council, especially the United States of America and
China, but also States that have excelled in what can
perhaps be best described as health diplomacy, such as
Cuba, which not only has a history of health diplomacy
but has responded in dramatic fashion by sending over
165 doctors to the region.
We are grateful for the many pledges of support that
have occurred between yesterday and today from our
colleagues and from Member States. We are gratified
that the call to action by the Secretary-General and by
the President of the Assembly has been answered so
emphatically.
In this time in which we conduct our business at this
session, we are occupied — or perhaps preoccupied — by
many issues in front of us. This session, as I said before,
will be momentous. But we have demonstrated by our
actions today and by the Security Council’s action
yesterday that when called upon we can achieve a
singularity of purpose in a common objective.
There is no doubt that the road ahead will be
difficult. There will be many more victims. But what
the United Nations has emphatically declared is that
we will not be defeated by the disease; we will not
be cowed into silence or fear by this epidemic. All of
us, no matter how large or how small, have a role to
play. A culture of fear should not allow the epidemic
metastasize into something greater.
Today, as I speak, we have word of various
shipments going to Sierra Leone, supplies being
delivered and various national and international groups,
including non-governmental organizations, mobilizing
over social media and from the epicentre of the disease
to make a difference and to make their voices heard in
terms of practical support.
At the end of the day, all that we do and say here
must have relevance on the front line. Our prayers and
thoughts go to the fallen. Our prayers and thoughts are
with those who continue, day in and day out, in difficult

A/69/PV.3

circumstances and with limited supplies, to answer to
the ultimate call of the Hippocratic Oath: first, do no
harm; secondly, others above self.
We are gratified by the support that we have
received in this house. The three primarily affected
States will continue to be grateful and to do their part
in strengthening their public-health systems going
forward, beyond Ebola, to make sure that we are not
faced with a similar threat in future.
Mr. Touré (Guinea) (spoke in French): First, allow
me to convey my delegation’s warm congratulations
to you, Mr. President, on your outstanding election to
preside over the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth
session. I also wish to express my delegation’s profound
gratitude for the convening of this important meeting,
which is part of the new momentum of the international
community in its fight against the haemorrhagic fever
caused by the Ebola virus.
Guinea welcomes the initiative by the SecretaryGeneral to deploy a United Nations emergency
response mission against the epidemic in the West
Africa subregion. We also welcome the adoption of
resolution 69/1, on measures to contain and combat the
recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa. That initiative
eloquently illustrates anew the Secretary-General’s
personal commitment and determination to mobilize all
of the efforts of the international community to contain
and eradicate the scourge of the Ebola virus, which,
unfortunately, has already claimed too many victims
and now threatens to destabilize our countries.
As the Secretary-General stated, the unprecedented
crisis that is in full swing in Liberia, Sierra Leone
and in my country, Guinea, demands unprecedented
measures to save human lives. We dare to hope that
all of the initiatives will lead to the establishment of a
large coalition to combat the Ebola epidemic.
To date, the epidemic has claimed over 2,400 lives,
including caregivers. In Guinea, where the epidemic
began in March, the number of cases has risen to 882,
of which 662 have been confirmed, including 555
deaths. The victims range in age from 15 to 45 years,
with women making up the majority.
Adding to the crisis at hand, the epidemic has
gravely affected our economies, as seen in the decline
in commerce and productivity and in decreased activity
in many other sectors, including transport, investment
and tourism. The World Bank has warned that if the
Ebola virus epidemic is not contained and rapidly

14-541659/23

A/69/PV.3

eradicated, its economic impact on the three countries
most affected will be catastrophic. In Guinea, Liberia
and Sierra Leone, the quarantine of certain areas has
interrupted agricultural production and the distribution
of certain foods. That has led in turn to panic, penury
and significant price increases for basic foodstuffs.
At present, urgent action is necessary, not only
to halt the health crisis and save human lives, but
also to preserve stability and the progress achieved
with the help of the international community through
the Peacebuilding Commission and other United
Nations bodies, as well as through bilateral and
multilateral partnerships. To that end, the response
of the international community must be global and
coordinated in order to guarantee the best results as
quickly as possible.
I would like to reassure the Secretary-General
that his initiative has already created a feeling of
relief and hope in my country and in the subregion.
The Government and people of Guinea are committed
to closely cooperating with the United Nations for
the success of the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response.
To conclude, I would like to commend the American
presidency of the Security Council, the members of
the Council and all of the delegations that yesterday
sponsored resolution 2177 (2014), on the Ebola virus
disease. It is eloquent testimony to solidarity on a grand
scale. We would also like once again to thank France,
the United States, Russia, China, Japan, the United
Kingdom, the European Union, the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States and
the many other bilateral and multilateral partners that,
alongside the World Health Organization, Médecins
Sans Frontières and the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention in Atlanta, as well as other countries, such
as Morocco and Mali, have from the beginning shown
proof of solidarity, fraternity and friendship.
Ms. Cousens (United States of America): I wish
to thank the Secretary-General, the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and their teams for their extraordinary
leadership in confronting the Ebola virus and for
mobilizing all the determination and the resources of
the United Nations system behind that. We are taking
the floor to strongly support the Secretary-General’s
proposal for a United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response.

10/23

19/09/2014

Yesterday, an unprecedented 134 countries came
together to sponsor Security Council resolution 2177
(2014), which calls for swift and decisive action to scale
up the global response to the Ebola epidemic. Today, the
General Assembly comes together to signal its concern,
to add its voice and to pledge strong support to the
United Nations effort. In doing so, we stand together in
saying we will not turn a blind eye when human tragedy
is unfolding, and we will not bury our heads in the sand
when called upon to act.
The United States is answering this call for
specialized capabilities and resources and will work
in close coordination with the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response. We welcome the
commitment of other Governments, foundations,
non-governmental organizations and the private sector
to join in the effort. The real measure of our impact will
not be the commitments we make, but the commitments
we deliver on and the speed with which we act. The
math is simple: the sooner we act and the more of us
that contribute, the more lives we save. Most of all, we
are humbled and inspired by all of those working on the
front lines to fight and turn back this disease.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At this very moment in the Security Council, where
Argentina is serving as a non-permanent member, there
is an important debate taking place on the challenges
and complexities confronting us in the situation in
Iraq. However, my country could not be absent from
this meeting of the General Assembly — the most
representative body of the United Nations — to express
not only our pleasure but also the commitment of our
delegation to the adoption by consensus of resolution
69/1, on measures to contain and combat the recent
outbreak of Ebola in West Africa.
We also wish to decisively support the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to establish the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. Without
a doubt, that initiative will enable us to provide
an effective, comprehensive response to the Ebola
outbreak in West Africa, which is an issue that, given its
implications and the risk of spillover effects, involves
all of us and requires a response from all of us.
On behalf of the people and the Government
of the Argentine Republic, I would like to express
to the families of the thousands of victims and their
Governments our deep sorrow and our absolute
solidarity. Argentina will cooperate with the Mission,

14-54165

19/09/2014

which is a cause for everyone. Without doubt, the
seriousness of the current Ebola epidemic justifies our
meeting here to decide, to take action, to determine
urgent measures to avoid having the living conditions
of people of the world being dramatically affected, as
is happening in our brother countries in West Africa.
In consonance with the Secretary-General, Argentina
sees the Ebola epidemic not only as a health problem,
but rather as a multidimensional reality, and this is how
we must tackle it. We recognize that an epidemic of
these characteristics, if we do not contain it in short
order, can have huge humanitarian, economic and social
consequences. It could also bring about conditions
leading to institutional instability or social insecurity.
The West African countries do not deserve this.
They do not deserve this because they have made great
efforts in post-conflict situations to put themselves on
the path to inclusive economic and social development.
They do not deserve this — not the West African
countries, nor the developing world, nor all of
humankind. That is why we believe that at this time of
deep suffering for many, time is pressing. We cannot
spare any efforts, but we cannot impose unconnected
actions. That is why Argentina supports the United
Nations and its specialized agencies as the entity that
should have the responsibility for coordinating the
various efforts, contributions and lines of action that
are soon to be implemented because of the urgency
required.
Argentina supported the adoption of resolution
69/1 and wishes to underscore that it was adopted
by the General Assembly. It is encouraging that the
Assembly has exercised its responsibility to follow
through on proposals — in this case from the SecretaryGeneral — to consider issues that do not affect or
endanger security alone. These are situations that, by
learning from mistakes made and lessons of the past,
enable us to be lucid and effective so as to put rights at
the forefront, and not the violence of the future.
We heard yesterday — and here I express my
solidarity with the countries of West Africa — that
an epidemic of such characteristics could have been
avoided or more effectively tackled if those countries
had more sound, more comprehensive health systems
with proper infrastructure, and if they had more trained
human resources at their disposal. This is not the time
to scold or blame them. We have to understand the
profound causes for this inequality, because the Ebola

A/69/PV.3

outbreak is one face of poverty and inequality. That is
why it seems to me that we, the developing countries,
are not dull or incompetent, but rather aware that we
must continue to work for a more just distribution of
wealth, to achieve profound reforms of the international
financial system, to achieve financing for development
based on cooperation and solidarity and to free
ourselves from the enormous weight of sovereign debt
and establish fair rules in debt restructuring.
Yesterday, the World Health Organization DirectorGeneral, Ms. Chan, said in the Security Council
(see S/PV.7268) that this was a social, economic and
humanitarian crisis. Allow me to reaffirm that it is
also an ethical and political crisis, as it uncovers the
consequences of poverty — the poverty that we have
pledged to eradicate, but with the dignity in which we
all deserve to live. What a paradox that women are the
majority of the victims — not because we are weaker,
not because we are more vulnerable, but rather because
we almost exclusively are the caregivers. How will we
change the world if in West Africa, with the poverty,
inequality and injustice of a global order — which
we must change — the term “to care” has become
synonymous with dying?
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): As this is the first time
I address the Assembly with you, Sir, as President,
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
you on your assumption of the role of President of the
General Assembly. I also congratulate you on your
decision to allow this debate to take place today on this
important and pressing matter: the Ebola crisis.
I would like to align myself with the statement of
the African Group as delivered by the representative of
Malawi.
The Ebola crisis is a devastating emergency whose
economic, social, psychological and life-threatening
implications are horrendous. It is no exaggeration to
say that in order of magnitude and as a potential threat
to life, families and society, this crisis is among the
worst threats we face in the world today. The Mano
River countries, particularly Liberia, Sierra Leone
and Guinea, are at the epicentre, engulfed by this
virus, which is posing existential threats of historic
proportions to them. But none of us is safe. None of us
is either too far away or too rich to be within the reach
of this virus. The lessons of the HIV/AIDS epidemic
and other global epidemics must not be forgotten. We
ignore Ebola are at our own peril.

14-5416511/23

A/69/PV.3

It is therefore heartening to see the General
Assembly recognize the importance of this issue
and give it prominence and global attention here at
this meeting. Let me once again congratulate you,
Mr. President, and the Secretary-General for having
recognized that the Ebola horror that has now engulfed
those countries is indeed a crisis of international
proportions, one that deserves a global response.
Indeed, as was recognized in the Security Council just
yesterday, the crisis demands that it be recognized and
defined as a threat to international peace and security
and as a humanitarian emergency of potentially global
proportions.
My delegation therefore welcomes the establishment
of the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response — the United Nations response — and
recognizes that this response must have the following
four important dimensions. It must recognize, first,
the urgency of this crisis and the need for a swift and
determined response, and, secondly, the scale of the
challenge and the need for a commensurate scaledup response that fits that challenge and its potential
to escalate. Third is the need for thoroughness in the
technical response to ensure that we do not create
fear nor failures and lapses that might undermine the
response and the confidence of the affected populations.
Fourth is the need for solidarity in the character of
the response, through which we must ensure that the
countries and the response de-isolate the affected
countries and de-stigmatize the affected populations.
The solidarity must seek to build a global response
that meets the national challenge that each of these
countries faces.
The President of Kenya, His Excellency Mr. Uhuru
Kenyatta, has led a determined national response to
the Ebola crisis in our own country. Kenya has spoken
directly and forthrightly about the crisis at the African
Union, both in Addis Ababa and earlier this week in
Malabo, as well as within the East African Community
only yesterday. Our President has been emphatic in
stressing Kenya’s solidarity with the affected countries
and their populations. Kenya has put in place a national
preparedness programme to ensure that the virus does
not find fertile ground in our country to cause further
havoc around the world.
In reaching out to our sister countries, last month
Kenya donated a total of $1 million — $350,000 to each
of the three worst-hit countries — as a humble token
of our solidarity. Kenya stands ready to do more by

12/23

19/09/2014

sharing expertise on Ebola management, by supporting
diagnostic capabilities, by making available specialized
laboratories and by deploying health workers and
doctors within the context of the international response.
Kenya is also concerned by the isolation of the
affected countries that has resulted from the travel bans
and transport communication restrictions that have
been imposed. On Wednesday this week, our Cabinet
Secretary for Foreign Affairs announced in Addis
Ababa that the Kenyatta Administration was working
hard with the legislative arms of our Government to
seek a review of the ban of Kenya Airways flights to
the affected countries.
Close to 3,000 people are dead and many more
have been infected in just a few weeks of the spread
of this virus. This may sound unalarming to our
jaded international community sometimes, but the
projections of the trajectories of this disease are
sobering and shocking. Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Guinea, among other countries in the region, need
urgent and determined support.
Let us learn our lessons. Health-system investments,
like in investment in education and poverty eradication,
are as much an economic and health imperative as
they are an imperative for national, global peace and
security, and indeed an imperative for human survival.
Mr. Mukerji (India): We thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and for the initiative that
resulted in the adoption of resolution 69/1 by all 193
Member States this afternoon. We salute you for the
alacrity shown in taking this initiative. Even in your
first few days in office, you meet our high expectations
and confidence.
Though the outbreak of the Ebola virus is occurring
in West Africa, it is a matter of grave concern for my
country and for all of us who are Members of the
United Nations. We are united today by our common
responsibility. We pray for all those affected by this
virus. We commit ourselves to working together with
our partners in finding a cure for this disease.
The needs of the affected countries are large.
They include an urgent need for funds, transportation,
doctors, health services, medical supplies and social
mobilization. The affected countries obviously do not
themselves have the wherewithal to meet all those
requirements. My country has provided medicines and
financial assistance to the Governments of Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. We have also made an
14-54165

19/09/2014

additional financial contribution to the World Health
Organization specifically earmarked for addressing the
Ebola virus outbreak.
India has troops available in the peacekeeping
operations of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), including an all-female formed police unit.
Apart from the maintenance of law and order, they will
do whatever is asked of them by the UNMIL leadership
as part of the United Nations system’s response to this
outbreak.
India has deep-rooted and historical connections
with West Africa. There are 45,000 Indian nationals
living in that part of the continent. We therefore are
together with the people of West Africa at this time of
crisis.
We commend the Secretary-General and you,
Mr. President, for your leadership. The coordinating
role of the General Assembly, which consists of all the
Members of the United Nations, is central to responding
to the requests by the Governments of the affected
countries. We reiterate our continued support to our
partners in West Africa, both bilaterally and through
the United Nations, at this hour of need.
Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): Since this is the
first time I have taken the floor at this session, I
would like to take the opportunity to congratulate you
warmly, Mr. President, on your assumption of your
duties in presiding over the proceedings of the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session. I would like to
assure you of our support as you discharge your duties
as steward of our deliberations. My delegation would
like to express its appreciation for the convening of this
meeting and its gratitude to the Secretary-General for
spearheading the establishment and deployment of a
special United Nations emergency response mission to
combat the Ebola outbreak that is afflicting some of our
sister countries in West Africa.
We consider resolution 69/1, adopted today, and
the Secretary-General’s initiative to be appropriate
responses for mobilizing the necessary political will
and resources, given the alarmingly fast spread of this
highly lethal virus, which has caused so much suffering
to the communities affected and the regrettable loss
of more than 2,500 lives, particularly in our sister
countries of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone. The
epidemic is already disrupting economic activities,
affecting livelihoods and jeopardizing the development
gains attained in the past few years, threatening to

A/69/PV.3

derail the consolidation of peace and stability in these
countries and the entire subregion.
We share the view that the impact of this epidemic
has now become a global health emergency in which the
international community should collectively undertake
to play an active and effective role so as to help bring
it under control as quickly as possible. In that regard,
we commend those countries and organizations that
have already pledged to provide support and resources
for assisting the countries most affected, as well as
their neighbours, including announced deployments of
personnel and the African Union’s support for the Ebola
outbreak initiative. We would like to acknowledge
the efforts of the medical teams on the ground that
have been working in very difficult and dangerous
conditions, risking and sometimes losing their lives in
order to help those in need, as they strive heroically to
contain the spread of the epidemic.
National and regional leadership and effective
communication will continue to be important requisites
for the success of this endeavour. We therefore commend
the Secretary-General’s emphasis on establishing a
strong, system-wide approach to coordination by the
United Nations that will interface closely with the
Governments of the countries affected and with other
partners. It will ensure a fast, united response that will
avoid duplication of effort and encourage the efficient
use of resources. We hope it will also help to strengthen
overstretched public-health institutions and ensure a
sustainable response to the epidemic in the long term,
beyond the current emergency interventions. We would
like to assure the Secretary-General of our support in
this endeavour and look forward to following it closely
as implementation of the initiative unfolds.
Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would first like to reiterate my delegation’s
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the General Assembly. You can count on
our support during this intensive part of the session.
Ecuador would like to express its sincere solidarity
with its African brother countries suffering under the
terrible epidemic caused by the Ebola virus, particularly
Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria and Sierra Leone. We have
been in contact with those countries’ Governments
in order to consult them on their requirements and
needs at this difficult time, with the goal of giving
our solidarity and support concrete form within the
framework of action in the United Nations, especially
the World Health Organization.

14-5416513/23

A/69/PV.3

We commend the countries, particularly those
in Latin America and the Caribbean, that have sent
personnel and appropriate equipment to the areas
affected by this terrible disease. In that regard, I should
highlight the generous cooperation of Cuba, which
has sent a medical team. This brother country of ours,
despite decades of an unjust and illegal blockade,
has continued to display its great generosity since, as
the Cuban Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs said
yesterday (see S/PV.7268), it does not give what is left
over; it shares what it has.
As the organ that represents all States Members of
the United Nations, it is the particular duty of the General
Assembly to debate and take decisions concerning
topics related to international cooperation in the face
of a health emergency, as described in paragraph 1 (b)
of Article 13 of the Charter of the United Nations. We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this urgent
meeting to enable us in the General Assembly to address
this situation and thus to shoulder its responsibility.
Finally, I would particularly like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for establishing a United Nations
mission for the emergency response to Ebola. I would
like to underscore my country’s support for the work of
the Mission, and for the efforts of Dr. David Nabarro,
Senior United Nations System Coordinator for Ebola,
and of the World Health Organization.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your election to the presidency of the General Assembly.
We wish you every success in your stewardship of the
Assembly and you can count on our firm support.
Venezuela commends the adoption of today’s
resolution 69/1 and its provisions for containing and
combating the recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa.
We join with the rest of the international community
in actively expressing our concern about the alarming
reports of this devastating epidemic. The capacity for
destruction of this disease, which is threatening Liberia,
Sierra Leone, Guinea and other countries, could spread
even beyond the continent. These circumstances
ineluctably leave the international community and its
principal multilateral bodies with the task of agreeing
on the effective, coordinated and speedy measures
that the emergency requires. As we have heard, the
epidemic’s exponential rate of growth demands an
immediate response.

14/23

19/09/2014

Just a few months ago, these West African
countries were entering a period of stability, peace and
economic recovery, after dealing with bad outbreaks
of internal violence. We cannot ignore such issues
when analysing the current situation, and they should
alert us to the possibility that those recent difficulties,
which those countries have barely begun to overcome,
could re-emerge. This emergency public-health crisis
will undoubtedly have broader implications involving
political, economic, social and humanitarian issues. We
should emphasize the very troubling fact that 70 per
cent of Ebola victims have been women, showing that
in these circumstances the issue of gender requires
special attention.
I would also like to mention the resolution adopted
at the first meeting of the Special Committee of the
South America-Africa Cooperation Forum, held on
8 and 9 September in Quito, Ecuador, where serious
concern was expressed about the Ebola epidemic and
its negative effects in the region, and at which it was
agreed, among other things, that the Union of South
American Nations should convene a meeting as soon
as possible to discuss ways and means of supporting
our brother countries in Africa. Furthermore, today’s
briefings to the General Assembly by the SecretaryGeneral and by the Director-General of the World
Health Organization (WHO), as well as WHO’s report,
are testimony to the sensitivity of this issue and the
priority it should be given on our agenda.
We should point out that the exponential increase
in the number of victims owing to the Ebola epidemic is
also partly rooted in the poverty of the region as a result
of decades of violence, plunder and ruin. It is therefore
a matter not only of addressing the health emergency
but also of rebuilding those institutions that can bring
about the stability, peace and prosperity of the region.
We hope that the establishment of the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response and the
solidarity of Member States provides results in the for,
of an effective and efficient response so as to address
the catastrophe.
Finally, I would like to say that our Bolivarian
Government follows a policy and the humanitarian
principle of unconditional solidarity with the peoples of
the world, who seek the pursuit of common happiness
and the achievement of peace. It has always addressed,
without exception, the inequalities and social inequities
that beset most peoples in the world. The tragic situation

14-54165

19/09/2014

that our brotherly countries of Africa are currently
experiencing will be no exception.
In that regard, given the urgency of the situation,
our Government is considering how it can best leverage
the specific assistance that we will provide to ensure
its swift delivery to the peoples and Governments
impacted by the disaster. I also wish to report that we
are in direct contact with the Presidents of the four
relevant countries so that we can contribute as rapidly
and effectively as possible. They can count on our
assistance and ongoing support.
Mr. Shearman (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for having convened today’s
meeting on this vital issue. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his powerful statement on a
health crisis that has profound implications for us all.
The United Kingdom aligns itself with the statement
made earlier by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to add some remarks to that statement.
The current Ebola epidemic has become a
humanitarian, social and economic crisis for the
three most affected West Africa countries and their
22 million people. If we fail to act now, it threatens to
become a catastrophe that will destroy economies and
neutralize the gains of recent years. It is crucial that
the international community work together to fight and
stop the epidemic not only by assisting the three most
affected countries but also by helping other countries
in the region to be ready if the disease spreads to them.
The United Nations has a vital role to play in
bringing Ebola under control. We welcome the adoption
of resolution 69/1, on measures to contain and combat
the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. We also welcome
the efforts made so far to coordinate, to scale up and to
speed up the response of the United Nations system, in
particular the announcement by the Secretary-General
of the establishment of the United Nations Mission for
Ebola Emergency Response.
In addition, we welcome yesterday’s adoption of
Security Council resolution 2177 (2014), with a record
134 sponsors. The United Kingdom is committed to
playing its part. We have already started work on the
provision of a $60 million Freetown health centre. That
centre will give confidence to health workers who are
bravely battling against Ebola. British military experts
and staff from Save the Children UK have already
joined them on the ground to get the centre operational.
On Wednesday, my Foreign Secretary announced a

A/69/PV.3

significantly increased package of support. At the
heart of that package is the commitment to lead and
to underwrite the provision of a total of 700 treatment
beds for Sierra Leone. More than 200 of those beds are
already in the delivery pipeline. We will now deliver
a further 500 treatment beds and work with partners
to provide and train the international and national
staff needed to operate them. That is in addition to the
support that we are committing to partners such as the
World Health Organization, the Red Cross, Médecins
Sans Frontières, the International Rescue Committee,
the Ebola Response Consortium, UNICEF and other
parts of the United Nations system.
We welcome the announcements of support from
others, such as the generous United States assistance
to Liberia, this week’s announcement that France will
step up its support to Guinea, and pledges of help from
countries such as China, Canada and Cuba, as well
as those made yesterday in the Security Council (see
S/PV.7268). However, we need a huge and sustainable
global effort if we are to beat the scourge. Without
an immediate concerted global push, Ebola will kill
many thousands more, affecting communities for a
generation. Now is the time for united action. We call on
all countries to join the global coalition against Ebola
without hesitation or doubt and with the determination
that we will end the terrible outbreak.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of Mexico is pleased to see
you, Sir, presiding over the General Assembly at its
sixty-ninth session. We wish you success in your
leadership and assure you of our cooperation and
support throughout the session.
My delegation wishes to acknowledge the timely
convening of this meeting a day after the Security
Council adopted resolution 2177 (2014). It calls on all
Member States to respond as quickly as possible to the
urgent need to address the serious challenge of Ebola,
which is affecting several countries in West Africa and
threatens to spread.
The crisis compels us to reflect on the urgent
need to strengthen national health-care systems and
to take national and international action in order to
deal with the outbreak in the short term. It is a crisis
without borders and therefore requires a borderless
response without obstacles or conditions. Resolution
69/1, which we adopted today, supports the initiative of
the Secretary-General to establish the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response and clearly

14-5416515/23

A/69/PV.3

demonstrates the common will of the Organization to
cooperate and to provide humanitarian support.
As in the case of the cholera outbreak in Haiti, to
which Mexico responded, I would also like to convey
my delegation’s solidarity with the countries affected
by Ebola. The health care that some countries of
West Africa need today requires our rapid, effective,
sustainable and generous response. Let us remain
mindful of the possible implications of the crisis for
international peace and security. Above all, may we be
sensitive to the needs for social development and health
services of the affected countries. Mexico stands ready
to provide its support and solidarity to deal with this
emergency and to ensure that the affected countries can
return to the path of development as soon as possible
with the full support of the international community.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): First of all, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the office
of President of the General Assembly and to affirm
Brazil’s full cooperation during your term in office. I also
wish to thank you for having convened this important
meeting today. I wish to reiterate my delegation’s
appreciation for the efforts of the Secretary-General
and for the leadership shown by the Director-General
of the World Health Organization in establishing the
United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
(UNMEER) with the urgency that that requires.
Yesterday, the Security Council adopted resolution
2177 (2014) on the response to the Ebola crisis with
an unprecedented number of sponsors — a clear
recognition of the gravity of the outbreak and a sign of
the awareness of the serious consequences that healthrelated emergencies pose for our development efforts.
Today, the General Assembly rallied behind the
Governments and the peoples of Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone and expressed its commitment to fully
supporting UNMEER. Brazil will remain completely
engaged in such efforts and solidarity with our friends
in Africa. I would like thank the Secretary-General
for outlining the basic objectives of the Mission in
his letter dated 17 September to the President of the
General Assembly (A/69/389) and for highlighting
the importance of concerted and coordinated action
among the United Nations system, the World Health
Organization, Member States and other relevant
organizations.
As Brazil declared yesterday in the Security
Council (see S/PV.7268), I wish to reaffirm the intention

16/23

19/09/2014

of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to serve as a
platform for the exchange of information and raising of
awareness on the severity of the emergency. As Chair
of the PBC, Brazil would have liked to see a recognition
in resolution 2177 (2014) of the PBC’s early warning to
the international community on the Ebola epidemic and
its dramatic proportions.
We are particularly encouraged by the strategic
purpose of UNMEER to provide training infrastructure
for medical and non-medical personnel, as that will
enable local health-care providers to safely carry out
their work and, in line with the principles stated by
the Secretary-General, build the necessary capacity
to strengthen the national systems in the countries
affected, so that they will be prepared to prevent future
outbreaks. We must not forget that the crisis presently
affecting Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone is, more
than anything else, a health emergency and a social
and developmental challenge. It must be dealt with as
such, with the General Assembly playing a central role.
We look forward to examining the upcoming report
of the Secretary-General on the necessary resource
requirements for UNMEER and we call for the support
of all Member States.
Finally, I must make a special mention of
appreciation to the health-care providers — doctors,
nurses — humanitarian workers and all others who have
been part of efforts to fight the Ebola epidemic in West
Africa as well as those who will take part in UNMEER.
We wish them quick success and a safe return.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): Let me begin by expressing
Japan’s deepest sympathy to the families of the evergrowing number of victims of Ebola and to the people
and the Governments of the affected countries. It is
important to coordinate our actions at the international
level in order to rapidly address this global health
crisis. To that end, Japan is very grateful to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his leadership in addressing
the crisis. That is why the Government of Japan lends
its full support to resolution 69/1, which we have just
adopted. Japan expects that the United Nations will
combat Ebola as one body, by making the fullest use of
the new United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response mechanism.
I would like to briefly share Japan’s efforts to
respond to the emergency. We have so far provided
$5 million for West Africa, dispatched Japanese medical
doctors and supplied 20,000 infection-protection suits
for health-care workers. Japan also stands ready to
14-54165

19/09/2014

provide a new medication against Ebola developed by
two Japanese companies, Toyama Chemical Company,
Ltd. and the Fujifilm Holdings Corporation. Over the
long term, we will continue to support the African
countries’ own efforts in improving their resilience
against public health crises. Strengthening Africa’s
social and economic resilience is one of the priorities of
Japanese policy towards Africa.
In conclusion, I join other speakers in expressing
our hope that this Ebola outbreak will be quickly
brought under control. I would like to reiterate Japan’s
determination to take an active role in combating that
global threat.
Mr. Grant (Canada): On behalf of the Government
of Canada and all Canadians, I extend our profound
condolences to and solidarity with the peoples of
Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, as well as Nigeria
and Senegal, for the extreme challenges confronting
them due to the Ebola crisis. Canada remains deeply
concerned about the outbreak of Ebola in West Africa,
which risks undermining the foundations for economic
prosperity, security and social stability that have been
painstakingly supported by the United Nations system,
including the Peacebuilding Commission.
(spoke in French)
We recognize that this crisis has arisen in a
chronically fragile situation in regions where great
poverty reigns, which have barely recovered from
decades of conflict and civil unrest. In partnership
with the United Nations system and the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies,
Médecins Sans Frontières and other actors, the
Government has clearly expressed the urgent need for
a collective response if we want to succeed in avoiding
worst-case scenarios.
(spoke in English)
We are looking to the United Nations to present
a coherent approach to enable timely and effective
responses by the global community. In that regard, we
welcome the degree to which the Secretary-General and
the United Nations as a whole are making the response
to the Ebola crisis a key priority. Specifically, the
establishment of the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response is unprecedented, and we expect
that it will provide much-needed field support to those
working on the front lines of the crisis.

A/69/PV.3

Canada made early contributions in support of
humanitarian and security interventions to help contain
the spread of Ebola throughout West Africa. We have
provided expert deployments, vaccines and material
and financial support. Our contributions to the World
Health Organization (WHO), Médecins Sans Frontières
and local Red Cross and Red Crescent organizations
has helped established the base for their respective
response activities. In addition, Canada has deployed a
mobile laboratory to Sierra Leone with rotating teams
of Canadian laboratory technicians and supplies. We
have also enabled the deployment of four Canadian Red
Cross delegates to Guinea and Sierra Leone and four
Canadian experts to Sierra Leone working for UNICEF,
and committed over $2.5 million in personal protective
equipment to WHO for distribution.
Recognizing the extraordinary circumstances and
for the benefit of the global community, Canada donated
to the WHO nearly a thousand doses of the experimental
vaccine VSV-EBOV. We have also actively contributed
to the WHO expert panels on Ebola.
Canada is now considering the United Nations
appeal issued on 16 September and will work in
a coordinated manner with all partners to make it
possible for an effective global response to bring the
outbreak under control. We shall continue to support
those collective efforts to bring an end to the terrible
suffering and loss of life caused by the Ebola crisis.
Mr. Zamora Rivas (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you
on your election as President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-ninth session. We are confident that under
your leadership, Sir, this body, the most representative
of the United Nations, will strengthen its role in order
to respond to events that concern our membership.
As an example of this leadership and the role of
the General Assembly, we commend the work of your
Office in submitting resolution 69/1, entitled “Measures
to contain and combat the recent Ebola outbreak in
West Africa”, which we have just adopted. We also
take note of resolution 2177 (2014), adopted yesterday
by the Security Council on the same subject, from the
perspective of international peace and security.
The letter sent to the Secretary-General by the
Presidents of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone leaves
no doubt about the need for a rapid, effective and
united response to the Ebola outbreak in West Africa.
But solidarity is not all that is called for when we are

14-5416517/23

A/69/PV.3

facing the risk that Ebola could spread across the world.
We are talking of no less than the health of our own
people. We have faced such risks in the past, with sad
results. El Salvador therefore welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s intention to establish the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, which should
work closely with the World Health Organization as
well as with all the agencies, funds and programmes of
the Organization.
El Salvador occupies one of the world’s most
vulnerable territories, which is exposed to risks that
include, among other things, earthquakes, volcanoes
and climatic extremes. My country has always been
the beneficiary of the solidarity of the peoples and the
Governments of other countries when we have been
affected by disasters related to those risks. Therefore,
El Salvador sees it as an opportunity and an honour to
reciprocate those expressions of solidarity by offering
the affected populations whatever services the United
Nations considers relevant.
In that regard, we wish to go beyond simply
responding to the call of the United Nations to urge all
Member States to join in this noble endeavour. Just four
days ago, our Minister for Public Health publicly invited
personnel from my country’s health sector to help the
victims of this disease. As of this morning, more than
80 doctors, along with dozens of health workers, have
signed up to offer their professional services to those in
need in West Africa, wherever the affected countries
and the United Nations decide they are most needed.
Mr. Wang Hao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation wishes to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session. China would also
like to thank you and Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for your efforts, and China welcomes the swift
convening of this meeting on the outbreak of Ebola.
We support the adoption of today’s historic
resolution 69/1, establishing a special mission in West
Africa. The Ebola outbreak is currently raging in the
West African countries of Sierra Leone, Guinea and
Liberia, posing a serious threat to the lives and health of
the countries concerned. When one side is in difficulty,
all sides should help. Combating the outbreak of Ebola
is no longer a task solely for the people and countries
of Africa; it is also the common responsibility of the
world. Time means lives. The characteristics of this
Ebola outbreak enable it to spread quickly, widely and
deeply. The more time it takes, the more difficult and
18/23

19/09/2014

more costly it will be to control the disease. China
therefore calls upon the international community
once again to lend intensified urgency to combating
this outbreak and to quickly provide assistance to the
countries concerned.
China experienced a severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS) outbreak in 2003, and we keenly feel
the suffering of the people of West Africa. The Chinese
leaders and Government attach great importance to the
outbreak in West Africa, and we therefore immediately
provided assistance to them and shared our experience.
As of today, China has 174 medical experts and workers
deployed in the affected areas of Sierra Leone, Liberia
and Guinea. Yesterday, President Xi Jinping announced
that the Chinese Government has decided that, on
the basis of the two packages of earlier assistance,
we will provide additional emergency cash, food and
material aid totalling Y200 million to Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Guinea, and $2 million to the World Health
Organization and the African Union to support their
struggle against Ebola.
As a next stage, China, together with all the
countries of the world, will join forces with the countries
concerned in West Africa to overcome the difficulties
and achieve victory over the disease. We hope that, with
the help of the international community, the people of
West Africa will soon win the battle over Ebola and
that national stability, along with economic and social
development, will be restored as soon as possible.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Since this is the first time that I am taking the floor
on behalf of my country at this session, I wish to
extend to you, Sir, Cuba’s most cordial and heartfelt
congratulations. I assure you that you have the full
support of our delegation. We have every confidence
that you will ably lead members at this session. I would
also like to commend you for convening this timely
meeting, which is a credit to you and speaks to your
able leadership as President from the Africa Group
that one of our first meetings specifically looks, as it
should, at the emergency in Africa caused by the Ebola
epidemic in West Africa.
Allow me also, Sir, to express our support and
solidarity with the authorities of Liberia, Sierra Leone
and Guinea, whose foreign ministers all took the floor
in the Security Council yesterday (see S/PV.7268). I
believe that they are carrying out commendable and
intense work and that our cooperation is essential to
their success.
14-54165

19/09/2014

I would like now to refer to and support the
Secretary-General’s proposal to create a United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response in
West Africa. His proposal comes at a time when it is
absolutely essential to establish such a mission, and for
it to be established under the leadership of the United
Nations. The Mission addresses an issue that can wait
no longer. Once again, we are convinced that we can be
successful. The women, the elderly and the children of
West Africa deserve that response.
I also wish to acknowledge Ms. Margaret Chan,
Director-General of the World Health Organization,
who has been leading her organization’s support of the
work of the health authorities in the affected countries
from the very beginning.
Cuba’s Ministry of Health announced in Geneva
our commitment to send a volunteer medical brigade to
Sierra Leone to join the fight against the epidemic. All
of the members of the brigade have at least 15 years of
professional service and have worked in other countries,
where they have tackled natural disasters and
epidemics, as well as served on cooperative medical
missions. We are prepared to work shoulder to shoulder
with other countries, even those with which Cuba does
not have diplomatic relations. Cuba’s response is part
of its assistance and solidarity with Africa, Asia and
Latin America and the Caribbean. In the battle against
Ebola, which should be everyone’s battle, Cuba decided
to maintain its cooperation and extend it to the most
affected countries. Those countries have already been
informed of that initiative by our authorities. In the
rest of the region not affected by Ebola, where we have
over 4,000 health workers, we stand ready to help in
preventing the disease.
The medical brigades that will be sent to Africa to
tackle Ebola are part of the Henry Reeve International
Contingent of Doctors, established in 2005 and made
up of specialized doctors who are used to tackling
disasters and major epidemiological issues. The
Cuban Government’s response confirms the values of
solidarity that have guided our people and the Cuban
revolution. As was said earlier on, those values lead us
not to offer leftovers, but to share the little that we have.
Africa is awaiting an immediate response from
all Member States, especially from those that have
resources. I believe that, in some way or another, we all
have something to give. It is urgent that we all join in
the global effort against Ebola, and Cuba stands ready
to continue to contribute to that effort.

A/69/PV.3

Once again, we congratulate you, Sir, on this
commendable initiative and on the adoption of
resolution 69/1, which we were able to support today.
We believe this is a timely moment and opportunity.
Mr. Eriza (Indonesia): My delegation would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. My
delegation would also like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting. As the recent developments
in global affairs have shown, your tenure as President
will undoubtedly be challenging, but my delegation
fervently believes that your commendable leadership
will guide the Assembly in the right direction in carrying
out the challenging tasks ahead. The convening of the
Assembly’s meeting on the agenda item entitled “Global
health and foreign policy” to consider the adoption of
resolution 69/1, on the Ebola outbreak, is a testimony
of your able leadership within just a few days of your
assumption of office.
Last month the World Health Organization (WHO)
declared the 2014 Ebola outbreak to be one of the
largest Ebola outbreaks in history. It has had massive
humanitarian impacts on the most affected countries
and on the region. Recently, we received a joint letter
from the Presidents of the Republic of Sierra Leone,
the Republic of Liberia and the Republic of Guinea
appealing to the good in each and everyone of us to
support their efforts to save people in their countries.
A coordinated international response to stop and
reverse the international spread of the disease is indeed
vital. As the Director-General of WHO said during her
briefing to Member States earlier this month, now is not
the time for lots of words, now is the time for action. My
delegation therefore welcomes and fully supports the
Secretary-General’s initiative to establish the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. We
hope that the crisis can be contained soon.
Ms. King (Australia): Australia welcomes the
adoption of resolution 69/1, which supports the
Secretary-General’s intention to establish the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response.
The Ebola outbreak is an urgent and devastating
crisis. It has transformed itself into much more than a
health crisis, as we all know, with grave humanitarian,
economic and social consequences that could spread
far beyond the affected countries. We have heard that
the already high numbers of infections and deaths are
multiplying exponentially, doubling every three weeks.
Health systems in the affected countries have been

14-5416519/23

A/69/PV.3

stretched to the point of collapse. Sick and infected
people are being turned away from overflowing
treatment centres to die. We have heard the dire forecast
of what will happen if Ebola is left to continue its
alarming spread. We know that action is urgent and that
the United Nations system is critical to the response.
Despite the heroic efforts of all those who are
grappling with the crisis, we have much catching up to
do if we are to succeed in bending the epidemiological
curve down from its current trajectory. The effects of
the outbreak are still reversible, but only if the response
and particularly isolation and treatment capacity
are scaled up massively and quickly. It is absolutely
vital that there be a coordinated and comprehensive
response. Australia therefore strongly supports the
Secretary-General’s efforts, through Mr. Nabarro
and by working closely with Ms. Chan and the World
Health Organization (WHO), to ensure that the United
Nations system plays a leading role in the global
effort to control the outbreak. We recognize that this
is an unprecedented challenge that requires an equally
unprecedented response, which is why Australia
welcomes and supports the Secretary-General’s
initiative to immediately establish the first-ever United
Nations international public health mission.
Australia is committed to supporting the
international response, and we stand in solidarity with
the affected countries and their people. Our Minister
for Foreign Affairs announced this week that Australia
would immediately provide a further $7 million,
including for the WHO consolidated regional response
and to support the provision of front-line medical
services. Australia will continue to assess areas where
it can best contribute to the crisis.
Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): As this is the first time
that I take the floor, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.
Uganda has experienced Ebola outbreaks four
times in the past 14 years, with our worst experience in
the years 2000 and 2001, which involved 425 cases. In
2001 Ebola killed 224 people, including Dr. Matthew
Lukwiya, the doctor who accurately diagnosed and
reported its occurrence. In 2007 it killed only 37 people,
while in 2009 it killed 17. In direct comparison, as of a
week ago, the reported cases in West Africa were over
4,700 in number and are still on the rise.

20/23

19/09/2014

Uganda is prepared to share its experience and
stands ready to continue providing the assistance
required during this trying time. Our experience has
taught us that aggressive public-health campaigns are
key in curbing the spread of epidemics. The Ugandan
Government was unreserved in sending out warnings,
replete with descriptions of Ebola symptoms and advice
on how to handle those presenting with it, as well as
describing proper procedures for handling and burying
the dead.
In Uganda, as soon as the first Ebola cases were
identified, public health officials created makeshift
quarantine facilities and called a press conference,
together with the World Health Organization, to
ask for help. We exposed the problem right away
and demystified any stigma attached to it. Other
measures included Uganda’s active infectious
disease-surveillance network, which offers a quick
reaction time to deal with suspected cases. The swift
local response created opportunities for international
assistance to reach us. People looked out for the
symptoms, and they immediately reported suspected
cases to surveillance officials. It is one of the reasons
that Uganda has successfully stamped out four Ebola
outbreaks, even ones that have occurred in urban areas.
Our high adult literacy rates also played a role, because
that increased the options of the communication media
in informing the general public.
Uganda shares the grave concern expressed by the
rest of the Member States about the rapid deterioration
of the health situation in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone and about the fact that the epidemic has begun to
grow exponentially in that region, with no respect for
borders. We stand in solidarity with those countries.
In July, Uganda sent a team of 20 of our top
Ebola experts to Sierra Leone and Liberia. The team
had specializations including epidemiology, case
management, community education and psychosocial
support. However, they quickly discovered that this
was a situation where even protective equipment was
insufficient. The medical workers needed equipment,
training and resources. The disease once again claimed
the life of one of Uganda’s senior surgeons, Dr. Samuel
Muhumuza Mutoro, in Monrovia. Fragile health systems
create weaker support systems for medical personnel,
who could potentially walk off a job that unnecessarily
increases their chances of exposure.

14-54165

19/09/2014

In that respect, Uganda welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s decision to establish the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER).
We agree that the priorities of UNMEER should be to
stop Ebola, treat patients, ensure continued services,
maintain stability and prevent further outbreaks.
Africa has battled several challenges and has built
up its medical human resources in spite of very many
odds stacked against it, including HIV/AIDS. We
cannot afford to lose the battle against this disease.
Mr. Deniau (France) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your election
to the presidency of the General Assembly at its sixtyninth session.
I would like to align myself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union.
The health crisis caused by Ebola has by its
scale turned into a socioeconomic crisis, and it now
constitutes a threat to peace and security. It is our duty
to stop the progression of this scourge. This is why
France has made the fight against Ebola a priority,
and it is fighting alongside the African countries
concerned. Our collective responsibility is focused on
three priorities. These are to act, to coordinate and to
prevent.
First, we must act. That is why, since the beginning
of this epidemic, my country has taken the initiative to
support the actions of affected African States and of
the World Health Organization and non-governmental
organizations that are contributing to the fight. The
experts of French laboratories of the Pasteur Institute
identified the presence of the virus last May, and they
were among the first in the field in Guinea. Today,
assistance from France to combat Ebola has reached
over €60 million, with the funding going through the
various relevant channels.
Strictly on a bilateral level, my country will provide
€35 million to affected countries and their neighbours.
A substantial part will be concentrated on Guinea,
which the French Minister for Cooperation visited
several days ago. In addition, the President of the
French Republic has just announced the establishment
in the coming days of a branch of the Pasteur Institute
and a military hospital in the forested area of Guinea,
a region known to be the centre of the epidemic. The
hospital will be staffed with military doctors and
doctors specialized in civilian protection and will have
air support.

A/69/PV.3

Next, we must coordinate the efforts to contain the
epidemic. That is why, at the European level, at our
initiative the European Union will quickly have the
means to coordinate health evacuations. We are also
working at the level of the United Nations, in close
coordination with the World Health Organization and
with the United Nations Coordinator for the Ebola
Emergency Response, David Nabarro, concentrating
our efforts specifically on Guinea, as Mr. Nabarro has
asked us to do. We are also providing support, including
human resources, to the Crisis Operations Centre based
in New York.
Finally, we must prevent. We can contain Ebola if
simple and strict health-safety rules are applied. But
beyond that, we will find a lasting solution only by
helping the countries affected to strengthen their health
systems for the duration, and by focusing particular
attention in those countries on the most vulnerable
populations, in particular women. As the SecretaryGeneral said earlier, this disease takes an especially
heavy toll on women.
I would like to welcome the commitment of all the
Member States that are participating in the international
mobilization against Ebola. I also wish to commend the
courage of the health staff in the affected countries,
both local and international, who are working in the
field to combat the epidemic. We must admire their
courage. I have in mind in particular the dedication of
the Médecins Sans Frontières teams. I think that we
must really commend the courage shown by those men
and women.
In that context, France can only strongly welcome
the initiative that you, Mr. President, took in submitting
the text of resolution 69/1, which we have adopted today.
Following yesterday’s adoption of Security Council
resolution 2177 (2014), today’s resolution reaffirms our
full support and the mobilization of the entire United
Nations system and all Member States. The meeting
organized for 25 September by the Secretary-General
will be another demonstration of that collective
determination. As part of this international mobilization,
which one must call historic, you, Mr. President, can
count on the strong support of France.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union.
Let me begin by expressing our deepest
condolences to the families and friends of all those
who have perished in the Ebola outbreak. We commend

14-5416521/23

A/69/PV.3

the affected countries for their resilience and steadfast
determination in these difficult times, and we pay
tribute to the many brave health workers engaged in
the tireless efforts to counter this terrible disease. Let
me also express appreciation for the important support
provided by the United Nations family and other
international partners.
This important meeting is in itself an
acknowledgment of the seriousness of the situation.
We join others in a global appeal for a scaling-up of
international efforts. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative to convene a high-level meeting
next week and his efforts to improve coordination
of international assistance, not least through the
appointment of a Senior United Nations System
Coordinator. The decision today to establish a United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response is also
critical in this regard.
Sweden has long-standing bilateral relations
with the countries concerned. We are also a leading
humanitarian donor globally, and we have responded
accordingly to this crisis. We have already contributed
$4.4 million to the three countries most affected, and
we are in the final stages of preparing an additional
package of $13 million for the appeal of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. We will shortly revert with additional
substantive commitments, including logistical support.
As Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission country
team for Liberia, we will continue to contribute to a
comprehensive approach to this crisis, as well as to
promote a regional perspective and link short-term
assistance to the longer-term peacebuilding priorities
in the country. We are committed to standing by all
the countries facing this merciless epidemic, and we
look forward to the opportunity to announce further
significant support in the near future.
Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
too would like to commend you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of your office and for convening this
important meeting.
The voices we have heard here today, in the Security
Council yesterday (see S/PV.7268) and elsewhere are
truly encouraging. All that remains is to put those
commitments into action. The victims of the Ebola
outbreak deserve our sincere sympathy and support.
Isolating and stigmatizing the victims, including

22/23

19/09/2014

through transport restrictions, is truly unfortunate. We
call for an urgent review of such restrictions.
The Ebola outbreak has highlighted the fragility
that persists in Africa as well as in other parts of the
world. While we are directing our efforts to eradicating
the Ebola outbreak in the short and medium term, in the
long term what we have to do is to build the capacities
of the health and humanitarian sectors so they can
cope with major outbreaks such as that of the Ebola
virus. At the African Union Summit in Malabo in June,
His Excellency President Jakaya Kikwete expressed
the readiness of the United Republic of Tanzania to
support the regional interventions spearheaded by the
African Union, as well as the international efforts,
including those undertaken by the United Nations. Our
resolve and commitment to support those measures
continue. We will also continue to work with partners
to strengthen the level of preparedness for addressing
this Ebola epidemic.
Mr. Talbert (Guyana): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your initiative in convening this important meeting
and for your leadership in facilitating an urgent
response by the General Assembly to the Ebola crisis.
We welcome today’s adoption of resolution 69/1,
on measures to contain and combat the recent Ebola
outbreak in West Africa.
Guyana would like to take this opportunity to
register its concern about the deadly Ebola epidemic,
unprecedented in scale and impact, that has struck West
Africa. We express our solidarity with our brothers and
sisters in the countries affected, particularly Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone, and our support for a robust
response on the part of the international community.
The crisis brings with it a plethora of challenges that
require a multidimensional and multisectoral response
at the national, regional and international levels. In
addition to the obvious public-health implications
of the epidemic, the Secretary-General has drawn
attention to the significant political, social, economic,
humanitarian and security dimensions of the crisis.
The Governments of the affected countries are
making valiant efforts to respond to the crisis and
contain the spread of the disease. However, given its
exponential spread, an urgent, massively scaled-up and
coordinated global response has become imperative if
we are to bring it under control and prevent its spread to
other territories. Guyana supports all efforts to that end.
In that regard, our delegation applauds the Secretary-

14-54165

19/09/2014

General’s leadership and supports his initiative
to establish the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response. For its part, the Government of
Guyana is currently actively considering an appropriate
contribution in the context of the global response.

A/69/PV.3

The President: We have heard the last speaker on
this item. The General Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 124.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

14-5416523/23
