General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

200

- -

proposed review mission on the current refugee situation in Somalia to the Economic and Social Council at
its first regular session of 1981;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the High Commissioner, to submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session
on the progress achieved in the implementation of the
present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
15 December I 980

35/181.

Situation of refugees in the Sudan

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1980/10 of 28 April 1980 and 1980/45 of 23 July 1980,
by which the Council requested the Secretary-General,
in co-operation with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to send an interagency mission to
the Sudan to assess the needs and the magnitude of assistance required for the financing of the programmes
for the relief and settlement of refugees and to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session,
Having heard the statement of the High Commissioner100 concerning the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the visit of the interagency mission to the
Sudan from 12 to 22 June 1980, 102
Noting with appreciation that the Government of the
Sudan, with the help of the High Commissioner and the
international community, held an important and wellattended conference at Khartoum from 20 to 22 June
1980, entitled "International Conference on Refugees in
the Sudan",
Deeply concerned that the assistance rendered to the
Sudan falls far short of today's needs required to set in
motion the process of rehabilitation, settlement and
community development, together with the strengthening of national services to cope with the significant addition to the population caused by the continuing massive influx of refugees,
Recognizing the need for continued financial and
material support from the international community to
the refugees in the Sudan,
Recognizing further that the presence of large numbers
of refugees in the Sudan and the continued influx of
more refugees put grave pressures and strains on that
country's limited resources,
I. Commends the Secretary-General for sending an
interagency mission to the Sudan and for the comprehensive report prepared by the mission on the needs
and the magnitude of assistance required for refugees in
the Sudan; 103
2. Takes note with appreciation of the assistance that
has been rendered for refugees in the Sudan by several
Member States, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations;
3. Endorses the report of the interagency mission to
the Sudan 103 and the recommendations contained therein;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
report to Member States, international organizations
and voluntary agencies and to appeal to them, in close
10
'

0

'
'

A/35/4 IO.
Ibid., annex.

-- -

co-ordination with the High Commissioner, to provide
generous contributions to the refugees in the Sudan on
the basis of the report of the mission;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the High Commissioner, to send, as a matter of urgency, follow-up missions to carry out feasibility studies with a view to strengthening the capacity of the
Government of the Sudan to pursue cost-effective
strategies and to plan and locate new settlements as an
integral part of over-all rural and urban development,
on the basis of the recommendations of the mission;
6. Appeals to Member States, the High Commissioner, the United Nations organizations concerned
and voluntary agencies to render maximum financial
and material assistance to the Government of the Sudan
in its efforts to provide shelter, food and other services
to the growing number of refugees in that country;
7. Commends the initiative and endeavours of the
Sudan in convening at Khartoum the International
Conference on Refugees in the Sudan to draw the attention of the international community to the plight of
473,000 refugees and to the magnitude and complexity
of their situation;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its first regular session
of 1981 and to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
15 December I 980
35/182.

Humanitarian assistance to refugees in Djibouti

The General Assembly,
Having heard the statement of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, 100
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General, 104 the annex to which contains the
report on the assessment of the needs of the refugees in
DJibouti, as prepared by the interagency mission which
visited Djibouti from 5 to 11 June 1980,
Noting with satisfaction the oral report of the High
Commissioner with respect to assistance to the refugees
in Djibouti,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1980/11 of28 April 198Oand 1980/44 of23 July 1980on
assistance to the refugees in Djibouti,
A ware of the consequences of the social and economic
burden placed on the Government and people of
Djibouti as a result of the influx of refugees and the subsequent impact on the national development and infrastructure of that country,
Noting with appreciation the concern and continued
efforts of the Office of the High Commissioner, the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the World Health Organization,
the World Food Programme and the non-governmental
organizations which have worked closely with the
Government of Djibouti on the relief and rehabilitation
programme for the refugees in that country,
l. Appreciates the action taken by the SecretaryGeneral in arranging and dispatching the interagency
mission to Djibouti to assess the needs of the refugees;
"" A/35/409.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Takes note with appreciation of the oral report of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and of the assessment of the needs of the refugees in
Djibouti contained in the report prepared by the mission;
3. Endorses the report of the mission to Djibouti and
the recommendations contained therein;
4. Invites the High Commissioner to continue his
humanitarian assistance to the refugees in Djibouti;
5. Requests the High Commissioner to continue to
ensure that adequate assistance programmes are organized for the refugees, to keep the refugee situation in
Djibouti under constant review and to maintain close
contact with Member States and the governmental and
non-governmental organizations concerned to mobilize
the necessary assistance to the Government of Djibouti
to cope effectively with the refugee situation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its first regular session
of 1981 and to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session on the implementation of the present resolution.

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980
35/183.

Assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1978/39 of I August 1978, by which the Council requested the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, in co-operation with the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, the World
Food Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the World Health Organization and other specialized agencies, as well as non-governmental and
voluntary organizations, to render maximum possible
assistance to the Governments of the countries in the
Horn of Africa,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution I 980/54 of 24 July 1980, by which the Council requested the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
High Commissioner, to appeal to the international community to find ways and means of mobilizing urgently
humanitarian assistance for displaced persons and
voluntary returnees in Ethiopia,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia, 105 prepared pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution I 980 /8 of 28 April 1980,
Having heard the statement of the representative of
the Secretary-General, 106 in which he requested the assistance of the international community in carrying out
the recommendations and proposals contained in the report,
Having heard the statement of the Commissioner for
Relief and Rehabilitation of Ethiopia, 101 in which he
outlined the grave situation facing the large number of
displaced persons in Ethiopia and the difficulties encountered by his Government in providing for their relief and rehabilitation,
11

" A/35/360andCorr.l-3.
"'" Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session.
Third Committee, 51 st meeting, paras. 13-15.
101
Ibid., 53rd meeting, paras. 40-46.

Taking note of the appeal of the Secretary-General' in
his note verbale of 11 November 1980,
I. Endorses the appeal of the Secretary-General in
which he urged Governments and international organizations to provide prompt and generous assistance to
displaced persons;
2. Endorses also the appeal of the Economic and
Social Council to Member States, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations and all voluntary
agencies to assist the Government of Ethiopia in its efforts to provide relief and rehabilitation to displaced
persons;
3. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia and the
recommendations contained therein;
4. Commends the Secretary-General for the preparation of the comprehensive report on the needs of displaced persons \n Ethiopia;
5. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue his efforts to mobilize humanitarian assistance for the relief and rehabilitation of certified voluntary returnees;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of 1981 and to the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session on the progress achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/184.

Assistance to student refugees in southern
Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/174 of 17 December 1979,
in which it, inter alia, noted with concern the continued
influx into Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia
of student refugees from Namibia and South Africa and
the urgent need to provide facilities for their care, health
and education,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 108 the annex to which contains the findings of
the review missions sent by him to Botswana, Lesotho,
Swaziland and Zambia in May and June 1980 to examine the status of the programmes of assistance to student refugees in southern Africa,
Conscious of the responsibilities and obligations
shared by the international community to assist the
countries of asylum by providing financial and material
assistance to enable them to cope with the influx of these
student refugees,
Co~vinced that the discriminatory policies and repressive measures being applied in South Africa and
Namibia will lead to a further exodus of student refugees from these countries,
Recognizing the need to strengthen the capacity of the
countries of asylum to deal with any new emergency
which may develop as a result of a sudden influx of student refugees from Namibia and South Africa,
Disturbed by the adverse effects which the application
of apartheid, particularly the bantustan policy, is having on settled communities living in South Africa in
areas bordering Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland, and
"" A/35/149.
