S/PRST/2001/6

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 March 2001
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4285th meeting of the Security Council, held on 2 March 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Burundi”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council strongly condemns the recent attacks by armed
groups in Burundi, particularly those launched on Bujumbura by the Forces for
National Liberation (FNL). The timing of these actions is of particular concern
since they were launched during the meeting of the parties to the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement (the Arusha Agreement) on Burundi convened
by the Facilitator, Nelson Mandela, on 25 February 2001 in Arusha, Tanzania.
The Council calls for the immediate cessation of these attacks.
“The Security Council expresses its strong disapproval of all acts aimed
at undermining the peace process in Burundi. The Council urges all sides to
exercise restraint and to refrain from any action that may exacerbate the
situation.
“The Security Council condemns the deliberate targeting of the civilian
population by the armed groups and calls upon all parties to abide by
international humanitarian law and in particular to refrain from any further
attacks or any military action that endangers the civilian population.
“The Security Council reiterates its call on the FNL and the Forces for
the Defence of Democracy (FDD) to cease hostilities immediately and to join
the peace process. The Council recalls the meeting in Libreville on 9 January
2001 between the President of the Republic of Burundi and the leader of the
FDD and urges the continuation of this process. The Council calls on all the
parties, including the armed groups, to engage in dialogue immediately so as to
allow an early cessation of hostilities and to reach agreement on a permanent
ceasefire.
“The Security Council stresses the importance of providing urgent
humanitarian assistance to civilians displaced by the hostilities, and calls upon
all parties to guarantee safe and unhindered access by humanitarian personnel
to those in need. The Council reiterates its request to the donor community to
help the Government of Burundi, United Nations agencies and the
humanitarian community to respond effectively to the needs of the population

01-27235 (E) 020301

*0127235*

S/PRST/2001/6

of Burundi. The Council also urges donors to deliver on the commitments
made at the Paris Donors Conference on 11 and 12 December 2000.
“The Security Council takes note of the scheme for power-sharing
arrangements among parties to the Arusha Agreement worked out by the
fourteenth Summit Meeting of the Regional Peace Initiative on Burundi, held
in Arusha, Tanzania on 26 February 2001 and calls on all the parties to reach
early agreement on the outstanding issues related to the transitional powersharing arrangements and to give their full cooperation to the Facilitator.
“The Security Council stresses that the key to achieving lasting peace in
Burundi lies with the Burundian parties. It is convinced that compromise is the
only means to resolve the conflict, and to this end urges all parties to work
towards settling outstanding differences over the peace accord, and to proceed
to its implementation.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full support for the continuing efforts
of the Facilitator, the Regional Peace Initiative and the Implementation
Monitoring Committee to bring peace to Burundi. The Council also
emphasizes the role of the Implementation Monitoring Committee in
advancing the peace process. It takes note of the Communiqué of the 14th
Summit Meeting of the Regional Peace Initiative on Burundi held in Arusha,
Tanzania on 26 February 2001. It also reiterates its readiness to consider
practical ways in which it can best support the peace process, and the
implementation of the Arusha Agreement.
“The Security Council will remain seized of the matter.”

2
