S/PRST/2008/33

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 September 2008
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5970th meeting of the Security Council, held on 4 September 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the signing of a peace and
reconciliation Agreement (“the Djibouti Agreement”) between the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and the Alliance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia
(ARS) in Djibouti on 19 August 2008, the preliminary work undertaken by the
High Level Committee and the Joint Security Committee set up under that
Agreement, as well as recent political developments. The Security Council
expresses its determination that the Agreement should provide the basis for
lasting peace, security and stability for the people of Somalia, including the
ultimate withdrawal of foreign forces. The Security Council commends the
efforts deployed by the TFG and the ARS to this end and their commitment to
peace.
“The Security Council reaffirms its respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia.
“The Security Council extends its gratitude to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, and to the
UN Political Office for Somalia for mediating dialogue between the parties
and garnering support for the political process. The Security Council further
expresses its gratitude to the Government of Djibouti for hosting talks between
the parties.
“The Security Council calls on the parties to meet all elements of their
Agreement in full. In particular, the Council underlines the crucial importance
of the parties taking all necessary measures to ensure, without delay,
unhindered humanitarian access and assistance to the Somali people, and of
the parties and their allies terminating all acts of armed confrontation. The
Security Council states its support for the implementation of the Agreement
and its intention to review that implementation continuously.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong support for the African Union
Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) and urges again the international community
to provide financial resources, personnel, equipment and services for the full
deployment of AMISOM.

08-49747 (E) 040908

*0849747*

S/PRST/2008/33

“The Security Council takes note of the parties’ request in the Djibouti
Agreement that the United Nations, within a period of 120 days, authorise and
deploy an international stabilisation force. The Council further notes, in this
regard, communiqués by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
of 29 June 2008, 8 August 2008 and 20 August 2008.
“The Security Council, acknowledging recent positive political
developments in the wake of the Djibouti Agreement as confirmed by
Mr Ould-Abdallah, reaffirms its willingness, as set out in its resolution 1814
(2008), to consider, at an appropriate time, a United Nations peacekeeping
operation to take over from AMISOM, subject to progress in the political
process and improvement in the security situation on the ground.
“The Security Council recalls the Secretary-General’s contingency
planning for a United Nations integrated peacekeeping mission in Somalia,
which recommends that plans are put in place for the deployment of an
international stabilisation force, in the framework of the approach presented by
the Secretary-General in his report of 14 March 2008 (S/2008/178).
“In this regard, the Security Council requests that the Secretary-General
elaborate on his contingency plans and provide, in consultation with the parties
and other relevant stakeholders, a detailed and consolidated description of a
feasible multinational force, its mandate and derived tasks, to include inter alia
the size and geographical scope of that force, progressively deployed, and
further provide a detailed concept of operations for a feasible United Nations
peacekeeping operation.
“The Security Council further requests the Secretary-General urgently to
identify and approach States that might contribute the financial resources,
personnel, equipment and services required, stands ready to support the
Secretary-General in this regard, and calls upon States to respond favourably.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to report on the
implementation of the Djibouti Agreement by the parties, including an update
on the conditions on the ground, as well as on his planning, including
discussions with potential contributing States, within 60 days.”

2

08-49747
