S/PV.8086

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8086th meeting

Monday, 6 November 2017, 3.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Akylbayev
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Dieng
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Tachco
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Police Commissioners

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-36616 (E)
*1736616*

S/PV.8086

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Police Commissioners
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; Mr. Issoufou Yacouba, Police
Commissioner of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali; Mr. GeorgesPierre Monchotte, Police Commissioner of the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti; and
Ms. Priscilla Makotose, Police Commissioner of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/926, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Italy.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2382 (2017).
The intention is for this meeting to be as interactive
as possible, along the lines of the briefing held last
November (see S/PV.7808) and our dialogues with the
Force Commanders. We look forward to questions from
Council members to the Commissioners and from the
Commissioners to the Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
2/27

06/11/2017

Mr. Lacroix: I would like to thank the Security
Council for convening this briefing on the role of
United Nations policing in peace operations. I would
also like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
adoption of resolution 2382 (2017), which builds on
the milestone resolution 2185 (2014) and reflects the
increasingly central role of United Nations police
(UNPOL) in peacekeeping.
I am particularly pleased that we are joined today
by the Heads of the police components of our missions
in Haiti, Mali and Darfur. They will share stories of
accomplishments and challenges in the many areas of
United Nations police work, including host-State police
capacity-building and development, the protection of
civilians, gender-sensitive policing and countering
transnational organized crime.
Last month here in the Chamber, the SecretaryGeneral made it clear that he wants more efficient and
cost-effective peace operations. The aim is for a more
coherent approach to peace and security, development
and human rights. What that means for United Nations
police is a continued vital role in bridging United
Nations work, from prevention to peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. From the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the Central African Republic
and from South Sudan to Haiti, United Nations police
provide operational support, assist in the reform of
police services and, where appropriately mandated,
undertake interim policing functions. I am pleased to
share a few examples of how we achieve our mandates.
First, United Nations police now operate on
a solid foundation of police doctrine, that is, the
Strategic Guidance Framework for International
Police Peacekeeping, which was developed in close
partnership with Member States, regional organizations
and police professionals worldwide. That has allowed,
for example, for the adoption of comprehensive
approaches to police operations, capacity-building and
development. United Nations police now focus not only
on the transfer of basic skills but also on strengthening
host-State police institutions. They mentor and advise
at the command level, informed by close consultations
with the host State. Commissioner Monchotte will brief
the Council further in that regard. That work translates
into improved management of human resources and
recruitment, fleet and procurement systems, rigorous
internal oversight mechanisms and increased outreach
to communities. In addition, the Strategic Guidance
Framework also allows us to improve efficiency in
17-36616

06/11/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

police generation and performance measurement.
Streamlined recruitment processes enable us to better
respond to host-State and mission needs and to identify
specific skill sets needed in the field. The Police
Division is also finalizing an accountability framework
for United Nations policing, as called for in last year’s
report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/952).
Secondly, United Nations police play an increasingly
vital and unique role in the protection of civilians,
through community-oriented and intelligence-led
policing. When our police officers walk the beat, they
interact with local communities, establish trust, collect
early warning signs and help our missions to better
respond to imminent threats.
Equally important is UNPOL’s work with host-State
counterparts in prioritizing the protection of civilians
and training them in their tasks. UNPOL also provide
physical protection to civilians when the host State
is unable or unwilling to do so. That multi-pronged
approach — which is now included in departmental
guidance on the protection of civilians — ranges from
prevention and information collection to training,
advocacy and physical protection.
Thirdly, United Nations police components are
increasingly called upon to assist their host-State
counterparts in fighting serious and organized crime.
Commissioner Yacouba will share more details on
UNPOL’s support for the Malian authorities in that
regard. Our police components assist the host State
in setting up criminal intelligence systems and using
modern technology to prevent and investigate serious and
organized crime. They also help to improve the police’s
interactions and relationships with the communities in
the host State, through better information sharing and
partnerships to fight crime.
Fourthly, improving our effectiveness means
recruiting more women to our police ranks. As Police
Commissioner Makotose will tell us, women police
officers perform all the tasks that their male colleagues
perform. In addition, they mentor and inspire future
women police leaders, increase access to justice for
women and children at risk and improve information
gathering and analysis by reaching vulnerable groups.
Unfortunately, few of our police leadership positions
are occupied by women. We need more nominations
of qualified women police executives from Member
States. In December in Addis Ababa, the Secretariat
will co-host, with the African Union, the first of four

S/PV. 8086

female senior police officer command development
courses to prepare the next generation of female police
leaders to take up international command positions.
Finally, on the issue of conduct and discipline,
United Nations police have received operational
guidance on the implementation of resolution 2272
(2016). If needed, the Department will not hesitate to
replace police units from countries that have failed to
hold perpetrators accountable.
As we demand more from our police officers, we
also need to go the extra mile to ensure their welfare,
safety and security in the field. We need to supply
our police peacekeepers with up-to-date equipment to
increase their situational awareness and to be in a better
position to respond to threats to mission personnel. I
believe we must also tackle disparities in conditions
of service among different types of police personnel,
which negatively impact morale.
Today’s discussion will not resolve all police
peacekeeping challenges. Nevertheless, my hope is
that it will help us to further mobilize international
support for the United Nations police and build on the
momentum generated by the first-ever Security Council
resolution on the United Nations police in 2014, as well
as resolution 2382 (2017), adopted today, and the first
United Nations Chiefs of Police Summit. I look forward
to hearing the Council’s views how we can together
strengthen United Nations police.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yacouba.
Mr. Yacouba (spoke in French): I would first
like to express my gratitude for this opportunity to
address the Security Council on the important issue of
strengthening the capacity of Mali’s security forces in
the fight against organized crime and terrorism.
The Mali context is plagued by a resurgence of
terrorist attacks in the north, and increasingly in the
centre of the country, against the Mali’s defence and
security forces, as well as the forces of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), Operation Barkhane
and the civilian population. During their recent visit,
Council members were able to assess the extent of the
consequences of those attacks.
Between 2013 and 26 October this year, direct and
indirect attacks injured 387 peacekeepers and killed

17-366163/27

S/PV.8086

United Nations peacekeeping operations

06/11/2017

86 personnel from MINUSMA, while 172 staff from
humanitarian non-governmental organizations were
subject to multiple acts of violence, including executions
and kidnappings. The Malian forces and the civilian
population are also suffering, and just this morning six
civilians were killed, and a further 10 injured, by an
explosive device in the Gao region.

including 1,385 in the fight against organized crime
and terrorism. The Mission is also engaged in the
construction and renovation of infrastructure, the
provision of equipment and support for the operational
co-location and coordination efforts, particularly the
nine specialized units through which MINUSMA
provides a range of advice and expertise.

The situation is equally disturbing from the
socioeconomic standpoint. For instance, more than 500
schools in the centre and north of the country remain
closed. Criminal groups are experiencing success due
to the enormous resources that they are drawing from
all types of trafficking, and through substituting the
State by providing security and basic social services
to the inhabitants of their zones of influence, where
the local population are reluctant to cooperate with
the Malian defence and security forces or international
forces due to fear of retaliation.

To that end, MINUSMA police continue to
support the work of the Malian specialized judicial
unit and has made available its scientific and technical
police laboratory, while supporting the setting up
of a similar national laboratory. The specialized
investigations brigade alone handled 71 cases related to
terrorism, money laundering, weapon-smuggling and
human trafficking.

The security situation in the subregion is hardly
exemplary. It is in that context that, as members are
aware, the States of the Group of Five for the Sahel
are endeavouring to stand up a Joint Force to fight
terrorism and transnational organized crime — at
the heart of which the investigation and repression of
crime must be better taken into account. In line with
resolution 2364 (2017), MINUSMA is striving to
support the establishment of reformed defence and
security institutions to contribute to the restoration
of State authority and the subsequent return of basic
social services, as stipulated in the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation.
MINUSMA is also supporting the development
of a national strategy to prevent and combat violent
extremism and terrorism. That vision must in particular
unify all the relevant State and non-State bodies in order
to prevent threats linked to terrorism. That explains the
importance and urgent need to establish effective local
security measures, for which MINUSMA has developed
a detailed concept to involve the local population in
identifying and resolving its own security challenges.
Whether acting alone or in concert with partners,
MINUSMA police support the capacity-building
of Mali’s structures to combat organized crime and
terrorism. At the strategic level, the United Nations
has contributed to the drafting of a national strategy to
ensure that the gender perspective is taken into account.
Through its capacity-building activities, MINUSMA
has trained nearly 24,000 security force personnel,
4/27

The implementation of our mandate is fraught
with challenges, especially with regard to the process
of reforming the security sector, which is slow in
coming to fruition. Other challenges lie in the weak
governance of the justice, security and defence sectors,
the size of the Malian territory, the climate, the
porous nature of the country’s borders, the multiple
obstacles to implementing the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation, and the deficits in the deployment of
specialized and French-speaking police and armoured
vehicles at the disposal of formed police units.
Despite the efforts made thus far, the security
and social fabric is continuing to deteriorate seriously
in the Sahel. It is therefore my humble opinion that
the countries of the subregion of the Sahel and their
neighbours would benefit from a more dynamic
approach focused on a merging of sectoral strategies.
Before concluding, I would like to recall that
MINUSMA police and the various stakeholders strongly
support the Malian defence and security forces in
carrying out their activities, reform and redeployment,
despite the many challenges, as well as constraints in
terms of personnel and logistics, facing them.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Yacouba for his briefing.
(spoke in English)
I now give the floor to Mr. Monchotte.
Mr. Monchotte (spoke in French): I would like to
highlight today the good practices developed during
the transition by the police component of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
17-36616

06/11/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), which began on 16 October, in a
crucial area of o
​ ur mandate, namely, the strengthening
of the capacity of the Haitian National Police (HNP).
That transition period has presented two major
challenges for the police component.

S/PV. 8086

the nine other departments so as to conclude with the
western part of the country, which includes the capital.

In order to encourage participation, buy-in and
ownership, a total of 11 round tables with elected
officials, magistrates and personnel from both forces
were led by the Director General of the Haitian
The first concerned ensuring the smooth National Police and myself throughout the country.
management of the reduction of contingents by 69 per A list of posts and skills was drawn up to inform
cent — that is to say, going from 951 international police contributing countries of those developments through
personnel for MINUSTAH to 295 for MINUJUSTH. the Police Division, as well as to encourage them to
That was made possible by precise departure planning, provide the appropriate resources to appoint female
based on the innovative structure of a committee personnel with the required skills and qualifications
dedicated to renewing the contracts of the international where they must be more widely represented. The
police officers.
international police experts were trained with those of
the HNP in the preliminary phases and provided with
The second challenge involved the need to adapt
documentation — furnished for the first time through
our efforts to the new situation in the crucial area of​​
a joint effort by the operational and development
capacity-building for the HNP, including promoting
pillars of the police component — that spelled out and
gender equality. In line with the guidelines that I
publicized the various skill sets.
developed with the consent of the Director General of
the HNP, another version of the previous model was
In conclusion, it is clear that that programme is
developed. It was designed so as to ensure the smoothest the main focus of the police component, and that that
transition possible to MINUJUSTH and offer a new reform, implemented in accordance to the deadlines
approach to transferring skills on another scale. Its goal established pursuant to resolution 2350 (2017), will
is aimed at establishing cultural and strategic change in be able to develop and begin to function optimally
the way in which the HNP is supported.
only if the police component receives the necessary
support for carrying out its work, including, on the one
The programme, known as the guidance and
hand, equipment, especially with regard to vehicles,
support programme, is based on mentoring the
infrastructure and a well-functioning helicopter
senior management of the HNP, in particular in the
component, and, on the other, human resources,
areas of command and control, operational planning
including the authorized allocation of 295 qualified
and administrative management. Accordingly, 205
personnel. Although we have demonstrated that we can
international experts were assigned to an exterior,
do more with less, the road before us remains long.
exo-skeletal unit, which has been attached to the
HNP, alongside 150 senior officers of the Haitian
The President: I thank Mr. Monchotte for his briefing.
police, holding positions of responsibility within
I now give the floor to Ms. Makotose.
general management and the central and departmental
Ms. Makotose: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
directorates, as well as specialized units. The United
Nations police officers who were deployed to that to brief the Security Council on the work of the police
programme were selected based on their professional component of African Union-United Nations Hybrid
and linguistic skills, as well as their experience in the Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
sought-out areas.
Resolution 2363 (2017) conferred to main priorities
The programme has been implemented in four to the UNAMID mandate. The first is to protect civilians
successive phases according to the deadlines set for across Darfur. That includes active patrolling in areas
the closing of MINUSTAH. A pilot project in one at high risk of conflict and with high concentrations
department served as a benchmark for the entire of internally displaced persons (IDPs), and securing
process, and its assessment enabled the monitoring IDP camps, adjacent areas and migration routes to
committee to make the necessary changes before ensure a more effective response to threats of violence
deploying it in other departments of the country.cThe against civilians. More specifically, we have conducted
subsequent three phases involve its implementation in several thousand patrols in support of the physical
17-366165/27

S/PV.8086

United Nations peacekeeping operations

06/11/2017

protection of civilians, including more than 2,300
confidence-building patrols to camps for the displaced,
and more than 2,600 to respond to the security needs of
internally displaced persons, particularly women and
children engaged in livelihood activities outside their
camps. Additionally, UNAMID police have undertaken
more than 500 joint patrols with community policing
volunteers, and have managed public order during the
distribution of humanitarian assistance.

headquarters, where they are all engaged in all forms of
duties. Females are encouraged to apply for leadership
positions, and we have conducted leadership-training
workshops to support their confidence-building and to
mentor them. The UNAMID Police Women’s Network
also continues to meet and encourage the empowerment
of women. Men are also part of the Network, and I am
happy to report that in one sector there are more male
than female members.

The second mandate priority is establishing a
protective environment by engaging communities in
community-policing initiatives and supporting the
capacity-building of the Sudanese police in Darfur.
Community policing volunteers engage with the
community on various issues, such as advocating
participation in the Government’s arms collection
programme and urging IDPs and Sudanese uniformed
personnel to respect the buffer zone and avoid
provocation during presidential visits. With regard to
capacity-building for the Sudanese police force, we
support the institutional development of the police in
line with our joint programme for the rule of law and
human rights.

Those are just a few of the many internal efforts
made, as we also assist and advocate for the Sudanese
police force in Darfur to mainstream gender. There
is greater awareness now, but females remain few in
number and none hold senior leadership positions. We
are working on some projects that we hope, if supported
by donors, will see marked progress. That progress is
essential if we are to fully support the prevention and
management of conflict-related sexual violence and
sexual and gender-based violence in Darfur. The patrols
continue to receive information, but some victims are
so traumatized and afraid of stigmatization that they
do not come out. More advocacy and support for those
victims is required.

I should also like give a brief update on the
reconfiguration of the police component. We have
successfully withdrawn from 14 team sites with
minimum challenges. We have repatriated two formed
police units (FPUs), while the repatriation of contingentowned equipment remains ongoing. Two FPUs have also
been delinked from the military and relocated at two of
the six team sites earmarked for the reconfiguration.
Some challenges were encountered and are now being
managed for the four team sites and the two temporary
operating bases that are to be implemented in the second
phase. Supervising and monitoring the closed team
sites has not been easy, as road and weather conditions
have affected our movement. The military numbers and
capabilities are different from those of the FPU, which
will have an impact on the outputs that will be possible
in those delinked team sites.

Women in Darfur remain the main players in
economic and livelihood income-generating activities,
as many males continue to avoid venturing out for
fear of being killed. For their efforts, some women
are raped, harassed or abused. More work needs to be
done to support those women with safe economic and
income-generating activities. Of course, it would be
more helpful if the Sudanese police force in Darfur’s
capacity to investigate and prosecute offenders
were enhanced.

The UNAMID police component strives to
implement our mandate in a gender-responsive way.
Under the guidance of the Secretary-General’s gender
parity strategy, we have advocated for, and are thankful
to, Member States to respond to the call for skilled
staff. The UNAMID police now includes 20 per cent
female individual police officers and four professional
staff out of 16, with two more in process. Both males
and females are deployed at team sites and in sector
6/27

For us to receive more female peacekeepers, the
national police services must themselves include
proportional national representation. Females need
additional training and mentoring to build their
confidence. More role models are required. And
Member States need to second more qualified females
for senior positions.
The President: I thank Ms. Makotose for her
briefing. I would like to thank all the briefers for their
valuable input.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Police
17-36616

06/11/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Commissioners for their briefings. It is quite inspiring
to hear about the work that they do and the challenges
that they face every day in completing their mission. It
is clear to us that police work is a crucial part of United
Nations peacekeeping.
I also want to thank Italy for putting forth the
resolution that we adopted today, resolution 2382
(2017). It is truly an important step towards improving
the performance of United Nations police.
One of the key elements of our efforts to make
United Nations peacekeeping more effective is a clear
exit strategy. The ability of a peacekeeping mission to
complete its work and depart depends on our collective
ability to strengthen the capacity of the State to provide
for the safety of its citizens. Alas, as we have seen
in many countries with peacekeeping missions, host
Governments often not only lack capacity in their
security sector institutions, but basic legitimacy with
the citizens they are meant to protect and to serve.
In those contexts, we must not only build the
capacity of security sector institutions, but redefine the
very notion of what a country’s military, political and
justice institutions are meant to achieve. That requires
building an integrated security architecture that seeks
to ensure the safety of citizens rather than the longevity
of the Governments that lack legitimacy with their own
citizens. Police have a crucial role to play in making
that vision a reality.
In the recent transition from the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti to the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, we have seen the
essential role that United Nations police play in working
with national forces to maintain security and stability
while seeking to build the capability of the Haitian
National Police. We are hopeful that the new Mission
will find a willing and engaged partner in the Haitian
Government, as the Mission begins to implement its
rule-of-law programme.
Likewise, as the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur continues its planned
reconfiguration, the role of the mission’s police forces
will take on even greater importance in building
local capacity.
The challenges in Mali are different and great. United
Nations police in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali assist Malian
authorities in addressing the transnational crime and

S/PV. 8086

drug trafficking that fuel terrorist movements in the
region, as we saw during our recent Security Council
visit to the Sahel. Such assistance and capacity-building
is a crucial element, as part of a larger package of
assistance, to creating an environment conducive to a
solution to the overall conflict.
Police cannot be second-class citizens in United
Nations peacekeeping. The United Nations bureaucracy
must model the same level of integration among military,
police and justice components that we seek to develop
in host nations through peacekeeping operations.
Police expertise must be consistently integrated into
the mandates and decision-making structures of United
Nations peace operations — both peacekeeping and
special political missions. We welcome this resolution’s
emphasis on strengthening United Nations police
doctrine and its implementation, as well as the call
to define clearer standards for personnel, equipment,
operations, performance and assistance to host State
police services.
We also welcome efforts to collect, manage
and analyse data on peacekeeping operational
requirements and unit field performance to support
performance-based decision-making. Over the past 14
years, the United States has demonstrated its strong
commitment to improving the performance of United
Nations police by investing more than $40 million to
directly train or support 16,000 from 15 countries. We
see the partnerships called for in today’s resolution as
crucial to continuing to build capacity to deploy wellqualified, well-trained police to peacekeeping.
Ultimately, we recognize the essential role of
the United Nations police in building the capacity of
host nations to ensure the safety of all their citizens
and creating the conditions for successful mission
conclusions. Today’s resolution is an important step
towards ensuring that United Nations police are able
to help secure lasting and sustainable peace in United
Nations peace operations around the world.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We express appreciation to
the Italian presidency for taking the initiative to organize
this briefing meeting on the activities of United Nations
police forces. We thank Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix for his briefing. We are also grateful
to the three Police Commissioners — from the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and

17-366167/27

S/PV.8086

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur — for sharing their field experiences. My
delegation has no doubt that we have indeed benefited
from their briefings.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2382
(2017) and commend Italy, as the penholder, for
facilitating the negotiations on the resolution, which we
hope will contribute to enhancing the role of United
Nations police.
Ethiopia recognizes the important role that United
Nations police play in promoting stability and longterm development in countries affected by conflict.
The landscape where United Nations peacekeepers
are deployed today has changed dramatically. The
significance of United Nations police has never been as
critical as now, in the light of the corresponding change
in conflict dynamics, the transformation in the size and
complexity of peacekeeping mandates and the evolving
trends towards multidimensional peacekeeping. During
our visit to the countries of the Group of Five for the
Sahel, we got a close-up look at the critical role played
by the MINUSMA police component in Mali. We
agree with what Commissioner Yacouba said earlier.
We also appreciate what the police component of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur has been doing, as highlighted by Police
Commissioner Makotose, including the demonstrated
gender sensitivity.
United Nations police have become a vital
component of peacekeeping, particularly in carrying out
mandated tasks related to supporting the capacities of
host States’ law enforcement institutions. The role that
United Nations police components play in facilitating
the transitions from peacekeeping to development
and peacebuilding is also very crucial. Past and
recent experiences, such as in Liberia, as well as in
other cases, show the demonstrable success of United
Nations police in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
In particular, their functions in supporting host States
through monitoring and restructuring local police
forces, training and advising other law enforcement
institutions, as well as restoring and promoting public
safety and safeguarding the rule of law, have been
indispensable. We believe that national ownership
should be the guiding principle of United Nations police
when supporting host States in building and developing
the capacities of local police forces. National capacity
gaps of host States should also inform the composition
of United Nations police components, particularly
8/27

06/11/2017

during planning, recruitment, the provision of guidance
and training.
Where mandated, the managing of civilian tasks
that United Nations police undertake, including in
preventing and addressing violence against women and
children in the context of conflict and post-conflict
situations, also remain very instrumental. In that
regard, the deployment of women police officers will
have practical and positive impacts on winning the
trust of local communities. That is why increasing the
participation of women in United Nations peacekeeping
is very important. It is a source of pride to note that
Ethiopia is one of the leading contributors in that regard.
There is no doubt that peacekeeping mandates
related to police activities need to be clear and
achievable. Of course, police-contributing countries
should ensure that the forces that they deploy in the
field — individual police officers, formed police units
and specialized police teams — are well trained and
equipped in order to implement such mandates.
Furthermore, the Secretariat has a key role to
play, including through enhancing the effectiveness
of strategic generation of police personnel with better
planning, appropriate expertise, language skills
and operational readiness. Therefore, strengthening
United Nations policing operational coherence within
the United Nations system remains very important.
In that regard, we believe that triangular cooperation
regarding policing among the Security Council, troopand police-contributing countries and the Secretariat
is key to strengthening the effectiveness of United
Nations police in peacekeeping.
Finally, Ethiopia has made very modest
contributions to United Nations police, including police
officers who served in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, which just concluded its mandate and
which is now transitioning into MINUJUSTH. I want
to conclude by reaffirming Ethiopia’s commitment to
enhancing its participation and contributions to United
Nations police in the years ahead.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting on United Nations policing. We also commend
the leadership of the Italian presidency in preparing
and negotiating resolution 2382 (2017), which we
just adopted.
17-36616

06/11/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

I express gratitude to Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing. We
are particularly thankful to the Police Commissioners
who briefed us today.
As an active police- and troop-contributing country,
Ukraine fully supports efforts to enhance the efficiency
the United Nations policing in field operations. We note
that, despite the challenges faced by the uniformed
personnel of the United Nations, United Nations police
contingents have a solid record of achievements. For
instance, the police component of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) played an
important role in ensuring stability and security during
particularly difficult times for Haiti. Its contribution
to strengthening the capacity of State institutions, in
particular the Haitian National Police, is second to none.
The transition to the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) testifies
both to the successful completion of MINUSTAH’s
mandate and the readiness to move towards to a new
form of the presence of the United Nations in the
country. MINUJUSTH should provide crucial support
in advancing those important transformations and
consolidating the progress achieved. We have full
confidence that the new Mission will effectively deliver
on the mandated tasks, including further support and
development of the Haitian National Police.
Challenges faced by United Nations police
components on the ground have evolved significantly
and warrant thorough consideration by the Council.
On the other side of the globe, asymmetrical threats in
Africa remain an issue of particular concern in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). September and October
were among the deadliest months for peacekeepers
serving in Mali. Ukraine strongly condemns the recent
terrorist attacks on MINUSMA personnel.
The ongoing instability in Mali remains one of
the main factors causing a spillover of violence into
neighbouring countries. In that regard, we remain of
the view that security sector reform and the deployment
of the Malian police, defence and security forces
throughout the country to combat violent extremists
and maintain law and order are urgently needed.
Given the fact that MINUSMA remains the primary
target of terrorist attacks, along with the growing
sophistication of such attacks, we are convinced that
enhancing the safety and security of police personnel

S/PV. 8086

and peacekeepers should be among the top priority
tasks of the Secretariat.
United Nations police must be adequately prepared
to undertake complex tasks in preventing, mitigating
and resolving violent conflicts and contributing to
early peacebuilding and reconciliation. In that regard, I
would like to highlight several points that we consider
important to further improve the efficiency of United
Nations policing.
First, Ukraine supports the development of the
Strategic Guidance Framework for International Police
Peacekeeping, which should provide a solid foundation
for strengthening international cooperation on United
Nations policing. Further efforts to ensure the full
implementation of the Strategic Guidance Framework
by all United Nations police components on the ground
should be taken as a matter of priority.
Secondly, predeployment and in-mission training
for police personnel of United Nations peace operations
should be enhanced. The Police Peacekeeping
Training Centre in Ukraine, with its predeployment
course certified by the United Nations, is one of our
contributions to that endeavour.
Thirdly, peacekeeping operations (PKOs) should
be provided with resilient mandates and advanced
technologies, so as to effectively contribute to ensuring
security and public order, including stopping illegal
cross-border flows of weapons, criminal elements,
foreign terrorist fighters along with mercenaries.
PKOs must possess the appropriate means and
resources necessary for the effective monitoring and
verification of ceasefire agreements and other relevant
arrangements, including on disarmament.
Finally, it is important to remain dynamic
in registering formed police units’ commitments
through the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness
System. Timely troop generation and deployment are
prerequisites for any mission’s success. To that end,
triangular cooperation among police-contributing
countries, the Secretariat and the Council should be
maintained and further developed. Equally critical is
the maximum engagement of women in United Nations
peace activities, as was rightly mentioned by Police
Commissioner Makotose.
Let me conclude by commending the Police
Commissioners who are with us today and their personnel
for their dedicated service to the United Nations.

17-366169/27

S/PV.8086

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I, too, would like to thank the Italian presidency
for convening today’s briefing. My thanks also go
to our briefers, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and the Police Commissioners of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
With the adoption of resolution 2185 (2014), the
Security Council adopted its first resolution related
to activities of United Nations police and underscored
that police work makes a valuable contribution to
peacekeeping. The growing relevance and importance
of police work in peacekeeping operations was manifest
in the holding of the first Chiefs of Police Summit,
which took place in June 2016, where Ministers of
the Interior, Heads of Police and high-level officials
from more than 100 Member States met to analyse the
evolution of United Nations police work.
Uruguay welcomes today’s unanimous adoption
of resolution 2382 (2017), which highlights the interest
generated on this issue. With this resolution, the
Security Council clearly sets out the central role played
by United Nations police in peacekeeping efforts and
the maintenance of international security. In that
regard, the resolution provides strategic guidance to
help to strengthen the ongoing efforts of the police,
as well as to ensure that police components are able
to continue to evolve hand in hand with the reform
process of peacekeeping operations. I would therefore
like to thank the Italian presidency for having taken
the initiative of drafting the resolution. I also thank
the other members of the Council for their constructive
spirit throughout the negotiations, which made it
possible to arrive at an ambitious consensual text.
Uruguay is a long-standing contributing country
and is highly committed to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. My country has been contributing police
to peacekeeping operations since 1991, when we first
deployed personnel to the United Nations Verification
Mission in Guatemala. To date we have without
interruption contributed to numerous United Nations
missions, including those in Mozambique, TimorLeste, Western Sahara, Angola, Liberia, Côte D’Ivoire
and Haiti. Our participation is oriented towards the
deployment of individual police officers, who mostly
10/27

06/11/2017

act as instructors and advisers, and in some cases also
undertake executive tasks.
As a police-contributing country, Uruguay wishes
to express its gratitude for the assessment work of the
Police Division of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, in particular its visits to countries that
decide to contribute personnel. In that connection,
it is essential to continue to improve training for
formed police units and police officials, particularly
in the area of protecting civilians, taking into account
the increasingly complex environments in which
peacekeeping operations are deployed.
Also as a police-contributing country, Uruguay
meets all United Nations requirements thanks to the
training provided by our National Peace Operations
Training Institute, where both military and the police
components for service with the United Nations are
trained. Training is comprehensive, with a special
focus on zero-tolerance policies on sexual abuse and
exploitation, gender policies and human rights training.
To make this meeting a little more interactive, as
you, Mr. President, called for at its commencement, I
would like to direct a question to MINUJUSTH Police
Commissioner Monchotte. In his judgement, what
will be the major challenges facing MINUJUSTH in
successfully fulfilling its mandate?
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
the Police Commissioners for their valuable briefings
to the Security Council today. I also welcome the new
United Nations Police Adviser, Mr. Luis Carrilho,
and take this opportunity to thank his predecessor,
Mr. Stefan Feller, for his services. Let me also add
how encouraging and nice it is to see all these Blue
Berets here today in the Council. They are fundamental
as security providers and capacity-builders. They are
essential to the establishment of the rule of law and
contribute to long-term sustainable peace.
Landmark resolution 2185 (2014), the first
resolution devoted solely to United Nations policing,
was adopted by the Council in 2014. With resolution
2185 (2014) as the starting point and baseline, we
have today adopted resolution 2382 (2017) on United
Nations policing, which builds on its legacy. To further
enhance United Nations policing, we can draw on the
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report
on policing (S/2016/952) and the external review of
the Police Division from May 2016. From those solid
17-36616

06/11/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

foundations, we can continue to enhance the role of
policing in preventing conflict, promoting the rule of
law and protecting civilians.
Since 1964, Sweden has continuously contributed
policing capacity to United Nations peace operations.
Swedish police officers are today present in eight
United Nations peace operations, and we are currently
assessing further contributions. While the challenges
within peace operations have evolved greatly over
the past 53 years, the value of police components
remains clear. Today, police components provide
operational support to national policing institutions
and to institutional reform. They also support capacitybuilding and an integrated approach to rule-of-law and
security sector reform efforts.
That broad range of functions and activities serves
to highlight the unique and central role that United
Nations policing plays across the peace continuum,
linking and mutually reinforcing the development,
peace and security and human rights pillars. Building
effective, responsive and representative police services,
as a part of functioning rule-of-law institutions, is one
important cornerstone of building sustainable peace
and stable and resilient societies. For that reason, we
must be mindful of including the broader rule-of-law
and justice chain in our approach, and also contribute
corrections officers, prosecutors and judges to serve
alongside police officers in peace operations.
For example, in Liberia, a country where Swedish
police and corrections officers have served for over
a decade, there is an ongoing joint United Nations
Development Programme-United Nations Mission in
Liberia rule of law programme in place. Police and
other rule-of-law actors are working together there and
are supported by the United Nations global focal point
on police, justice and corrections to ensure a smooth
transition from the outgoing mission to the United
Nations country team. That will enable a continuation
of efforts to enhance community access to justice and
strengthen the capacity of security institutions.
In the Central African Republic, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic’s police component have
worked together with Malian authorities to establish
a rapid response unit for sexual and gender-based
violence within the Central African Republic’s national

S/PV. 8086

police service. By working with national authorities
and other United Nations entities, the police component
has strengthened the capacity to address sexual and
gender-based violence within the country.
As we have said on numerous occasions before
in the Council, the mandates of our peacekeeping
operations need to be realistic, context-tailored and
flexible. That requires high-quality, context-sensitive
and inclusive analysis from the Secretariat. Integrating
policing advice as part of that analysis needs to be
standard practice in the process of developing mandates
and in their renewal.
As our briefers underlined today, we need to continue
to increase the number of female police officers serving
with the United Nations. Doing so would ensure that
missions better reflect the communities in which they
work and enhance their effectiveness in the delivery of
mandates. Missions also need to strengthen their ability
to integrate and support the role of women in building
peaceful societies.
Sweden is strongly supportive of the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to reform the United Nations peace
and security architecture so that the United Nations
system is better able to deliver on its overarching
mission to prevent conflict and sustain peace. In the
light of the unique position of police at the intersection
between security and development, police functions
will be essential to achieving that objective.
Turning to our briefers today, I would like to pose a
few short questions, if I may.
First, in their view, how can policing advice be
better integrated into the formulation of mandates so as
to better support their activities in the field?
Secondly, in the light of the sharp focus on police
and the rule of law of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti, I would be interested to hear
about Commissioner Monchotte’s key reflections so far
concerning the transitional work of the Mission.
Twelve thousand United Nations police officers
from almost 90 countries are now serving with United
Nations missions across the globe. By working with
national institutions, they serve and protect communities
and ensure respect for human rights and the rule of law.
Their work is central to delivering on the mandates
agreed by the Council and to supporting national efforts
to create prosperous, stable and peaceful societies. We
owe them our full support.

17-3661611/27

S/PV.8086

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. Akylbayev (Kazakhstan): We thank the Italian
presidency for convening this important briefing
and commend its effective stewardship in preparing
resolution 2382 (2017), which we adopted today. We
also thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the
Police Commissioners for their valuable input. In
regard to the topic of today’s briefing, our delegation
offers the following observations.
First, in light of the overall United Nations reforms,
and especially in peace operations, as recommended by
the 2015 reports, United Nations policing also demands
our attention. To sustain peace, we need to develop
clear mandates and directives for police contingents,
with strong units for the rule of law, security sector
reform, the protection of civilians, human rights and the
empowerment of women and youth. Such an approach
will lead to the national stability of host countries, with
the main focus on capacity-building to prevent new
conflicts or the recurrence of existing ones. It is equally
important to attract investments for future economic
recovery and development.
Second, the United Nations police’s main task
should concentrate on strengthening national police,
justice and corrections institutions, and those that
hold them accountable, especially at a time when most
mechanisms have been destroyed as a result of conflict.
Those processes require the fair and efficient delivery
of justice by a sufficient number of competent, ethical
and independent officials with adequate training and
educational support.
Third, national ownership is imperative, with
priorities identified by State authorities and civil
society. They should be consistent with the cultural
and legal traditions of the host country, yet not in
conflict with international norms. Those must operate
without causing greater tensions, thereby worsening
the situation on the ground.
Fourth, restoring and maintaining peace and
stability is a long-term process. It therefore requires
close and long-standing consolidation and cooperation
among national, regional and international partners,
as well as donors and all other relevant stakeholders,
such as the private sector, academia, civil society and
the media.
Fifth, support for the police and other personnel
is just as vital to the success of our peacekeeping
operations as it is for our military forces, and so we
must strengthen the ability of police-contributing
12/27

06/11/2017

countries (PCCs) to speedily prepare and deploy
qualified personnel to new missions.
Sixth, a critical issue to resolve is the role of the
United Nations police when involved with the military
in the protection of civilians. That also calls for areas
and modalities of coordination between the police
and the military in various overlapping protection
situations, based on the type of violence and other
community-based variables.
Seventh, we will also need to address broader
capability and training gaps by expanding the number
of PCCs with high capabilities. It would also be helpful
to encourage further political engagement between
PCCs and troop-contributing countries to understand
mutual responsibilities in various tasks from conflict
prevention and resolution to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
Finally, Kazakhstan is committed to the United
Nations police playing a vital role in promoting lasting
stability, peace, security and development, and is
willing to explore the ways in which we can engage
the capabilities of United Nations policing within
peace operations.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
the Police Commissioners of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSТН) and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) for sharing their experiences with
us today. I also express my heartfelt appreciation to all
peacekeepers for their contribution in the face of severe
challenges on the ground.
We welcome today’s discussion as part of the
Council’s broader focus throughout the year on
making peacekeeping operations as effective as
possible through better mandates, capabilities and
force generation. Resolution 2382 (2017), which we
adopted today, also follows the important work of 2014
on the rule of law, good governance and oversight of
security institutions through resolution 2151 (2014),
on security sector reform, and resolution 2185 (2014),
on policing. We have had a series of discussions on
peacekeeping in the Chamber this year. We have had
good discussions, and Japan believes that it is time to
move from proposals to action. Today’s resolution will
provide important guidance on the way ahead. All of
17-36616

06/11/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the missions represented today offer important lessons
and insights.
I would first like to highlight Haiti, since
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) successfully completed its operations
last month. The support of MINUSTAH to the Haitian
National Police provided a successful example of
the role of policing based on national ownership.
MINUSTAH adapted to changing circumstances on
the ground through community violence-reduction
initiatives, while supporting police capacity-building,
improved criminal justice procedures, joint patrols
and the development of the 2017-2021 strategic plan.
The transition to MINUJUSТН also serves as a model
for how United Nations peacekeeping missions should
adapt as a country’s needs change as part of an eventual
exit strategy.
The briefing provided by Mr. Yacouba reminds us
that the role of police in MINUSMA is vital. Due to the
growing security threat in Mali, we tend to focus on the
Malian defence and security forces, but security and
justice cannot be delivered by them alone. The primary
objective of the mandate of MINUSMA is to support
the Government’s efforts for the gradual restoration
and extension of State authority, including the Malian
police. Japan has been providing capacity-building
assistance to the Malian police, in cooperation with the
United Nations police.
Regarding UNAMID, we look forward to the
ongoing efforts of the Mission’s police to strengthen
local police to undertake protection of civilians
tasks, as well as for the safe and voluntary return of
internally displaced persons as the Mission’s drawdown
progresses. We hope that in so doing, UNAMID will
continue to set new standards for dealing with genderrelated issues.
During its Council presidency in December, Japan
hopes to round out this year’s discussions by holding
a meeting on effective and efficient training and
capacity-building based on the report of the SecretaryGeneral mandated by resolution 2378 (2017). The year
2018, in turn, will be the year to translate our various
discussions and resolutions into concrete results in the
field — a goal shared with the Secretary-General’s
reforms. Interaction with the wider United Nations
membership will be key to our success. Japan looks
forward to actively supporting those efforts.

S/PV. 8086

Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Police Commissioners
for their briefings and express my deep appreciation for
the efforts and sacrifices that they and police personnel
make in peacekeeping operations with a view to
promoting peace and stabilization.
Our annual meeting is an important occasion for the
Council to avail itself of the expertise and experiences
of those operating in the field. It also helps us to better
understand the dimensions of the challenges being
faced and to develop appropriate policies to elevate
United Nations policing. In that context, we welcome
the adoption of resolution 2382 (2017) on United
Nations police operations, which strengthens the role
of United Nations police operations and appropriately
recognizes them as a key component of United Nations
missions. I commend the role played by the delegation
of Italy in drafting this resolution.
Over the past two years, the United Nations has
undertaken a comprehensive reform of its peace and
security architecture, which has been guided by the
review of United Nations peacekeeping operations
carried out by the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations and the recommendations of
the Secretary-General on the peace and security
architecture of the Secretariat.
The Organization lacks a comprehensive vision to
address conflicts while taking the needs, specificities
and priorities of host communities and States into
account. This has led us to improve the tools available
to the Organization, in particular its peacekeeping
operations, in order to effectively address the emerging
challenges and deal with the complex situations that
characterize most United Nations missions.
It goes without saying that United Nations police
operations are not excluded from these efforts. The
police component plays a key role in implementing
United Nations peacekeeping mandates and provides
a foundation for the transition from a peacekeeping
operation to a United Nations civilian presence. It
also contributes to preventing a relapse into conflict
by assuming tasks related to the capacity-building
of national institutions and enabling host countries
to extend security control throughout their territory.
Police also ensure security for the holding of elections
and they are citizens’ first point of contact with the
United Nations on the ground. They also play an

17-3661613/27

S/PV.8086

United Nations peacekeeping operations

important role in building trust in the United Nations
within communities.
In this respect, we reiterate our full support for the
police component, as reflected in our contributions of
police contingents to most United Nations missions
and in our status as the third-largest police contributor.
In 2016 and 2017, Egypt has contributed to three of
the most difficult United Nations missions, including
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. We have also pledged to deploy additional
United Nations police units that have been refitted
with Peacekeeping Capability Readiness Systems. In
addition, we contribute armoured vehicles to United
Nations missions.
I should like to take this opportunity to ask Police
Commissioners some questions, without prejudice to
our adoption of the highest standards of predeployment
training and modern equipment required to carry out
the critical tasks entrusted to the police component.
My first question is addressed to Ms. Priscilla
Makotose, Police Commissioner of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). In the light of the significant improvements
in the security situation in Darfur and the drawdown
of UNAMID adopted by the Security Council, what
measures is the Mission taking to ensure stability
and shore up the efforts of the Sudanese Government
during the handover of security responsibilities to
local authorities?
My second question is for the Police Commissioner
of MINUSMA. In the light of the increasing security
threats, which have made MINUSMA the most
dangerous Mission, what measures have been taken
to improve security at headquarters, in line with the
magnitude of these threats? I would also like to inquire
about the efforts made to improve community outreach.
Given the role of community outreach in ensuring the
safety and security of missions, what steps should the
Council take to support the mandate of the Mission?
14/27

06/11/2017

My third and last question is addressed to the Police
Commissioner of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti. Resolution 2350 (2017) has given the
Mission a mandate focused on strengthening rule of law
institutions and the Haitian National Police. I would
like to know if, in his view, this has contributed to the
success of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, and subsequently to that of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, and if it is useful
to include building national institutions as a pillar in
the mandates of United Nations missions, while taking
into account the specificities of each conflict.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to express
to the Police Commissioners our deep appreciation
for their efforts and sacrifice in the context of
peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I want to thank our
briefers for sharing their analyses with us today, and
particularly to welcome Police Commissioner Makotose
to the Council. I also want to thank the presidency
and the Secretariat for ensuring that we hear women’s
voices in this Chamber, not just on policing but on all
the issues we discuss.
At the outset, I would like to echo my Swedish
colleague and to ask all the Blue Berets at today’s
meeting to pass on to their officers the Security
Council’s thanks and admiration for their service and
bravery. Their work and sacrifice in fragile and postconflict States is a vital part of peacekeeping operations
and special political missions. From Haiti to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, from Afghanistan
to South Sudan, the men and women of United Nations
policing put their lives on the line to protect the most
vulnerable as their communities emerge from conflict.
Their presence allows people to rebuild their lives,
their communities, their livelihoods after the guns
have fallen silent, and they help embed longer-term
stability by promoting the rule of law, human rights
and by helping build capable and accountable security
institutions that can stand on their own two feet without
United Nations support.
It is because of the important role of United Nations
policing that it is so vital that we hold these meetings.
We are the organ that tasks those men and women with
risking their lives, and so it is important that we hear
directly from the police commanders about what more
the Council can do to support them and their officers. As
we all know too well, the threats they face do not stand
17-36616

06/11/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

still. If United Nations policing is to stay effective, then
we — whether Council members, police-contributing
countries or police commanders — need to be ready to
respond and reform.
That is why we would have liked to have seen
resolution 2382 (2017) go further in terms of reform.
There is still much to be done in order to ensure that
United Nations policing is as effective and efficient as
possible. For example, the United Kingdom wants to see
a more flexible approach to the police function — one
that adapts according to the situation each mission
faces. This should be underpinned by a strong analytical
capability that can undertake the continuous analysis
necessary to ensure support remains appropriate to
needs on the ground.
In parallel, we would like to see the Secretariat
make more regular and effective use of specialists
with skills relevant to the situation at hand. This would
require the introduction of better and more transparent
administrative arrangements to absorb and utilize this
expertise. Additionally, it is crucial that policing be
incorporated into integrated planning and assessment
processes, both in New York and in missions, so that the
various mission components complement one another.
In this regard, I want to highlight and commend the
good work of the Global Focal Point for Police, Justice
and Corrections, a working arrangement between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United
Nations Development Programme, UN-Women, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and others, which provides joint
operational country support in the police, justice and
corrections areas in post-conflict and other crisis
situations. It is an example of the United Nations
providing more effective, coherent and coordinated
country-level assistance, which we would like to see
more of.
I also want to stress the United Kingdom’s
continuing support for the external review 2016
recommendations. We are keen to see progress being
made on these areas, including those referenced in the
Secretary-General’s report.
Let me conclude with a final reflection. United
Nations police are present throughout the continuum of
conflict. The Blue Berets are usually the first and the
last members of the United Nations family that a local
population meet during any intervention or response
to a crisis. So to succeed in their mission, across the

S/PV. 8086

duration of their deployment officers need to establish
a relationship with the population, one founded on trust.
That trust is more readily formed if United Nations
police officers reflect the diversity of the world that
they are sent to protect.
Allow me to close by joining my voice to that of
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix in expressing my
support for police-contributing countries that are
addressing the obstacles preventing more women from
entering United Nations police. I also wish to encourage
even greater efforts within United Nations police
components to consult with communities, including
women, and ensure that their views and needs are fully
part of their day-to-day work and their reporting to
the Council.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Italy for convening this meeting. We also
thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Police
Commissioners of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti and African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur for
their briefings.
Today, more than 11,000 United Nations police
officers are deployed in 11 peacekeeping operations
and four special political missions. They perform their
duties with devotion in trying and complex situations,
and China pays tribute to their spirit of dedication
and sacrifice.
The international situation is currently undergoing
profound changes; conflicts and disputes are becoming
more diverse. The context for United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the tasks they set out to
achieve are increasingly complex, and United Nations
peacekeeping police mandates have been on the rise.
The international community should consider in depth
the circumstances facing peacekeeping police, their
mandates and the way forward, and explore ways they
can improve their work. China would like to make the
following observations.
First, the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the basic principles of
peacekeeping — the consent of the host countries,
impartiality and the non-use of force except in selfdefence or in fulfilment of the mandate — must be
observed. These three peacekeeping principles are the
cornerstone of peacekeeping operations and provide
an important guarantee for the effectiveness of United

17-3661615/27

S/PV.8086

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Nations policing. It is important to fully respect the
sovereignty of host countries, listen to their views and
communicate better with them regarding the duration
of deployments, the adjustment of mandates and other
such issues. If, as a result of changing circumstances, the
host country demands the exit of United Nations police,
the Secretariat should develop a clear exit timetable
under the political guidance of the Security Council.
Secondly, the mandates of police deployed in
peacekeeping operations must be unambiguous,
feasible tailored to the context and focused. Mandates
are the basis of and guidance for the work of missions
and the very foundation of effective peacekeeping
operations. Each mission faces different situations
and tasks. When designing policing mandates, the
situation on the ground, the priority needs of the host
countries and the capacity of the police-contributing
countries, among other factors, should be considered
in an integrated manner. Their mandates should be
unequivocal, targeted, highly actionable and subject to
timely assessment in the light of dynamic changes, so
that their priorities and focus may be constantly adjusted
to serve the central objective of the peacekeeping
operation concerned. Host countries have the primary
responsibility to protect civilians, and the task of
peacekeeping police is to assist them in capacitybuilding and under the leadership of the host countries.
Thirdly, the Secretariat should provide higher
quality and more efficient support and guarantees to
the peacekeeping police in performing their duties.
The Secretariat should take fully into account new
contexts and situations encountered by the police
in order to make peacekeeping more effective and
resilient in the face of complexities, particularly by
boosting coordinated actions between the police,
civilian and military components of missions. It is
important to highlight the safety and security of
peacekeeping employees. Strengthened coordination
with police-contributing countries (PCCs) and host
countries improves early warning capabilities and the
internal sharing of information so as to raise the level
of safety and security across the board.
Fourthly, we must attach greater importance
to the role of PCCs. Troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and PCCs are the main players undertaking
peacekeeping operations. It is imperative to improve
communication between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and TCCs and PCCs, fullyleverage the role
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
16/27

06/11/2017

and enable TCCs and PCCs to have a greater voice.
Adequate attention should be given to the needs of
developing countries as PCCs, and they should be
encouraged to boost their capacity through bilateral
and multilateral cooperation.
China is the largest PCC among the permanent
members of the Security Council. Chinese peacekeeping
police officers have earned many accolades from
various parties thanks to their diligence and excellence.
China began sending police officers to United Nations
peacekeeping operations in 2000; since then, we have
sent some 26,000 police officers to missions in TimorLeste, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Afghanistan, Kosovo,
Haiti and elsewhere. At present, more than 150 Chinese
police officers are serving missions in South Sudan,
Cyprus and Afghanistan.
China is now in the process of fully implementing
the commitments made by the Chinese leader at the 2015
Leaders’ Summit on Peacekeeping to further support
United Nations peacekeeping operations, including by
taking the lead in the creation of a standby formed police
unit and training peacekeeping police officers for other
countries. Two of China’s standby peacekeeping police
units are already formally registered with the United
Nations peacekeeping standby mechanism, parts of
which are already at the rapid-deployment level.
China stands ready to work with the international
community and make its positive contribution to the
development of United Nations peacekeeping policing
and the maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and the Police
Commissioners of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur for their briefings.
In most cases, the term “United Nations
peacekeeping forces” is synonymous with military
troops. Nevertheless, police components also play
a key role in the maintenance of security at three
levels in particular: protection through dialogue and
commitment, protection against physical violence and
protection through the creation of a secure environment.
The roles of the United Nations police in the areas
of protection through dialogue and commitment and
protection through the creation of a secure environment
17-36616

06/11/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

are well-established in practice and involve advice,
building the capacities of and strengthening the
local police, and access to justice and Government
institutions. However, there is still a lack of clarity
regarding the role of the United Nations police with
respect to the physical protection of civilians.
The United Nations defines police work as a
support function of Government, responsible for the
prevention, detection, and investigation of crimes, the
protection of persons and property, and the maintenance
of public order and security. In this sense, exactly
one year ago we received the report of the SecretaryGeneral on United Nations policing (S/2016/952)
containing 14 recommendations on police work. Within
the framework of resolution 2185 (2014), it is clear that
police forces for international peace and security are of
increasing importance.
The Secretary-General’s approach allows us to
identify different priorities and measures to strengthen
the work of police contingents deployed to the various
peacekeeping missions in order to create a coherent
and adaptable system that is capable of dealing with
emerging conflict and post-conflict situations, in
addition to contributing to planning transition processes
and the development of integrated approaches to the rule
of law in countries where they carry out their activities.
On the other hand, as stated by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in its Guidelines on Police
Operations, the United Nations police can engage in a
wide range of activities, including, inter alia, advice,
reform, restructuring and strengthening of police
institutions, training and instruction, assistance in
electoral processes, disarmament and demobilization,
community-based policing, patrol border management,
public information and education.

S/PV. 8086

as well as specific tasks. We are confident that such
difficulties can be overcome by improving performance
management on the ground for police and civilian
components as well as military ones. The best way to
manage resources, human, financial or material, is to
focus on improving assessment and planning capacities
and enhancing the ability to provide timely information,
full communication and leadership, thereby effectively
strengthening and operationalizing the work of the
Police Division and the Strategic Force Generation
and Capability Planning Cell of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
In the context of peacebuilding, it is also crucial
to ensure that the work of the United Nations police is
strengthened in terms of the transition and transfer of
full responsibility to host States’ police forces as well
as in relation to missions’ exit strategies. In that regard,
as a Latin American country, we think it is important
to highlight the Haitian National Police’s development
plan for 2012 to 2016, which was implemented by the
police component of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). This plan focused on
improving the capacity and operational readiness of the
Haitian National Police in the areas of crime prevention
and response and activities related to law enforcement,
which not only helped to maintain stability during the
2016 elections, but also made a valuable contribution to
the process of closing MINUSTAH and transitioning it
to MINUJUSTH.

Bolivia believes that the multidimensional nature
of missions requires United Nations police officers
to cooperate closely in all areas of conflict and at all
levels, including through interaction at the local level
with military, political, humanitarian and human rights
sectors and other civilian components, but above all
by working closely with the host State in strict respect
of the principles of sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.

We must strengthen our efforts to incorporate a
gender perspective into the United Nations police,
thereby affirming, ensuring and encouraging
women’s equitable participation both in peacekeeping
operations, in accordance with resolution 2242 (2015),
and in peace processes, by playing an active role in
prevention, mediation and dialogue, with the aim of
arriving at solutions that reflect equality and contribute
to post-conflict reconstruction. In that regard, I would
like to ask the Commissioners what efforts and actions
are being undertaken to improve women’s participation
in force components, in particular MINUJUSTH,
which consists only of a police component. We also
reaffirm our full support to the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy on sexual abuse by members of
peacekeeping missions.

We welcome the Organization’s efforts to ensure
that countries contributing police contingents meet
the required standards. However, challenges remain
in the areas of deployment and capacity-building

In conclusion, Bolivia reaffirms its support for
and commitment to peace operations and would like
to thank United Nations staff and the personnel from
the troop- and police-contributing countries for their

17-3661617/27

S/PV.8086

United Nations peacekeeping operations

work, men and women who risk their lives every day
to build lasting and sustainable peace in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s meeting on police issues in United
Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions. We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix and the Police Commissioners of the United
Nations missions in Mali, Haiti and Darfur, for their
helpful briefings. We take this opportunity to once
again express our gratitude to all United Nations police
peacekeepers for their selfless efforts.
The work of the United Nations police in our current
peacekeeping initiatives is extremely important. They
deal with tremendous challenges and have to work
in increasingly difficult conditions. Besides helping
to ensure public order, they also support national
Governments in their efforts to protect civilians and
play an important auxiliary role in post-conflict reform
of law-enforcement institutions and national capacitybuilding for host States. We believe that because they
are providing that assistance on behalf of the entire
international community, the police, like peacekeepers,
are obliged to comply scrupulously with Security
Council mandates, the Charter of the United Nations
and the core principles of peacekeeping.
A key part of effective mandate fulfilment is the
establishment of constructive, trusting relations with
the host State that take its priorities into account. It
is the principle of national ownership that guarantees
success. One can hardly call it effective international
support if a mission’s protracted presence ultimately
results merely in substituting the efforts of United
Nations police for those of the local force. In providing
assistance to States it is equally critical to take national
specifics into consideration. Attempts to apply a
universal approach to reforming an area as important
and sensitive as a society’s law-enforcement structures
inevitably ends in the proposed solutions being rejected.
In order to help peacekeepers deal effectively with
the challenges they face, especially when additional
factors complicate conflicts further, they must get the
technical and staffing support they need. The Russian
Federation, as a police-contributing country, has
continued to expand its contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping activities and to deploy personnel with
18/27

06/11/2017

relevant skills. Since 1992, more than 500 officers
from branches of Russia’s Ministry of the Interior
have become United Nations police officers. Since
the United Nations Chiefs of Police Summit in June
2016, the number of Russian United Nations police
officers has increased by more than 50 per cent. They
are currently engaged in operations in South Sudan,
Kosovo, Haiti and Cyprus, and 20 per cent of them are
women. Women’s participation in policing in Russia
itself is also growing steadily.
Russia has also been striving to do its bit to
improve the effectiveness of police peacekeepers’
work, including that of non-Russian police. Since 2000,
the United Nations-certified peacekeeping training
centre of the Interior Ministry’s All-Russian Institute
for Advanced Training in Domodedovo, near Moscow,
has trained more than 350 foreign police peacekeepers,
including commanders from more than 50 countries.
Russia has unique experience in vocational training for
peacekeepers and we are ready to share it.
Russia supported the Council’s adoption today of
resolution 2382 (2017). However, we have to point out
that the work on the draft resolution was extremely
difficult. The Security Council took great pains to
ensure that the document did not politicize the work
of the United Nations police and that it focused on
concrete issues, based on the premise that every
element of the United Nations system is responsible
for a clearly defined area of issues. We believe it is
unacceptable to put a subjective interpretation on the
norms of international humanitarian law, particularly
where the protection of civilians is concerned. Under no
circumstances should peacekeepers, including police,
become a party to a conflict or take any side, and they
should certainly not be put in a position of using force
against a host State.
The police unquestionably play an important
role in United Nations efforts to prevent relapses into
conflict within the framework of their mandates in each
individual mission, but it is difficult to conceive what
their potential contribution could be to the SecretaryGeneral’s prevention and mediation efforts before
conflicts break out and missions are deployed. We
support the importance of ensuring an ongoing dialogue
between the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries on every aspect of peacekeeping operations,
including mandate planning and formulation.
17-36616

06/11/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8086

We believe firmly that discussions on the most
difficult issues, particularly police organizational
issues, should be transparent, and that the most suitable
platforms for them are the existing Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations and the General Assembly’s
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, on
the latter of which all troop-contributing countries
are represented. No external reviews can supplant
intergovernmental discussions of police issues. In
that context, we welcome the forthcoming briefing by
heads of police components to be held in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.

communities and the quality of their contact with the
people and local authorities that these United Nations
gendarmes and police officers build the trust that is
essential for effective protection, as has been the case
in Mali with the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
For police components to carry out these duties
effectively, it is vital to ensure that they are working
in full coordination with their peace operation’s other
components, especially the military and human rights
divisions. Their ability to respond together depends on
their ability to plan, analyse and act together.

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Italy for organizing this meeting on
the role of the police in peacekeeping operations, which
has enabled us to adopt resolution 2382 (2017), the
second Security Council resolution pertaining to the
police, three years after resolution 2185 (2014). I would
also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
and the heads of the police components here for their
briefings today.

That brings me to my second point, which is that
the police component plays a fundamental role in
establishing lasting peace. Establishing and training
domestic security forces that respect human rights,
ensure equal treatment for all and serve the people
are preconditions for long-term stability. The police
components of United Nations missions contribute
to that through support and training, in accordance
with the rule of law and United Nations due-diligence
human rights policies. That effort can be seen in the
Central African Republic with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, whose formed police
units are helping to protect civilian populations in
Bangui and beyond and to build the national internal
security forces’ capacity and strengthen Government
authority. The success of that commitment depends
on identifying the needs of the host State in detail and
on appropriate planning, enabling an effective police
response. In the transitional situation in Haiti, the
Council has recognized the significant added value of
using police for restoring peace with its establishment
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti.

I would like to pay tribute to the approximately
11,500 men and women who are currently deployed as
police officers in peacekeeping operations. Whether
they are from civilian or military national security
forces, they carry out their mandates in what are
sometimes extremely difficult security conditions as
they labour to ensure that peace is maintained and
civilians are protected.
Today peacekeeping operations are deployed
in increasingly complex, varied and evolving
circumstances, and police components are a major
asset in our response to them, as the resolution we have
just adopted emphasizes. In that regard, I would like to
discuss three priorities.
First, police forces should continue to play a central
role in the protection of civilian populations, and the
success of that depends on close contact between the
police deployed to operations and the people at risk.
Civilians, especially the most vulnerable among them
such as women and children, must be able to rely on
our police and gendarmes to protect them from human
rights abuses and violence and ensure that those
accused of such crimes are brought to justice and held
accountable for their actions. In the event of imminent
violence, it is the job of the United Nations police to
provide affected populations with the protection they
need. Besides that, it is through their commitment to

Thirdly, for police components to be able to help
to resolve conflicts, they must be fully adapted to the
needs of peacekeeping operations, a task that presents
several challenges. The first requirement is their
capacity for force generation. To be effective, a police
force must be large enough, as well as well equipped
and well trained. The ability to deploy an adequate
police component quickly remains a major challenge,
and we must all work together to respond to it.
The second challenge is police-force composition.
We support efforts to deploy more women to the police
components of peacekeeping operations. Women are
a guarantee of the link between the United Nations

17-3661619/27

S/PV.8086

United Nations peacekeeping operations

police in missions and highly fragile populations. They
are at the forefront in combating and preventing sexual
violence. They are an example for the future and a model
for the people we protect. We also support efforts in the
area of language. The capacity to maintain ties to the
host population depends on an ability to establish and
deepen a relationship of trust and mutual respect over
time and with the support of local authorities. France
does that by training deployed police and gendarmes
in French.
The third issue, which seems central today, is that
of technical competence. In order to deal with the
many types of crime they encounter on the ground,
investigations aimed at fighting impunity require
complex police techniques. Because of that, mission
police components must have the specialized technical
knowledge needed to combat sexual violence or
transnational organized crime, for example. France is
firmly committed to that approach. For instance, the
European Gendarmerie Force will shortly deploy a
team within MINUSMA to combat organized crime
and terrorism composed of Italian carabinieri, staff of
Spain’s Guardia Civil, Portugal’s Republican National
Guard and soldiers of the French National Gendarmerie.
The next meeting of police and gendarmerie
heads, to be held in the spring of 2018, will be an
opportunity for reflection on the role of the police
within the United Nations. It should help us examine
our doctrinal and technical choices, while offering an
analysis of the future of police components. In that
regard, I would like to hear the views of our briefers on
the role of police personnel in building lasting peace.
In other contexts they have all promoted the concept of
sustainable peace through the prevention of violence,
the restoration of host-country policing capabilities and
national reconciliation. Can they tell us what they have
learned from their experience? It would be particularly
helpful to get a better understanding of the constraints
they have encountered and the imperatives they have
had to take into account in carrying out their actions. I
thank them in advance for that.
Mr. Dieng (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
would like to thank the Italian delegation for taking
the initiative to hold today’s important meeting, giving
us the opportunity to exchange views directly with the
commanders of the police components of peacekeeping
operations. We are also grateful to Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix and the heads of the police components
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
20/27

06/11/2017

Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur for their informative
briefings. Senegal would especially like to thank
the commanders and their troops and to express its
gratitude for their outstanding performance in complex
and challenging environments.
Today, the importance of the growing role of the
police in peace operations is well established. Their
place and role have undergone many changes since
1960. While traditionally they was used for monitoring,
observing and producing reports, today they have
become key players in multidimensional peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions. An example of that is their
work in protecting civilians in situations of internal
insecurity such as that of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan. The United Nations police also play a
central role in building the capacities of host countries’
security forces. For example, formed police units and
individual police officers have jointly responded to
many needs in Haiti.
In order to take on full responsibility for those
changes in its functions, police components have had
to adapt their structure and organization and revise
their employment processes and doctrines again and
again, and numerous Security Council resolutions and
assessments have been introduced and implemented in
order to increase their operational capacity and role in
supporting countries in crisis. It is against that backdrop
that a complete review of the structure, functions and
capacity of the Police Division was conducted, in line
with the report of the High-level level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO) (see S/2015/446). It
must be underscored that, despite those commendable
efforts, much remains to be done to overcome the
challenges with which we are all familiar — as listed
in the HIPPO report and highlighted by the Security
Council in resolution 2185 (2014). Resolution 2382
(2017), which we adopted today at the initiative of
the Italian delegation, is part and parcel of the efforts
to address the current challenges faced by the Police
Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
To ensure that our meeting is interactive, as
requested by you, Mr. President, I would like to ask a
few questions. My first question will be directed to all
the Police Commissioners who spoke at today’s briefing.
17-36616

06/11/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

With regard to capacity-building for host-country
security forces, we know that communications play a
key role. Quite often, however, police training officers
do not speak the official language of the host countries.
What measures are Police Commissioners taking to
address that challenge?
I also have a question for the MINUSMA Police
Commissioner. Undoubtedly, the environment in which
the Mission operates requires reliable equipment and
well-trained personnel. What are the main challenges
for police units in combating and preventing crime in
those countries?
With regard to MINUJUSTH, the evaluation report
of the formed police units notes that the Division for
Policy, Evaluation and Training has issued reservations
about the operational capacity of formed police units
made up entirely of women. What are the strengths and
weaknesses of such units? As the evaluation team has
recommended, would it not make more sense to have
mixed-gender formed police units, given that almost all
troop- and police-contributing countries have mixedgender units at home?
While not a question, I would like to comment
on the briefing by Ms. Makotose, whom I thank for
her valuable contribution to today’s meeting. I take
this opportunity to announce that, as the leading
police-contributing country, with seven units in five
peacekeeping operations, Senegal intends to provide
the United Nations with 26 additional female police
officers. Those officers have already passed tests that
were held in Dakar in August under the All-Female
Selection Assistance and Assessment Team Training
programme, which was financed by the Government of
the United States. That effort provides some insight into
the importance that Senegal attaches to strengthening
the role of women in peacekeeping operations, and in
police activities in particular.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.
At the outset, I would like to thank all delegations
for their constructive collaboration in adopting
resolution 2382 (2017) today. I am also very grateful
to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and to the Police
Commissioners of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) for their briefings. They confirmed

S/PV. 8086

the central role that police units currently play in peace
operations throughout the world.
As described by Police Commissioner Yacouba,
United Nations police components in Mali assist the
Malian authorities in the fight against transnational
organized crime, including illegal trafficking in
weapons and in persons. Such activities are very
often connected to terrorist organizations, providing
them with several sources of financing. The support
United Nations police can provide to local authorities
in the fight against those criminal networks and in
the disruption of trafficking networks is crucial for
reducing a major source of instability in the Sahel and
in the entire Mediterranean region.
As Police Commissioner Monchotte explained,
the police component in Haiti is now at the core of the
peacekeeping Mission, strengthening the rule of law
by mentoring local police. The Mission in Haiti can
be an example of how United Nations police capacitydevelopment efforts can assist in preventing a relapse
into conflict, and leave behind an enduring legacy of
sustainable peace. It is an important test case and a
possible future model for the successful transition and
eventual exit of peacekeeping operations.
I would also like to thank Police Commissioner
Makotose for her meaningful insight into how
the operational effectiveness of UNAMID was
strengthened by making the activities of the United
Nations police components more gender-sensitive. That
is an important step forward.
Today’s briefing confirmed that the United Nations
police contribution is the key to achieving our common
objective of smarter and more cost-effective peace
operations that are able to bring about sustainable and
long-lasting peace. That, by the way, is our common
goal in support of reforming the United Nations system
as envisaged by the Secretary-General. We believe it
is therefore necessary to strengthen United Nations
police. In that regard, I would like to recall the critical
role of the United Nations Standing Police Capacity,
located at the Global Service Centre in Brindisi, in
providing peace operations with readily available police
expertise. I would like to suggest four brief points for
further consideration.
First, we must recognize the contribution of the
United Nations police in preventing conflict and
sustaining peace, and, consequently, in including

17-3661621/27

S/PV.8086

United Nations peacekeeping operations

06/11/2017

policing as an integral part of the mandates of peace
operations. That would support the focus on prevention.

will be very brief so as to allow our colleagues from the
field to respond to the various questions posed to them.

Secondly, we should strengthen the role of United
Nations police in protecting civilians and preventing and
addressing sexual and gender conflict-related violence
and violations and abuses against children, including
by providing assistance and support to local authorities.
In that regard, predeployment training for Blue Helmets
is key to providing the necessary assistance and to
preventing sexual exploitation and abuse.

I think that today’s debate has highlighted the
increasingly vital role of police in peacekeeping — both
in providing security and complementing the military
component, as well as in contributing to the protection
of civilians, in partnership with other components in
our operations — but also the vital contribution of our
police colleagues in strengthening local capacity in the
crucial area of rule-of-law institutions. Obviously, the
strengthening of the rule of law and institutions is a
precondition for restoring lasting peace and providing
our peacekeeping operation with the possibility to exit.

Thirdly, we should provide guidance on what is
required to improve accountability, transparency,
efficiency and effectiveness in the performance of
United Nations police, by defining clear standards
for the provision of personnel, equipment and
assistance to host-State police. In that regard, the
role of police-contributing countries is of paramount
importance. We must enhance triangular consultation
and cooperation between police-contributing countries
and the Secretariat.
Fourthly, we completely share the view that an
increased number of women in police forces will
improve the performance of United Nations police units.
I encourage Member States to do more to contribute to
that objective, starting with recruiting a greater number
of women at the national level.
Finally, I would like to pay tribute to the women and
men serving in United Nations peacekeeping missions,
and in particular those who have lost their lives over
the years. We must spare no effort to improve the safety
and security of our Blue Helmets by providing them
with the necessary equipment and technology that can
save their lives.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Since there were several questions for the Police
Commissioners and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix,
I would like to turn the floor over them to respond to
the questions posed and to make other remarks.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I would again like to thank you, Sir,
the Italian presidency of the Security Council and all
members of the Council for holding today’s debate,
as well as for adopting resolution 2382 (2017). It is a
clear signal of the Security Council’s interest in United
Nations police activities in the area of peacekeeping. I
22/27

The question asked by the representative of Sweden
was related to how the police dimension might be
further integrated within mandates conferred on us
by the Security Council. I believe that the rationale
behind the representative’s question also involves
how those police activities could be increasingly and
better supported by the Security Council. I would like
to highlight the importance of the continuous interest
of the Security Council in the United Nations police.
As I said, that interest has been demonstrated today by
this meeting and the adoption of resolution 2382 (2017),
but we are keen on having further interaction with the
Council. Moreover, we look forward to the Council’s
consideration and discussion of the reports that we
will provide, specifically the report to be submitted
pursuant to resolution 2382 (2017), on a different set of
very important issues.
I would also like to say that the challenges
associated with and the need to improve United
Nations police peacekeeping are in many ways similar
and, indeed, complementary to the challenges and the
demands of other components. We look forward to the
Security Council’s feedback on how we perform not
only in responding to those challenges, but in further
integrating the activities of various components, while
ensuring adequate cooperation in the field. A number
of past reports of the Secretary-General have already
addressed the issue of police components. I believe
that we should look to the Council to provide us not
only with consistent monitoring of and support for our
efforts, but also with encouragement to Member States
to support those efforts in crucial areas, such as scaling
up performance, increasing and improving training
and capacities, particularly as our police component
is dealing with activities and issues that require very
technical and specific capacities.
17-36616

06/11/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Some of those were addressed and mentioned
earlier during this meeting, including working to
increase the integration of police component activities
with other components; partnering with other
institutions and organizations, such as regional and
subregional organizations, as well as the European
Union; and cooperating with police-contributing
countries not only to increase the percentage of women
in our police contingent, but also to better address
the role of women in peacekeeping processes in our
operations. The language issue was mentioned by some
representatives; it is a crucial issue, particularly with
regard to policing, because the United Nations police is
all about interacting with the population.
I would like to add that that it is equally important
that our expectations vis-à-vis the Security Council are
met in terms of mandates being adequately provided
with the required resources to ensure that we can fulfil
the missions conferred upon us by the Security Council,
including policing, as well as the other activities. I
believe that it is also important to encourage States
Members to support our work in policing, not only by
entering into partnerships with police-contributing
countries with a view to helping them improve their
capacities, but also by encouraging them to continue
and possibly increase their support to programmatic
funding for capacity-building. As members of the
Council are aware, our police activities also depend
on that type of programmatic funding, which is very
important with regard to our work in developing several
key policies, several of which were mentioned today.
In conclusion, I would like to say that today’s
briefing is particularly timely for many reasons, one
of which is that it provides us with the opportunity to
welcome Police Commissioner Luis Carrilho. I would
like to say before the Council that we are delighted to
see him join the peacekeeping family, but I would also
like to pay tribute and very warmly thank Commissioner
Stefan Feller for the his outstanding work at the head of
the Police Division.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Yacouba.
Mr. Yacouba (spoke in French): I believe that
Mr. Lacroix has addressed the crux of the questions. I will
therefore answer some of the more specific questions.
The first question concerns the attacks and the issue
of explosive devices confronting the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). It is an issue of major concern

S/PV. 8086

to the countries of MINUSMA and host countries, as
well as for Headquarters in New York. We have held
several video-teleconferences to address the issue, and
a working group was established to reflect on how to
avoid the damage and loss.
In that regard, the first issue concerns training,
including predeployment training whereby all
formed units — whether formed police or military
units — are provided with information regarding
asymmetric attacks, especially those involving
explosive devices and mines. Above all, they must
undergo complementary training under the auspices of
United Nations Mine Action Service. The importance
of such training has been witnessed on the ground,
where, despite the high number of incidents that have
been reported, many deaths have been avoided simply
because people have followed the proper protocol. Even
now, in cases where accidents have often occurred, the
latter have been attributed to a failure to follow protocol
according to instruction. There is therefore a problem
concerning command, which has been identified, and I
believe that corrective measures have been implemented
at the force and police component levels.
There is also the issue of passive protection
measures. I am speaking of attacks on camps
and convoys. Equipment has been scaled up, but
unfortunately some units lack the equipment especially
designed for such attacks. We have seen armoured
vehicles equipped with armour that fails to protect them
against mines. Headquarters has drawn the attention of
contributing countries to the problem on the ground so
that measures can be taken to address those issues.
We are therefore not only focusing on raising
awareness, but also on the intelligence dimension. The
latter entails conducting an investigation whenever there
is an incident involving an explosion. In each police
unit, we have an investigative branch that takes over the
necessary tasks after an explosion. MINUSMA carries
out an internal investigation, and the Malian authorities
carry out their own. Regardless of whether the attacks
target MINUSMA or Malian personnel, according to
our mutual agreement, we exchange information.
Accordingly, we have established a criminal
database, so that we can trace explosive devices and try
to identify who laid them and where they came from.
With broader cooperation in the subregion and with
enhanced inter-service cooperation, we hope that we

17-3661623/27

S/PV.8086

United Nations peacekeeping operations

will be able to trace them to their source and cut the
supply line. That is, in essence, one of the first problems.
The second aspect is the lack of trust between the
population and the security defence forces. That is
indeed a major obstacle, because if that is absent, then the
police, the gendarmerie and the national guard — who
are supposed to protect the population — do not in fact
enjoy its trust. That leads to an underlying problem that
can be addressed only through security sector reform in
order to foster trust between the security forces and the
people. And to do that, the Malian forces must comprise
the entire range of national viewpoints.
Additionally, the forces must be accountable before
the law. We must do away with impunity, corruption and
other aspects that the people find contemptible within
the security and defence forces. They are fully aware
that we have, with their assent, created a programme
of local policing that seeks to make sure that the local
population is kept at the core. Therefore, security
cannot carried out against the population; rather, the
people themselves contribute to their own security and
to the implementation of development projects.
We explain to them that this is about a virtuous
circle. We carry out awareness-raising campaigns to
explain our mandate to the population. We explain our
role and mandate to the people, as well as the need to
work with the Malian forces. They will generally share
their concerns and, I believe, the Government has
agreed to participate in this local policing approach. On
4 October, at the national police level, at the fifty-seventh
anniversary of the creation of the police, in front of the
entire Government and Parliament, the Government
committed itself to the local policing approach.
What will it accomplish? The population is
now suffering from the lack of trust in the Malian
security forces, as it is the extremisst that impose their
law and way of life. But with the joining of the two
structures, they will be able to act against the negative
elements — the extremists.
On the question of the vision for the future, I think
that Mr. Lacroix has answered it. I wanted to add
that it should include a republican police force that is
accountable before the law.
With regard to the third question, the aspect of
communication has been addressed. I only wanted to
add that, at the level of formed police units, there are
units that patrol and escort humanitarian workers but do
24/27

06/11/2017

not speak the local languages. Through the recruitment
of local interpreters, the staff of the formed police
units — if, for example, they speak Arabic — must
learn a local language as well in order to be able to
better interact with the local population. In any given
community, an English or French speaker will have to
learn the local language to interact with the people and
gain their trust.
Another key aspect when it comes to communication
is ensuring that people understand our mission. When
they do not, they are reluctant to engage with us. We
regularly carry out awareness-raising campaigns to
explain our mandates. I would say that in Gao, for
example, we have been fairly successful in that regard.
At a certain point, we even had people in Gao who
wanted to take the law into their own hands and set up
prisons. Once they understood our role, with the support
of all stakeholders — the entire community, including
women and elders — they themselves abandoned the
actions they intended to take. They understood the
relevance of our role.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Commissioner Monchotte.
Mr. Monchotte (spoke in French): The new
approach we have set up is of course aligned with view
towards an exit strategy, as the mandate of resolution
2350 (2107) gives us a time limit. By targeting high-level
leadership, there was an attempt to force ownership and
to announce a departure.
Additionally, the new approach should be
understood in the context of the European Gendarmerie
Force, which is perfectly integrated. Moreover,
coordination and integration is generally carried out
through the programme budget of the global focal
point for justice, human rights and correctional justice.
It is an extremely positive aspect that enables us to
contribute in a very pragmatic way to the development
of the Haitian National Police.
With respect to the challenges I see for the future,
I can anticipate two specific challenges for the Haitian
National Police. First of all, there is the non-politicization
of the police, as that would be extremely damaging for
the general atmosphere in the country and its stability,
which would be called into question. The second
challenge is the budgetary interest of the Government
in the police by availing it of the means to act and
by honouring the commitments adopted on 5 July
by the Prime Minister in his capacity as President of
17-36616

06/11/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the Superior Council of the National Police, when he
validated the 2017-2021 strategic development plan that
we prepared jointly, in which Haiti must contribute at
least 45 per cent to the overall five-year budget.
Other challenges that I see for us are ensuring
the best experts so as to ensure that skills transfer
and capacity-building occur in the best possible
conditions. To that end, we must have the necessary
equipment — be they vehicles, infrastructure or
infrastructure adjustments — for the working conditions
of our international police, above all a helicopter unit
to carry out our joint operations with the police. Our
mandate requires that we provide operational support
to the Haitian National Police in the territorial planning
of the country. That element is crucial.
As for sustainable peace, beyond the purely
economic aspects of political stability in the technical
and police arena, it is absolutely clear that the police
must address the population equitably, respect human
rights and use force with care. These are fundamental
prerequisites. That is why we participate in and support
operations as part of the mandate. Human rights
training for law enforcement units is a critical part of
technical support.
I would also like to underscore the role of the
General Inspectorate, which we support with experts
alongside its senior management. That was implemented
under the mandate for the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) with approximately
15 United Nations police deployed in the Inspectorate.
The Inspectorate must carry out investigations of
allegations of improper conduct or the use of excessive
force, whether in police or peacekeeping operations.
The General Inspectorate considers approximately 600
cases annually.
With respect to the transition — a question was asked
in this respect by the representative of Sweden — what
enabled it to take place in a smooth and harmonious
manner was a vision that I would say was crafted in
late 2016. We began to plan well in advance, so that in
February 2017, when the strategic evaluation mission
arrived along with Mr. Ladsous, we were able to make
proposals relating to the post-MINUSTAH period and
to outline our support and advice programme. This
planning and preparation for the future took place in
close cooperation with the local police, without whom
none of this would have been possible. The work was

S/PV. 8086

thus carried out in a harmonious manner with a partner
that is fully accepting of this new landscape.
What further contributed to the stabilization of
MINUSTAH, as I observed based on my own experience,
was above all the fact that there was support for the
electoral process to be fully carried through. The police
component played an important role by deploying more
than 85 per cent of its force during the two rounds of
the presidential elections. This was also done jointly
with the Haitian National Police, which was absolutely
critical. In the presence of the highest authorities of the
State, we signed a joint security plan that enabled the
Haitian National Police to make clear progress in terms
of operational planning and to generate a coherent and
realistic operational framework at the national level.
This was a first for the Haitian National Police.
Turning to the promotion of gender equality in the
police component, first we created a listing of posts in
the framework of our new approach so that contributing
countries could see what posts needed to be filled, with
priority given to female personnel. At my headquarters,
I have two gender equality adviser posts reserved for
women. We are currently a very small structure, with
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti. I have also maintained a women’s network, and
I would stress here that advisers to this network have
a counterparts in the Haitian National Police, which
provided an excellent example of how to promote gender
equality within a police force. We are continuing these
efforts every day.
With respect to the police division and human
resources, arrangements were made that included the
authorization to reduce the duration of the mandate and
deployment for women, so as to facilitate their joining
the Mission.
Turning to communications, at the request of our
partner the Haitian National Police, we have stressed
linguistic issues, which are very important. Indeed,
the proper transfer of skills and capacity-building
is best carried out in a context of affectio societatis,
that is to say, a trust-based relationship between
mentor and mentee, which works best when a common
language is used, in this case French or Creole. This
is noted in the profiles that have been set up, so that
contributing countries, in addition to providing female
personnel, can ensure that such personnel are Frenchor Creole-speaking. When candidates are put forward,

17-3661625/27

S/PV.8086

United Nations peacekeeping operations

we conduct interviews and make our selection with a
view to securing French-speaking experts.
In conclusion, with respect to joint law-enforcement
units, I can attest to the fact that I have benefited from
this undertaking and would be fully in favour if it were
to continue.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Monchotte for his briefing.
(spoke in English)
I now give the floor to Ms. Makotose.
Ms. Makotose: I thank the Council for having
recognized the important work of the police in
peacekeeping and would like also to acknowledge
the Council’s important role in promoting peace and
our work. Its words of encouragement today and the
understanding and guidance shown are well received,
and we will be using them to inform and guide
our operations.
To the question that was posed by the representative
of Egypt, on the improvement of the security situation
in the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), I wish to acknowledge that there
has indeed been an improvement, especially in conflictrelated clashes, but my concern as Police Commissioner
is the fact that most internally displaced persons (IDPs)
remain in the camps, and their major concern when
we talk to them is the issue of security. This speaks
to the issue of trust between the IDPs and the security
institutions; they remain in the camps because they feel
a little bit insecure. We feel that we still have a role in
building this trust, and we hope that as we continue to
implement our mandate, this trust will be built.
Nonetheless, we have been undertaking a number
of strategies to ensure that in the event of our exit
there is sustainability and the rule of law. Chief among
this is that we started engaging in train-the-trainer
programmes under the capacity-building mandate.
We also have received a very interesting and exciting
request from the Sudan Police Force to help it develop
its standing operating procedures, its code of conduct
and a number of other institutional frameworks. We
believe that these are important to ensure sustainability
upon the exit of UNAMID.
We are also actively involved in community
policing, and we have a very vibrant communitypolicing volunteers programme as well as very vibrant
26/27

06/11/2017

community-safety committees, which discuss crime
and how to overcome some of the criminal challenges
that the people face.
We are also working with the United Nations
country team and mainly with the United Nations
Development Programme, UNICEF, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and UN-Women to build capacity for the continued
monitoring of the performance of the Sudan Police
Force once UNAMID has exited from Darfur.
We are also happy to have seen the spread of the
Sudan Police Force into almost all of the team sites
that are operational, and we are pleased that that Force
is now in existence in most of these areas, with the
exception of about three. We are still working to get
them into those areas.
We would like the support of the Council for
the joint programme on the rule of law and human
rights, which is aimed at overseeing the resourcing
and implementation of a sustainable criminal-justice
system. It has been hit by a lack of funding, but we
believe that this is the programme that is going to
drive sustainability and the capacitation of both of the
Sudan Police Force in Darfur and, indeed, all other
criminal-justice institutions.
In response to the question from the representative
of Bolivia, on the greater participation of women, I
highlighted some of the relevant issues, but let me
just touch on a few more. We are advocating for the
recruitment, training and deployment of the Sudan
Police Force in the deep field. It is a bit challenging,
because it is really still at a very low point. We are
hoping that our continuous engagement will certainly
bring us some way towards our goal. We have developed
a concept note to the effect that we are also seeking
funding so as to recruit more women, train them and
then deploy them in the deep field.
We have established a women’s network in the
Sudan Police Force as a vehicle for women to participate
in their empowerment. We insist that female members
of the Sudan police force participate in all our meetings.
As we continue to enhance the presence of female
peacekeepers deep in the field, we are still remodelling.
I hope that the Sudan police force will also take note
and copy what we are doing. I have also already had a
chance to engage with Walis and governors, and they
are beginning to accept the concept of recruiting more
female police officers.
17-36616

06/11/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8086

There was also a question from the representative
of France on the lessons learned from our experiences.
I would say that the situations in the conflict and
post-conflict areas that we operate in are hard and
desperate. The peace process, in my experience, has
been very slow, and sometimes it is very frustrating.
A lot of commitment and consistency is required to
achieve stability and peace; continuous engagement
with hosts, the internally displaced persons population
and community leadership builds the necessary
relationships that then contribute to the success of our
work. We also feel that partnerships and collaboration
among the missions, the United Nations country team
and police-contributing countries are extremely critical
for us to achieve our mandates.

we take note on how we carry out deployments to
ensure that there is equal geographical representation,
they have come in very handy in helping us deliver
our messages. Our Integrated Mission Training Centre
also provides courses that help us to learn a bit of
Arabic, and we have taken the initiative to hold English
enhancement lessons with both the Sudan police force
and internally displaced persons. That has also helped
us to build relationships and improve communication
with both communities.

With relation to the question from the representative
of Senegal on the issue of language — yes, it is a
real challenge. However, we have Arabic speakers
and language assistants in the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Therefore, because

On behalf of the Council, I would like once again
to thank all the briefersfor their very interesting
perspectives and insights.

Those are the questions that I am able to answer. I
very much thank the Council for this opportunity.
The President: I thank Police Commissioner
Makatose for the clarifications she has provided.

The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

17-3661627/27
