TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

24 NOVEMBER 197 1

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1601) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

1

. . . . . , 1. , . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . ,

1

Complaint by Senegal:
Report of the Special Mission of the Security Council established under
..........I.....,....I.......
resolution 294 (1971) (S/10308)

1

Point of order raised by the representative of the United Kingdom

6

Adoption

of the agenda

..........

S/PV. 160 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security, Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securiiy Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEEN
Held in New York

HUNDRED
on Wednesday,

President: Mr. Eugeniusz KUlJAGA (Poland).
&ese?lt: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l601)
I. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaint by Senegal:
Report of the Special Mission of the Security Council
established under resolution 294 (197 1) (S/ 10308).
Adoption

of the agenda

Tlze agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Senegal
Report of the Special Mission of the Security Council
established under resolution 294 (1971) (S/103081)
I. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): During
previous meetings devoted to the consideration of the
present item, the Security Council decided to invite the
representativesof Senegal, Guinea, Mali, the Sudan,Mauritania, Mauritius, Togo and Zambia to participate, without
the right to vote, in the Council’s debate on the question
beforeit,
2, In view of the limited number of placesat the Council
table, and in conformity with the usual practice, I shall
invite the representatives of non-membersof the Council
wishing to participate in this debate to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,on
theunderstanding that they will be invited to take a place
atthe Council table when it is their turn to speak.
3. 1 call on the representative of Senegalto take a placeat
theCounciI table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. Fall, representative of Senegal, took a place at the Security Council table,
arldMr. E.-H. A. Towe’, representative of Guinea, took the
placereserved for him in the Council chamber.
1Official Records of the Secusity Council, Twenty-siwth Year,
&vial Supplement No.3.

AND FIRST
24# November

MEETING
1971, at 3.30 p.rn#

4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will continue the consideration of the
item on its agenda.I would remind membersthat a draft
resolution has been submitted by Burundi, Sierra Leone
and Somaliain documentS/10395.
5. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi) (interpretation from
French): After the meeting this morning, consultations
were held amongvarious membersof the Council with a
view to reaching agreementon the draft resolution which
we introduced at the 1599th meeting and which shouldbe
voted on this afternoon. Agreementwasreachedwith some
difficulty, becausewe were bound to note that whiIe some
delegationsproposedamendmentswhich the sponsorswere
able to study and accept, other delegationshad to withdraw
the amendmentsthey proposedbecausethey were not fully
in accord with the tenor and the character of the draft
resolution.
6. Now I shouldlike to inform the Security Council of an
amendment which has been proposed to operative paragraph 4 of the draft resolution. That paragraph,which I
shallread in English,readasfollows:
“Calls upon the Government of Portugal to take
immediate effective measures;
“(a) So that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Senegalshallbe fully respected;
“(bj To prevent acts of violence and destruction
against the territory and the people of Senegal,in order
to contribute to the safeguardingof peaceand security in
the region”.
7, Another proposalwas also submitted regardingoperative paragraph6 and I shouldlike to inform the Council of
it. The amendedparagraphwould readasfollows:
“Culls upon the Government of Portugal to take
without further delay the necessarymeasures,sothat this
inalienable right of the peopleof Guinea(Bissau)shallbe
exercised”.
8. Those are the amendmentsof which we wish to inform
the Council. Of course, as will be noted, in a spirit of
co-operationand in the conviction that the Council must be
collectively responsibleand exercise-joint autharity, we
have tried to show a willingness to make concessions
although the new text is not completely acceptable, any
more than the old one was. In other words, it wasbecause
there was no better alternative that, in order to retain the

team spirit of the Council we had to reject some proposals
while accepting those that did not do grave damage to the
spirit or form of the text. Therefore, we hope that all
members will be able to support this text, which is at least
quite harmless.

particularly to their spokesman, the Ambassador of
Burundi, who facilitated the task of several delegations in
voting on the draft resolution,
17. My delegation considered with particular interest the
draft resolution submitted yesterday with such clarity and
eloquence by the representative of Burundi on the cornplaints by Senegal against Portugal.

9. On the other hand, I should like to point out that we
have held consultations with all the parties concerned. We
therefore hope that the work we have done and the efforts
we have made to reach unanimous agreement will produce
results when the draft resolution is voted upon. If there are
any questions concerning this draft resolution, we are of
course prepared to reply to them.

18. My country was a member of the Special Mission
whose mandate consisted in going to Senegal
“to carry out an inquiry into the facts of which the
Council has been informed, to examine the situation
along the border between Guinea (Bissau) and Senegal
and to report to the Security Council, making any
recommendations aimed at guaranteeing peace and security in this region”,

10. The representative of Argentina this morning raised a
very relevant point and since we have accepted if because
we consider it to be well founded, we might ask him
whether he could submit a paragraph concerning the work
done by the Special Mission. Since both the President of
the Council and the representative of Burundi were
members of the Special Mission to Senegal, it would be a
rather delicate matter for them to make a specific proposal
on the subject. That is why a formulation by the
representative of Argentina would be welcome.

My delegation actively participated in the consultations
which have taken place these past few days between the six
members of the Special Mission in order to achieve
agreement on the text of a draft resolution,
19. Once again we should like to affirm in the Council
that Belgium remains wedded to the idea of the exerciseby
the people of Guinea (Bissau) of its right to selfdetermination and independence, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
We also solemnly reaffirm that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Senegal must be respected.

11, Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish): The addition I proposed this morning was
very simple and read as follows:
“Expresses its appreciation for the work accomplished
by the Special Mission of the Security Council established
under resolution 294 (1971)“,

20. We would however, have hoped that the draft resolution could limit itself to drawing conclusions from the
reports of the Special Mission. That Mission chosea
particular drafting procedure because it had not found
formal proof of the participation of Portugal in the acts
which led to the adoption of resolution 294 (1971) of 15
July 1971. We therefore have some reservations as to the
formulation of operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution. We would have hoped that it could be deleted.

12. If it is accepted I believe that it should become
operative paragraph 1, and the remaining operative paragraphs would then be renumbered accordingly.
13. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): As I
understand it, the amendment just made by the representative of Argentina is acceptable to the sponsors of the
draft resolution. May I take it that this is SC?
14. Mr.

TERENCE (Burundi) (interpretation from
The sponsors of the draft resolution accept the
proposal submitted by the representative of Argentina and
wish to thank him for the spirit of courtesy which
prompted him to realize the need to acknowledge the work
done by the members of the Special Mission, despite the
difficulties they encountered. Hence, on behalf of the other
sponsors and on behalf of my delegation, I should like to
express our appreciation to him for the spirit of initiative
which he has shown,

21. Nevertheless, in view of the two principles mentioned
at the beginning of my statement, namely, our firm support
of the exercise by the people of Guinea (Bissau)of its right
to self-determination and independence, in accordancewith
the Charter of the United Nations, and respect for tile
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Senegal, my deleg*
tion will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

French):

22. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interprefatio~l
The problem seems to us to be very clear,
Here is a country, Senegal, which is a peaceful counts’
traditionally attached to its independence and its freedoms,
a country that is hard-working and serious and has a Bead
of State whose generous idealism is perfectly allied te s
down-to-earth sense of reality and whose only ambition
within the country is to work for the greater well-being of
the peasants and the workers and, externally, to give
concrete meaning to African fraternity. To consolidate and
diversify its economy and open it up to the rest of the
world, to find in very ancient traditions the basis for a
modern and dynamic society-that is obviously the concern
of the Government of Senegal. The complaints of whielr

fvom French):

15. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
Before we turn to the explanations of vote, I should like to
make it clear that the text before us, apart from the
amendments read out by the representative of Burundi,
would therefore contain an additional paragraph, operative
paragraph 1, and the other operative paragraphs will be
renumbered accordingly.
16. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) (interpretation fvom
First of all, I should like to pay a tribute to the
African delegations for their spirit of compromise, and

French):

2

.1
our Council has been seized for nearly 10 years are there as
of Burundi, Sierra Leone and Somalia we find reflected in
I; proof
that the tasks which the Dakar authorities have set
general terms the conclusions which we, the ,members of
I
.

for themselves have constantly been jeopardized by the
many incidents in the area bordering on Guinea (B&au),
and the situation has worsened during the last few months.
Hardly a week goes by without some villager of Casamance
having his tranquility disturbed. Houses set aflame, cattle
stolen, roads mined, even peasants kidnapped -that is the
daily fate of the people of the area.
23. When the Council was informed of this situation in
July, it decided to send an information mission to the spot,
Because I was President of the Security Council at that
time, I know how very much the Secretary-General and I
tried to set up a mission with a senseof balance to cover all
tendencies, all points of view and all ideologies. Senior
military
officers-experienced
military
expertsaccompanied our colleagues, In short, nothing was spared
so that we should be informed as completely, as accurately
and as objectively as possible, and, in fact, the report which
we have received and which was the result of long, careful
and sometimes delicate drafting, under the patient and
persevering authority of Mr. Sevilla-Sacasa, was unanimously adopted. It informs us of the particularly devastating attack on a village, of artillery bombardment and the
emplacement of mines. It also indicates that these various
incidents originated in Guinea (B&au). As we have already
had occasion to recall in the Council, if there is one point
on which there can be no doubt, if there is one point which
is unchallengeable, it is that Portugal, which considers itself
responsible for that Territory, is thereby responsible for
peace and good order in that Territory. It is therefore to
Portugal that we must legitimately turn to put an end to
the acts of violence and destruction,

the Special Mission, reached; and at the same time, it
projects the recommendations of the report, which were
adopted unantiously.
27. In the paragraphs of the preamble the background is
mentioned, as well as documents which it is impossible to
ignore. It states that the Security Council has considered
the report, it reflects this Council’s feeling of concern at the
climate of insecurity and instability, fraught with the threat
to peace and security in the region, and it.affirms the need
to guarantee the prerequisites for eliminating the causesof
tension.
28. The operative part of the draft resolution takes note
with satisfaction of the recommendations of the Special
Mission, reaffhms the provisions of resolution 294 (197 1)
of the Security Council, deplores the lack of co-operation
of the Government of Portugal and makes relevant appeals
to that Government and expressesother ideas suitable to
the case we are dealing with. For all these reasons, I shall
vote in favour of the draft resolution with the proposed
amendments.
29. As Chairman of the Special Mission I am bound to
express my gratitude to Mr. Ortiz de Rozas for his kind
Initiative in suggesting that the resolution record the
appreciation of the Security Council for the work accomplished by the Special Mission, an Argentine generosity
which does not surprise us.
30. I am grateful to Mr. Jouejati, for his kind words in
regard to me and to the work accomplished by the Special
Mission, of which he was a member, rendering us the same
excellent co-operation which the Chairman received from
the other members of the Mission. Mr, Jouejati wasa great
friend to all because of the good judgement he contributed
to our work. In like manner I am grateful to the
representatives of Japan, the Soviet Union and the United
States, and our esteemed President, the representative of
Poland, as well as to the representatives of Burundi, France
and Belgium, for their very cordial and friendly words
concerning me and my conduct as Chairman. I appreciate
it; they have greatly honoured me.

24. We know beyond any doubt that there are profound
causes for this insecurity, I already said so in July and I
repeat today: it is caused by a situation which we all know
and of which Portugal, as much as every one of us, must
become conscious. In order to put an end to that
insecurity , to restore peace, our African experience tells us
that there is a means: that is to recognize for the people of
Guinea (Bissau) the possibility of pronouncing itself on its
own destiny, Portugal enjoys in the world and particularly
in Africa a capital of sufficient confidence to be able
without fear to take this course, which, we have no doubt,
would open up for it perspectives of new and lasting
friendships with the populations concerned as well as with
the African spokesmen.

31. Every opportunity will be very propitious for me to
reiterate my gratitude to the representative of France,
Mr. Kosciusko-Morizet, for the confidence he placed in me
when he was President of the Security Council during the
month of July by designating me a member and Chairman
of the Special Mission. To this honour I associate the
satisfaction of having sharedsuch important responsibilities
with such eminent ambassadors as those of Poland, Belgium, Burundi, Japan and Syria.

25. The draft resolution submitted to us gives’an account
of all these concerns. No doubt one could make reserv+
lions or might criticize certain points-a resolution is never
perfect, However, the text, as drafted and with the
amendments introduced into it, for which we are most
grateful to the Ambassador of Burundi, his African colleagues and the Ambassador of Senegal, seemsto us to give
at1 exact account of the situation and to advocate the
course which should be followed. It is for this reason that
France is happy to lend its support to the draft resolution
which is before us.

32. I am grateful to all of them, recalling that it was
exactly four months ago, on 24 July last, that we left fdr
Senegal, honoured by the mission entrusted to us and very
much aware that we would discharge our duties with a
genuine sense of responsibility for the prestige of this
forum of international peace and security.

26. Mr. SEVILLA-SACASA
(Nicaragua) (interpretation
fio~fom
Spanish): In the draft resolution of the representatives

33. I reiterate that I shal1 vote in favour of the draft
resolution with the proposed amendments.
3

34. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): The report of
the Special Mission to Senegal has already been praised by
several speakers. My delegation fully shares the sentiments
which have been expressed and thanks the members of the
Mission for the way they have discharged their difficult
task. Evidently much credit must be given to its sage
guidance by its Chairman, Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa, to
whom we pay tribute,
35. The Mission is also to be congratulated on arriving at a
unanimous report. Clearly, this was not easy. And I would
observe in this respect that the work of translation from the
original and authentic French text showshow difficult it is
to bring out all the nuances, However, they did achieve
unanimity.

42, For those reasons we strongly condemn the Portu.
guese authorities for their aggression against the Republic
of’ Senegal and their brutal suppression of the people of
Guinea (Bissau) who are fighting for national independence.

36. The conclusions and recommendations are broadly
acceptable to my delegation. We regard the draft resolution
before us as being on the same lines as the report and its
recommendations and we shall, therefore, vote for it,
37. In some respects the draft resolution appears to go
beyond the cautious findings of the Special Mission, and in
this connexion we would have preferred operative paragraph 4 (b) to refer to all acts of violence and destruction
against the territory and people of Senegal, by whomsoever
committed. Nevertheless, the amendments which the
sponsors of the draft resolution accepted to paragraph 4,
and for which we are most grateful, bring this paragraph
more into accordance with what we regard as the intentions
of the members of the Special Mission.
38. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from FuenchJ: If no
other representatives wish to speak in explanation of vote
before the vote, the Security Council will now proceed to
vote on the draft resolution cbntained in document
S/l 0395 as amended.

43. We support the draft resolution submitted by Burundi,
Sierra Leone and Somalia, but in view of the past recordof
the Portuguese authorities we must harbour no illusions as
to the actual result of this resolution. The nature of the
colonialists will never change. Who can ensure that this
resolution will not meet the same fate as the previous
resolutions that have met only with contempt, resistance
and sabotage from the Portuguese colonialists? Who can
ensure that the colonialists will cease their aggressionand
destructive activities against the territory and people of
Senegal?
44. The Chinese Government and people resolutely support the peoples of Senegal, Guinea (Bissau), AngoIa and
Mozambique in their just struggle to win or safeguard
national independence, Their struggles have the broad
sympathy and support of all countries and peoples oppop
ing colonialism. We firmly believe that their struggle will
finally be victorious.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

1n favour: Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France,
Italy, Japan, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Syrian Arab Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

4.5. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): As has been
previously stated, the United States Government strongly
supported the essenceof the draft resolution, and although
we should have preferred slightly different language, the
United States Government could have gone along with and
supported almost the entire draft resolution as presented.
However, it had difficulty with some of the language of the
draft resolution, and with certain omissions to which we
referred at this morning’s meeting. In view of that difficulty
we were obliged to abstain in the vote on the draft
resolution as a whole.

Against: None.
Abstentions:

41. We have noted, too, that the Portuguese authorities
have also perpetrated armed aggression against the ten+
tories of the Republic of Guinea, the United Republic of
Tanzania and the Republic of Zambia, They have carried
out violent repression of the struggle of the peoples of
Guinea (Bissau), Angola and Mozambique for national
independence. In collusion with the white colonialist rulers
of South Africa and Southern Rhodesia, they have actively
carried out a policy of racial discrimination, The facts prove
that the colonial policy practised by the Portuguese
authorities is a threat to the sovereignty and security of he
independent African States, a challenge to the nations]
independence rights of the African peoples and a grave
violation of the spirit of the United Nations Charter.

United States of America.

The draft resolution was adopted by I4 votes to none,
with 1 abstention, 2

39. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I shall
now call on those representatives who wish to explain their
votes,

46. Operative paragraph 2 constituted for us a particularly
difficult problem, one which I explained in some detail and
which from past discussions is well known to members of
this Council, In view of our inability to achieve the changes
we sought-and I want to thank those who respondedto
our request this morning and permitted us to have the
opportunity and time to attempt to work something
out-the United States delegation found it necessaryto
abstain in the vote.

40. Mr. HLJANG HUA (China) (translated porn Chinese):
The Portuguese authorities have for a number of years
repeatedly committed armed aggrdssion against the Republic of Senegal and threatened the territorial integrity
and national security of that country. It has caused great
loss of life among the Senegalesepeople, thereby creating a
state of tension endangering the peace in that region.

47. Mr, ISSRAELYAN
2 Seeresolution 302 (1971),

(Union of Soviet Socialist Repub-

lies) (translated from Russian): The Soviet delegation has
4

frequently stated the Soviet Union’s fundamental position
with regard to the continuing acts of aggression committed
by the Portuguese colonialists against the African States of
Senegal, Guinea, the United Republic of Tanzania and
Zambia, The Soviet delegation has also stated its point of
view regarding the reasons for this, and regarding the
necessarysteps which must be taken by the United Nations
to put an end to the aggressive policy of the Portuguese
colonialists. From this point of view it seems to the Soviet
1 delegation that the resolution just adopted by the Security
; Council is weak and not sufficiently effective; it was
weakened even further in the course of the consultations
which took place between the morning and the afternoon
meetings, in particular by the deletion from the original
text of the draft resolution of a reference to a historic
document, the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, a document which
is generally recognized to have played an extremely
important role in the struggle of the peoples of the colonial
Territories against imperialism,
colonialism and neo.
colonidism.
48. However, in view of the fact that the sponsors of the
resolution-the delegations of Burundi, Sierra Leone and
Somalia, and also the deIegation of Senegal, as was clear
from the statement of the Ambassador of Burundi-agreed
to the amendments proposed to the original text of the
draft resolution, the Soviet delegation felt that it was able
to vote in favour of the resolution.
49. Mr. MIGLIUOLO
(Italy): We conclude today our
consideration of a complaint by Senegal which the Council
began to consider four months ago, in July, when it decided
to set up a Special Mission to carry out the necessary
investigations. We read the report of the Special Mission
with attention and great interest, I should like to join in the
praise of the report which has been expressed by previous
speakers. It is a well documented report, written with skill
and impartiality, and it shows the great amount of work
done by the Special Mission to gather relevant information,
We are indebted to the members of the Mission, the
representatives of Belgium, Burundi, Japan, Poland and the
Syrian Arab Republic, and particularly to Ambassador
SeviIla-Sacasa of Nicaragua, who led the Mission to its
successful conclusion.
50. The success of the Mission would not have been
possible without the efficient assistance of the Senegalese
authorities. The Government of Senegal deserves praise for
having readily accepted the decision of the Security Council
to dispatch a Special Mission to the site of the incidents and
for having provided it with full co-operation in the
fulfdment of its task. We only regret that it was not
possible for the Mission to complete its work with an
investigation on the Guinea (Bissau) side of the border; the
more so since it appears from the letter of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Portugal dated 29 September 1971
/s/10343] that the Government of Portugal had some
information to convey to the Council which would have
been given more weight if it had been properly investigated
by the Mission,

in paragraph 123 of the report that “it is clear that it is a
strict principle of the foreign policy of the Republic of
Senegal to avoid any engagement with Portuguese forces
other than for the actual defence of its territory”, and in
paragraph 114 that “On its tour of the border on the
Senegalese side, the Special Mission sawno fortifications or
artillery pieces in the area covered by it”. And further on,
in paragraph 127, the report affirms that the frontier
between Senegal and Guinea (Bissau) is “an area in which,
according to the observations of the Mission, PAIGC is not
engaging in any military activity”,
52. The second fact is that the acts of violence and
destruction are, according to paragraph 127 of the report,
the responsibility of Portuguese forces in Guinea (Bissau)
and are “the consequence of the special situation prevailing” in that territory. This special situation is an
anachronistic one, due to costly efforts to preserve against
the tide of history a form of domination whose colonial
nature no verbal definition or formal qualification can
conceal. It is a situation from which no body derives any
benefit; rather it is contrary to the interests of Portugal and
of the African populations concerned, which should be
allowed to exercise freely their right to self-determination,
53. The resolution which has just been adopted and which
was very ably drafted by the sponsors is based entirely on
the report of the Special Mission and duly takes into
account the two main facts that I have mentioned. My
delegation, which endorses the purpose of the resolution,
has therefore cast its vote for it.
54. We wish to avail ourselves of this opportunity to
express the hope that the Government of Portugal will
secure the utmost restraint from the authorities of Guinea
(Bissau) in order to avoid a repetition of the actions which
brought violence, destruction and death to the territory of
a peaceful neighbour. In fact, we have learned with great
concern of new incidents that allegedly occurred after the
publication of the report of the Special Mission.
55, Mr, JOUEJATI (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
porn French): This morning my delegation had the honour
to announce that it would support the draft resolution
submitted by our eminent African colleagues, We have just
voted in favour of that text, which now becomes a decision
of the Security Council. However, we should like to give
some clarification with respect to paragraph 6.
56. This afternoon the paragraph was amended so as to
omit mention of the modalities for the exercise of the right
of self-determination by Guinea (Bissau), modalities which
are perfectly explicit in the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) concerning the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. This omission would have called for serious
reservations. But, since the resolution in its operative
paragraph 2 “Takes note with satisfaction of the recommendations of the Special Mission” and, on the other hand,
the Special Mission recommended in its report respect for
the principle of self-determination and independence with
regard to Guinea (Bissau), a principle which is defined in
particular by General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), we
did not hesitate to vote in favour of the draft resolution, in

Sl , The report gives clear evidence of two main facts. The
first is that Senegal is firmly committed to peace. We read
5

the conviction that those provisions of resolution
1514 (XV) would remain fully in force to govern the
exercise of the right of self-determination by the people of
Guinea (Bissau).

by the Lisbon Government with the decisions of the
representatives of the world community.
Point of order raised by the representative
of the United Kingdom

57. Mr. SEVILLA-SACASA (Nicaragua) (interpretation
Spanish): I should like to state first that the
resolution we have just adopted, being based on the
recommendations of the Special Mission, represents a
gesture of recognition of the task accomplished by the six
members of the Mission. At the same time, I should like to
express to our colleagues, the Ambassador of the United
Kingdom and the representative of Italy, my gratitude for
their generous words about me personally and about my
activities,

65. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Frenchj: I call
on the representative of the United Kingdom on a point of
order.

from

66. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): I am raisinga
point of order on the assumption that we have fmished our
business for today,
67. I have asked for permission to speak on this point of
order to refer to the request which I made for a meeting of
the Council at 11.30 tomorrow morning, or as soon as
possible thereafter, in connexion with the matter of which
the Security Council is seized concerning the situation in
Southern Rhodesia. The text of the letter containing that
request has been circulated as document S/10396.

58. I should like to take advantage of the fact that you
have called upon me, Mr, President, to ask you to transmit
to the Secretary-General our cordial greetings and the good
wishesof all of us for his prompt recovery.
59. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): It will
be a pleasure for me to transmit to the Secretary-General
the kind wishes that the representative of Nicaragua has
asked me to convey to him,

68. Rule 2 of the Security Council’s provisional rules of
procedure provides that “The President shall call a meeting
of the Security Council at the request of any member of
the Security Council,”

60. I call on the representative of Senegal.
69. I know, Sir, that you have consulted all the other
members of the Council in connexion with the request to
which I referred. It was my assumption in making that
request that all members of the Council would wish to hear
a full statement from me, as soon as I was in a position to
make one, explaining the details of the agreed proposals
designed to achieve a settlement of the Rhodesian problem
which were signed in Salisbury yesterday, Indeed, through,
out this last week in the United Nations, in numbers of
Committees, we have continually had requests addressedto
us for information on precisely what washappening. It was
for that reason that I asked for a meeting of this Council to
coincide as closely as possible with the time when the
United Kingdom Parliament itself will be informed.

61, Mr. FALL (Senegal) (interpretation from French): On
behalf of my Government, I should like to thank all the
members of the Security Council that have supported my
country in this time of test and challenge through which
the population of Senegal in the region of Casamance is at
present living.
62. It is true that the text of the resolution is relatively
weak: doubtless my Government would have preferred a
firmer attitude on the part of the Council. Portugal’s
permanent defiance of the international community is
clearly a threat to peace and security. However, it was
necessary to take into account the various considerations
expressed by individual members of the Security Council.
We refused to compromise on one point-that which
explicitly condemned Portugal.

70. I should like to know now whether my assumption
was correct; or, if not, which members of the Council
object to meeting tomorrow for this purpose. If anyone
objects, perhaps he should make a formal objection,

63. We clearly understand that it was not possible for
those who buried mines on Senegalese territory to leave
their visiting cards behind them, Nevertheless, the members
of the Special Mission were able to determine that no
military facilities exist in Senegal that could bring about the
destruction to be found in the Casamance region, It was
clear that any military elements capable of causing such
destruction could come solely from Guinea (Bissau),
Whether they belong to the Portuguese Army, or whether
they belong to uncontrolled bands, as claimed by Portugal,
it is nonetheIess clear that the authority responsible
officially and in practice for that area is the Portuguese
Government,

71, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): Does
any delegation wish to speak on this?
72. Mr. ISSRAELYAN

(Union of Soviet Socialist Repub.

lies)(translatedfrom Russian):Mr, President, I understand

the position to be as follows: it is proposed that we discuss
an item on the agenda of the Security Council, that item
being the situation in Southern Rhodesia. If that is the case,
the Soviet delegation is ready to discussthe question of the
date for a meeting to consider this matter with YOU and
with the other members of the Security Council. As 1
understand it, we are not considering convening a special
meeting of the Security Council in order to listen te
information on the results of the visit of a statesman o,fo*le
country to one of that country’s colonies, That is not hew
we understand the situation, There is no precedent for it
and we should not create one. All sorts of visits take Place,

64. We understand, of course, that Portugal has friends
that hesitate to express themselves against the Portuguese
Government, and to condemn its Government. But we
should like to ask those friends of Portugal to use their ties
of friendship in order to bring about a greater acquiescence
6

and all sorts of talks are held, and the Security Council is
not convened just to listen to information from one
delegation or another as to the results of such visits.

matter clear. Perhaps the representatives of France and
Nicaragua did not understand me quite correctly. I should
like to repeat that the Soviet delegation does not object to
discussing the question of the situation in Southern
Rhodesia at any time when it is considered useful to do so
as a resuIt of consultations between members of the
Council. I repeat: the question of the situation in Southern
Rhodesia.

73. I should therefore like to make it quite clear that if we
are talking about discussing the question of the situation in
Southern Rhodesia exactly as formulated in the agenda of
the Security Council, then we are prepared to discuss both
the date on which that meeting should be held and the
time, and we have no objections. I should like to have your
reply on this point.

82. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): In order to
facilitate any consultations that might take place, I wish to
say that our delegation has no objection whatsoever to
meeting in accordance with the letter that was circulated by
Sir Colin Crowe.

74. Mr, KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation
Finn? French): I do not quite understand the objective of
this discussion. There is an item on the Security Council’s
agenda concerning the situation in Rhodesia, which we will
be discussing; on the other hand, there is the request which
has been made by the representative of the United
Kingdom, As Sir Colin Crowe stated, any member of the
Security Council, on the basis of rule 2 of the rules of
procedure, may ask for a meeting of the Security Council
and make a statement at such a meeting. That is the way I
understood the request of the British delegation.

83. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Earlier this week, on Monday
in fact, the Security Council Committee on sanctions met
to discuss an aspect of the question of Southern Rhodesia.
It had been hoped that following that meeting it would be
possible to arrange for a report to be submitted to the
Security Council so that the Council would be seized of the
question of Southern Rhodesia by the end of this week or
by Monday or Tuesday of next week at the latest.

75. I would add that, for us, the question is of great
importance; I believe it is of interest to all members of the
Council without exception; and it would be rare even for a
member of the Security Council to be so courteous as to
make a statement to the Council at the same time as a
similar statement was being made in his Parliament.

84. As the members of the Council know, the fourth
report of the sanctions Committee is still waiting to be
discussed by this Council, The statement to which the
representative of the United Kingdom has referred is
important and pertinent to the question of Southern
Rhodesia as a whole. Now we do not know what that
statement contains, but if it is of the dimensions now being
talked about in the press,it will naturally provoke a debate
immediately.

76. In any case, I think that all the members of the
Security Council will be interested in what the representative of the United Kingdom will say, Whatever our
individual judgement on what will be said, we shall, as a
result of it, have a greater amount of information available
to US on the subject of Rhodesia, as our Soviet colleague
pointed out.

85. For that reason one would have thought that the time
to be allocated for the consideration of such an important
statement should be such as to allow the Council to enter
into an immediate debate. Perhaps the representative of the
United Kingdom could inform us whether the statement he
intends to make relates to the Southern Rhodesia question
and is a recommendation which his Government intends to
place before the United Kingdom Parliament, or whether it
is a decision which in any event will go forward. Our work
will depend on the outcome of such a statement.

77. Consequently, as far as the French delegation is
concerned, we are in favour of hearing our British colleague
as SOOII as possible. If I am not mistaken, he would&e to
be heard tomorrow towards the end of the morning, We can
see only advantages in this procedure.
78. Mr, SEVILLA-SACASA

(Nicaragua) (interpretation

86. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): It will be a
substantive statement, I cannot say what is in it before my
Secretary of State makta his statement in the House. It will
concern Southern Rhodesia and it will be a matter of
interest to the Council, I am quite sure, I agree that it may
well indeed lead to debate in the Council. But perhaps for
that very reason members of the Council might like to hear
and consider what I have to say, and then proceed to a
debate at a future time. I do not imagine that it will all be
completed in the course of one meeting. But, given that this
is a matter that is on the agenda of the Security Council
and, indeed, on the agenda of a number of Committees in
the United Nations, given that the representative of the
Soviet Union is prepared to have a meeting about Southern
Rhodesia at any time, I would have thought that the
Security Council would not wish to be shown to be so
uninterested in the subject that it did not want to acquire
as accurate information as possible from a source which is
well qualified to give the information as to what is and will
evidently be an important new development.

from Spanish): I wish to say that I have no objection to
acceding to the request of the representative of the United
Kingdom-that
is, that we should meet tomorrow morning
at 11 o’clock, as announced,
79. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French): I
should like to point out that we have not yet formally
concluded our consideration of the item which is now on
the agenda; that is to say, the complaint of Senegal.
80. The representative of the United Kingdom has raised
the question of Rhodesia. After receiving this morning the
letter from that representative-which has been distributed
to all the members of the Council-I undertook consultations. Those consultations are continuing. I shall inform
members of the Council of the results as soon as they are
completed,
81.

Mr. ISSRAELYAN

lies) [translated

from

(Union of Soviet Socialist RepubI should like to make the

Russian):

7

87. Therefore I felt, as a courtesy indeed to the Council,
that rather than receiving press reports here and there, in
bits and pieces, the Council would wish to have an
authoritative statement of what in fact had taken place..
88, Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
porn Spanish): Frankly, I do not understand the meaning
of the debate which is beginning to develop in the Council.
89. We frequently hear, in this Council chamber and
elsewhere in the Organization, criticisms because delegations are informed of what happens in the rest of the world
through the press rather than through the official sourcesof
information at the United Nations, This is the first
opportunity we have to hear what has happened-and it
may be very important-from
the representative of the
country which has carried out the negotiations in Salisbury.
I believe that no one could have more authority than he to
report to-us, and I think that from every point of view it is
in the interest of the Council to hear what he has to say. In
any case, my delegation is the first to place on record that
we have the greatest interest in hearing the information
which Sir Colin Crowe has presented to us. This, of course,
does not mean that other problems relating to Rhodesiaand there may be several-will not be considered and dealt
with by the Council in due course, The Security Council
Committee on sanctions concerning Southern fiodesia is
meeting. It has still not compIeted its debate in regard to an
initiative which led to its meeting on Monday of this week.
The report of that Committee has to be submitted to the
Security Council for consideration. Therefore, I do not see
what there is to prevent us from having another element on
the basis of which to pronounce judgement, and if the
Security Council believes it necessary to have a debate, we
can have it when the time comes.

94, We maintain that if we begin to discuss the question of
Southern Rhodesia, we should discuss it in all its’complexity and not break off. Sir Colin Crowe’s request, if I
understand his letter correctly, is that we convenea
meeting of the Council at 11.30; we must sayquite frankly
that it is a rather unusual time and naturally we shall not be
able to do any more than hear one statement. After that, of
course, the meeting will adjourn and we shall not be ableto
discussthe whole of this vast and important problem,
95. That is why the Soviet delegation thought that if we
were to begin tomorrow, we should discuss the problem as
a whole, leaving aside other questions which ought to be
discussed, or that we should agree on some other procedure
which would be acceptable to all members of the Council.
96. Mr. TERENCB
(Burundi) (interpretation from
French): It seems that by trying to be so very specific we

90. For all those reasons my delegation supports at once
the convening of the meeting, and so that the President will
have no difficulty in consulting my delegation, I wish to
announce that I am very much in agreement that we meet
tomorrow morning at 11.30.

run the risk of complicating the problem. As far as the
delegation of Burundi is concerned, we feel that the
customary procedure should be applied, namely, that when
any delegation requests a meeting of the Security Council
for valid reasons which warrant the request, the Cound
should meet.

91. Mr. ISSRAELYAN

(Union of Soviet Socialist RepubI apologize for speaking
once again on this matter, but, as everybody knows, of
course, it was not I who raised the question. I think that we
should keep to the procedure usually followed in the
Security Council, whereby questions of this type are
resolved by consultations, which you have conducted very
successfully and well, but since the representative of the
United Kingdom has placed the matter before the Security
Council, I must return to it once again.
lics) (translated

93. It is therefore the opinion of the Soviet delegation
that the question of the situation in Southern Rhodesia
should be discussed and that available Security Council
material should be considered, including, first and foremost, the fourth report of the Committee on sanctions.
Any member of the Council, including, of course, the
representative of the United Kingdom may provide any
information or make any statement he wishes. We shali
listen to him as we listen to all other members of the
Security Council. But what the Soviet delegation objects to
is limiting the meeting just to information about one
particular aspect of a vast problem which is being cork.
sidered by the Security Council, I repeat-and here 1 wish
to reply to the remarks made by the Ambassador of
Argentina-the Soviet delegation does not object to holding
a meeting tomorrow, We only object to being limited
merely to hearing information relating to private talks of
any kind whatsoever.

from Russian):

97. On the other hand, it is my impression that in this case
there is a risk of putting the cart before the horse. It seem
to me, indeed, that we could hear the representative of the
United Kingdom but at the same time proceed with the
discussion of the problem of Rhodesia as such. I believe
that we should not get lost in rather complex details.
Actually, the request of the representative of the United
Kingdom is warranted, and as a result of the consultations
which you intend to hold, Mr. President, the request will be
met as early as he wishes.

92. The representative of Somalia rightly referred in his
statement to the fact that the fourth report of the Security
Council Committee on sanctions awaits consideration by
the Security Council, We have not yet had the opportunity
to consider it. It seems to me therefore that we should
consider this document, too, or rather, that we should
consider this very important document first at the Security
Council meeting to discuss the question of the situation in
Southern Rhodesia. As everybody sitting behind this table
knows full well, other problems have arisen recently in
connexion with Southern Rhodesia which we cannot
ignore.

98. I would therefore propose that we adhere to t1.e
following method: you, Mr.President, should proceed to
hold consultations, and the results of your consultations
would then enable us to hear the representative of the
United Kingdom, Summarizing my position in a few words,
my delegation does not object in any way to the requestof
the United Kingdom,
99. Furthermore, the representative of the United fig
dom did not-or at least that is how it would seemfrom the
8

statement he made-wish to separate what he has to say
from the remainder of the discussion of the problem of
Rhodesia in general,
100. Finally, I think it is incumbent on the President to
proceed to consultations, as is customary, and to convene a
meeting of the Security Council as soon as possible, as
requested by the representative of the United Kingdom.
101, Mr. MIGLIUOLO
(Italy): Mr. President, when one of
your aides kindly consulted my delegation about the
request of the representative of the United Kingdom my
delegation said that it did not see any objection to the
convening of the Security Council tomorrow morning. In
order to facilitate your consultations, I want to repeat that
we consider that request to be fully consistent with the
spirit and the letter of rule 2 of the rules of procedure, I
will not expatiate on the reasons, because I would simply
be paraphrasing what has been eloquently said by
Mr. Kosciusko-Morizet and Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, I would add
that we regard as a courtesy the gesture of the Government
of the United Kingdom in informing the United Nations at
the same time as it informs its Parliament, but this is not
the only reason why we are in favour of a meeting
tomorrow.

this regard it is only natural that we should receive any
information which it considers important enough to give us.
However, in order to meet this particular problem, I would
suggest that in our agenda for tomorrow we should try to
refer to the question as the “Resumption of consideration
of the question of Southern Rhodesia”, and then under
that heading there would be three sub-items: (a) Communication from or statement by the representative of the
United Kingdom; (b) Fourth report of the Committee on
sanctions; and (c) Any other matters.
105, Mr, LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) (interpretation from
French): I might say that I am experiencing some difficulty
in understanding the practical scope of this debate. We have
heard a request made by our British colleague ‘that we meet
tomorrow to hear a statement on a matter which has been
on the agenda of the Council for quite some time, I think
that the rules of procedure confirm that we must accede to
the request of our British colleague and listen to him. As I
just said the Council has been seized with this matter for a
long time, Moreover, it has been discussed by certain
committees of the Assembly; even the Committee on
sanctions has met on the subject. Consequently, we should
grant this request and hear what the representative of the
United Kingdom will tell us on the latest developments.
Quite clearly, following the communication and statement
a wider debate will take place. This is serious, but what we
should do first is to hear what the British representative
wishes to say, That would be a simple matter of common
sense, of courtesy to him. Consequently I should like it to
be recorded that we are in favour of a meeting of the
Council to hear Sir Colin Crowe. Then we shall wait for
further developments,

102. My Government, whose support for decolonization is
very well known, will certainly be interested to know what
the United Kingdom has to say in this forum on such an
important subject. I may add that the Security Council can
always decide tomorrow whether to confine itself to
listening to the statement by Sir Colin Crowe or immediately proceed to a debate-whether to continue the debate
on the statement or on the whole problem or to couple it
wit11
the report of the Committee on sanctions, regarding
which,
as far as my delegation knows, there has been no
request for urgent consideration. The Council is master of
its own procedures and it will be in a position to take the
appropriate decisions after the statement of Sir Colin
Crowe tomorrow.

106. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): As I made
clear to you earlier today, I have absolutely no objection to
the report of the Committee on sanctions being included in
the agenda. Indeed I would accept the agenda proposed by
the representative of Somalia.

107. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
think that we are having official consultations.

103. Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan): My delegation also wishes
to associate itself with the statements of a number of
previous speakers by saying that we are interested in
hearing at first hand and at the first possible opportunity
what the United Kingdom Government has to say on the
problem of Rhodesia and what the Foreign Secretary has
achieved in his talks with the Rhodesian authorities. I
believe that the representative of the Soviet Union is not
against that idea at all either. As far as I can gather, the
main point is how to phrase the item to be put on the
agenda tomorrow morning, I think it is for you, Mr. President, to decide how to phrase this item. So I do not think
there should be much difficulty in concluding this debate
promptly,

108. Mr. SAVAGE (Sierra Leone): My delegation was of
the opinion that the point of order raised by the United
Kingdom representative was adequately dealt with in your
statement, Mr, President, to the effect that the usual
consultations were going on. The delegation of Sierra Leone
would have absolutely no problem in listening to what the
British representative would have to tell us. But I agree with
you, Mr. President, that the usual consultations need to be
held and my delegation relies on you in this matter.
109. Mr. ORITZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
porn Spanish): It seems to me that the Counci* in its
wisdom has spared the President the task of holding
consultations, because the majority of its members have
already pronounced themselves, From what has been said it
seems clear that there is no objection to hearing the
statement of the representative of the United Kingdom, a
statement which promises to be extremely interesting.

104. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): First of all, I should like to
make it perfectly clear that my delegation does not in any
way oppose the United Kingdom representative’s imparting
to this Council information
relating to the Southern
Rhodesian question. In fact, all along my delegation has felt
that the responsibility
for the welfare and the future of the
people of Southern Rhodesia rests squarely on the
shoulders of the United Kingdom Government, and that in

110. With regard to what appears to be a slight problem of
form, that is, the wording of the agenda, rule 7 of our rules
9

of procedure states that: “The provisional agenda for each
meeting of the Security Council is drawn up by the
Secretary-General and approved by the President of the
Security Council.” So that the question is in the hands of
the Secretary-General, who will draw up the agenda, which
you must then approve, Mr. President. If you agree, the
consultations have taken place and the only thing remaining
is to decide when the meeting is to be convened, which, in
principle it had been thought would be 11:30 a.m. That is
acceptable to my delegation. The question of the agenda
being left to the discretion of the President, depending on
what the Secretary-General proposes, and perhaps even
taking into account the suggestion of our friend Mr. Farah,
the problem could be settled and we would all go home
satisfied after a good day’s work.
111. Mr. ISSRAELYAN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translatedji-om Russian): As I understand it, we all

agree on the need to convene the Security Council to
discuss the situation in Southern Rhodesia, at which time
statements will be heard and information provided in
accordance with established practice. And I think that all
members of the Council would certainly be surprised if,
shall we say, the Soviet delegation proposed or requested
that a meeting of the Security Council should be held
merely in order to inform the Security Council of the
rest&s, let us say, of talks between Mr. Brezhnev and Mr.
Pompidou. I think that that would be very interesting but it
would hardly be a reason for convening a meeting of the
Security Council.

representative of the United Kingdom, which consistsin
making a communication on a subject which interests 1%
Let us hear it. Later, if anyone wishes it we can have a
debate. We, who are probably slower than others, will take
time out to think and endeavour to examine the document
but obviously afterwards every delegation can speak freely
to any point with regard to the problem as a whole. I really
think that, as my colleague from Argentina has said, there is
no difficulty at all. We trust you, Mr, President, to convene
a meeting as appropriate to hear our colleague from the
United Kingdom,
116. Mr.

TERENCE -’ (Burundi) (interpretation fiorn
you could perhaps bring this
discussion to a conclusion. My delegation repeats that it has
no objection to the substance, as presented by the
representative of the United Kingdom. Hence, it is for the
President to inform us of the evolution of the question and
to convene a meeting on a suitable date and hour in
accordance with the request of the representative of the
Uliited Kingdom and possibilities of the President.
French): Mr. Preiident,

117. Since we have been given additional clarification by
the representative of the United Kingdom, who, as I
understand it, does in no way seek to disassociate his
statement from the discussion of the problem of Rhodesia
as a whole, my delegation has no difficulties in regard to
either the substance or the procedure,
118. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
Porn Spanish):I shall be very brief, Even though it appears

112. The attitude of the Soviet Union is that the meeting
is being convened not in order to listen to information, but’
in order to continue the discussion of a question which is
on the agenda and that a statement will be made in that
connexion by one of the members of the Security Council.
I really see no reason for argument, since in Sir Colin’s
letter it says in fact that this is “a matter of which the
Security Council is seized concerning the situation in
Southern Rhodesia” /S/l 03961. A completely clear question. As for how it should be formulated, I think that will
also present no difficulty. We have an item: “Question
concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia”. We are
going to discussit and naturally we are also going to discuss
the report of the Committee on sanctions which is available
to us and expressany opinions we wish,

that we are all in agreement, you are still being requested,
Mr. President, to consult us as to the date and hour, For my
part, frankly, I would wish to be informed of the report of
the representative of the United Kingdom by him and not
by l%e New York Times. That is why it would be
interesting to hear him tomorrow at the same time as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs will be reporting to Parliament
that is to say, tomorrow morning at 11.30. Otherwise, I
shall have to read one of the local newspapersto find out
only in part what the statement is.
119. For my part I formally ask whether there is any
objection by members of the Council to our meeting at
11.30 tomorrow morning, with the agenda that you will
decide upon in accordance with rule 7 of the provisional
rules of procedure,

113, I also support the proposal made by the Somali
Ambassador and think that the rest of the business can be
settled in the course of the consultations which you are
already conducting, Mr, President, on the matte1 today,

120. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French:
Since there are no more names on the list of speakers,
perhaps I might try to summarize this discussion and the
official consultations we have had instead of the informal
consultations we have as a rule. I think that on the basisof
the discussion we have had today, there is one thing on
which the members of the Council agree; that is, to take uP
consideration of the situation in Southern Rhodesia and
hear the representative of the United Kingdom.

114. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET (France) (interpretation
from French): Although many of the points discussedby
President Pompidou and Mr, Brezhnev would be of great
interest to the Council, most fortunately relations between
France and the USSR are not of the same kind as the
relations between the United Kingdom and Southern
Rhodesia.

121. As our colleagues from Argentina and Burundi
correctly suggested, the question of the date and hour of
the meeting can be the subject of consultations to be held
immediately after the adjournment of this meeting; we will,
of course, bear in mind the proposal of the representative
of the United Kingdom that we meet.

115. With regard to the position of my delegation I would
simply say that we are open to any debate on the entire
problem, But now there is a gesture of courtesy, which is
furthermore unusual, for which we are grateful to the
10

L

122. There remains the question of deciding on the
agenda, and I am ready to consult those delegations that
have suggestions to make on the subject immediately after
this meeting is adjourned.

128. Mr. FARAH (Somalia):I doubt whether the Security
Council hasever met on time sinceit wasestablished,and if
we set the meeting for 10.30 a.m. we can be pretty sure
that we shallnot beginuntil 11.30 a.m. So for that reasonI
would suggestthat we maintain our traditions of the past
25 years, schedule the meeting for 10.30, and begin
at 11.30.

123. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
porn Spanish): Perhaps my formal proposal was not clear-I
proposed that you, Mr. President, consult us here and now;
in other words, that you ask the members of the Council
whether they object to meeting tomorrow at 11.30 a.m. to
consider the question of Southern Rhodesia-that is, to
hear the United Kingdom representative.
124. As regards the agenda, I reiterate that there seems to
be no problem, since the agenda will be the one which, in
accordance with rule 7 of the rules of procedure, the
Secretariat will draft with your approval. You, Mr.President, will pass on the agenda.
125. Furthermore, we gather from the exchange of ideas
we have had that there appears to be no difficulty with
regard to the agenda. This has been settled. What I wish to
know is whether we will meet tomorrow at 11.30, and that
was why I made my formal proposal that you ask the
members of the Council that question.
126, The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
had not, in fact, understood the substanceof the proposal
that the representative of Argentina, hasjust repeated.
127. Mr. ISSRAELYAN

(Union of Soviet SocialistRepub-

lics) (translated from Russian): I am sorry but ‘it seemsto
me that that sounds like some sort of an ultimatum to
settle immediately the question of the time at which the
Security Council meeting should start. I find this quite
incomprehensible. It must be pointed out that you suggested holding consultations after the end of this meeting,
in order to settle any unresolvedquestions.Weall agreedin
principle that we should meet and discussthe item which is
on
the agenda. The item on the agenda is called the
question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia.
We, the Soviet delegation, are perfectly ready to meet,
tomorrow perhaps, either at 10.30 or 11.30, or perhapswe
shall make a concessionto the other delegationsand meet
at 9 o’clock in the morning. I do not understandthis lack
of confidence in you, Mr. President. Why cannot consultations be held after the end of this meetingand a time fixed
for tomorrow’s meeting then? I should like to say to the
Argentine Ambassador that the requestto hold a meeting
of the Security Council at 11.30 is, you must agree,in itself
somewhat unusual. Meetings of the Security Council, like
those of other organs of the United Nations, usuallybegin
either at 10.30 or at the latest at 11. Obviously therefore, it
is somewhat confusing as to why it shouldbe 11.30 andnot
11.45 or 11.48. The time indicated is an unusualone;,that
is why the suggestion has been made that consultations
should be held under the guidanceof the Presidentof the
Security Council. I think that we can perfectly well do this
after the end of the meeting; we can talk and settle at what
time tomorrow’s Security Council meeting shouldbegin.
But to request that the question of when tomorrow’s
meeting should begin should be settled immediately,
without leaving this table, is simply unusualandthe request
seems somewhat strangeto me.
11

129. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
representative of Somaliahas put me in a rather difficult
situation as President, If I agreed with his proposal, it
would be tantamount to agreeingthat the Security Council
always meets one hour late. However, after this last
statement, I wonder whether the representativeof Argentina wishesto insistthat we adopt a decisionhere andnow
or whether he would not agreethat immediately after this
meeting riseswe should contact all the interested delegations and decide on the time of the meeting, which, I
believe everyone agrees,should be held tomorrow. We
could also decideon the termsof the agenda,if anyonehas
any suggestionsto make. It is, of course,for the SecretaryGeneral to draw up the agendaand for the Presidentof the
Security Councilto approveit and submitit to the Council.
If that procedureis acceptableto all the membersof the
Security Council, I am ready immediately after declaring
this meeting adjourned to hold consultations with any
representative,
130. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS, (Argentina) (interpretation
fiorn Spanish): I shouldcertainly be the last to think ,that I
could present an ultimatum to the Soviet Union, or to the
Security Council. Were I to do so, I would then be entering
the undesirableclub of the super-Powers.
131. As long aswe do hold a meetingtomorrow morning,
so as not to be obliged to get from the afternoon
newspapersa report on what the Minister for Foreign
Affairs will say in Parliament,the hour is indifferent to me,
and it remainsat the discretion of the Presidentto decide,
basedon the consultations.But, in principle I think that it
is desirable,asthe Presidenthasquite rightly pointed out,
to agree that we shall meet tomorrow morning, The only
matter remainingfor consultationswould be the hour, since
in regard to the agendathe Presidenthassaidthat he agrees
with the proposalI madeto the effect we apply rule 7 of
the provisional rulesof procedure.
132. Mr. ISSRAELYAN (Union of Soviet Socialist Repub(translated from Russian): I did not say that an
ultimatum was presented to the Soviet delegation, It
seemedto me that the situation wasmuch worse and that
the representativeof Argentina had presentedan ultimatum
to the Presidentof the Security Council..But sincehe hasso
graciously retracted the ultimatum, I can only welcomethe
fact and support his requestto continue consultationsafter
the end of the meeting.
lics)

133. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
think that all the %ltimatums” have disappearedand that
we are ready to accept the suggestionthat has emerged
following the last statement of the representativeof the
Soviet Union. If that is the case,memberswill permit me to
conclude with the item which is on the Council’sagendafor
today, Since no representativehas askedto speak on the

representative of the Soviet Union. I thought that the last
proposal was made by the representative of Argentina who
had spoken of a meeting tomorrow morning. I would ask
you to be kind enough to enlighten me on this point,

question which is on today’s agenda, I consider that the
consideration of this matter has been concluded. The
Council, however, remains seized of the question, in
conformity with the provisions of the resolution we have
just adopted,

136, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from FrenChjl In
order that we have absolute clarity on this question, I
understood tha.t the proposal of our Argentine colleague
concerning a meeting tomorrow morning had been accepted
by the representative of the Soviet Union and that all that
remained wasto set the hour for that meeting tomorrow.

134. I should like to repeat that I am at the disposal of my
colleagues of the Security Council for any consultations
that they would like to have with me after this meeting,
135. Mr.

MIGLIUOLO
(Italy) (interpretation
porn
I should simply like to ask for clarification.
Mr. President, you referred to the last proposal of the

French):

The meeting rose at 6.5 p.m.

12

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

Nations,

llOflYLIMTb

M3AAHMR

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

New York

be obtoined
or write

from
bookstores
to: United
Notions,

DES NATIONS

and

distributors
Sales
Section,

throughout
New York

UNIES

Nations
Unies
rant
en vente
dons
ler librairier
et les ogeocer
entier.
Informez-vous
oupris
de votre
librairie
ou edrerrez-vout
b:
des venter,
New York ou GenBve.

KAK

lor publicociones
en todas
porter
Ventaa,
Nuevo

in United

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva

Lea publications
des
dhpositairer
du monde
Notions
Unies,
Section

Litho

NATIONS

OPl-AHH3Al(LlLl

de las Nacioner
de1 mundo.
Conrulle
York o Ginebrq.

Price:

$U.S.

06bEAHHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES
Unidar
ertirn
o su librero

en venta
o dirijase

1.00 (or equivalent

HAui4fi

UNIDAS
en

librerias
(I: Nacioner

in other

y cost
distribuidoror
Unidor,
Seccibn

currencies)

de

82180-August

1973~2,050
