S/PRST/2018/19

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 December 2018
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 8415th meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 December 2018, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the progress made by the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) with its reconfiguration
as mandated in its resolution 2429 (2018) and reaffirms its commitment to
supporting the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and development
in Darfur. In this connection, the Security Council also welcomes the holding of
the High-Level Event on the Transition from Peacekeeping to Peacebuilding and
Development in Darfur on 28 September 2018.
“The Security Council welcomes the continued improvements in the
security situation across Darfur outside the Jebel Marra area, aided by the
deployment of Government security forces associated with the arms collection
campaign, as well as efforts by the Government and UNAMID to promote
peaceful resolution of intercommunal disputes. The Security Council
encourages the Government of Sudan to continue the implementation of the
civilian disarmament efforts as stipulated in the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur (DDPD) and in close coordination with UNAMID.
“The Security Council takes note that the handing over of some UNAMID
team sites to the Government of Sudan in line with of the resolutions 2363
(2017) and 2429 (2018) have been successfully completed, and that the process
is currently underway to hand over additional sites in accordance with resolution
2429 (2018). The Security Council requests UNAMID to ensure that team sites
and Mission assets are handed over in line with general UN practices and
financial rules and regulations. The Security Council encourage the Government
of Sudan to ensure these are utilised in line with agreements made between
UNAMID and the Government of Sudan. The Security Council recalls its
resolution 2429 (2018) and urges the Government of Sudan to ensure that
UNAMID has unfettered access throughout Darfur, including to the areas from
which it has withdrawn.
“The Security Council, whilst welcoming the announcement of unilateral
cessation of hostilities by the Government of Sudan and by armed movements,
including by the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdel Wahid (SLA-AW) for
humanitarian access remains concerned about the security and humanitarian
situation in the Jebel Marra area and thus urges all parties to adhere to their

18-21584 (E)

121218

*1821584*

S/PRST/2018/19

unilateral cessations of hostilities and to allow unhindered humanitarian access
to populations in need.
“The Security Council takes note of paragraph nine of the African Union
Peace and Security Council communique (PSC/PR/COMM.(DCCXCIV)). The
Security Council also recalls its resolutions 2429 (2018) in which it expressed
its intention to consider imposing additional measures against those who impede
the peace process.
“The Security Council recalls its request in its resolution 2429 (2018) for
the Secretary-General to provide a detailed and clearly benchmarked exit
strategy for UNAMID. The Security Council takes note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report of 12 October 2018 (S/2018/912), including the proposed
benchmarks and indicators of achievement. The Security Council acknowledges
that progress towards achieving the benchmarks and indicators will contribute
towards the successful transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in Darfur.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary General and invites the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission to provide detailed reporting on
the progress made towards achieving the benchmarks and indicators in the
regular 90-day reports. In this regard, the Security Council further requests
UNAMID and the United Nations Country Team (UNCT) to ensure robust
monitoring of progress against the benchmarks and indicators.
“The Security Council acknowledges that some of the proposed
benchmarks and indicators are of more immediate priority and that some reflect
longer-term peacebuilding objectives in Darfur. The Security Council further
requests the Secretary General and invites the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission to attach particular priority to progress against the benchmarks and
indicators focused on protection of civilians, particularly relating to internally
displaced persons and returning refugees, human rights, rule of law, the
humanitarian situation, and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR)in the 90-day reports and upcoming strategic review to help guide the
Security Council’s considerations on the future of UNAMID’s mandate.
“The Security Council recalls taking note in its resolution 2429 (2018) of
the recommendations of the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission in their Special Report (S/2018/530) (Special
Report), including the transition concept to be undertaken by UNAMID in
collaboration with the United Nations Country Team over a two -year period
with a view towards the exit of the Mission on 30 June 2020 and its liquidation
by December 2020, provided that there is no significant change in t he security
situation in Darfur and progress is made towards the achievement of key
indicators and benchmarks.
“The Security Council recalls its request in resolution 2436 (2018) that the
Secretary-General ensure that data related to the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations, including peacekeeping performance data, is used to improve
analytics and the evaluation of mission operations, based on clear and well
identified benchmarks for mandate implementation and emphasising the need to
regularly review all peacekeeping operations.
“The Security Council encourages UNAMID and the UNCT, in
co-ordination with relevant stakeholders, to ensure that their integrated
transition activities support efforts to make progress against the proposed
benchmarks and indicators, and with the implementation of the DDPD and the
Government of Sudan’s development plans. The Security Council requests that

2/3

18-21584

S/PRST/2018/19

as part of this planning, due regard is given to ensuring sufficient human and
financial resourcing is devoted to sustainable transition planning and activities.
“The Security Council notes that the benchmarks and indicators contain a
number of actions to be undertaken by the Government of Sudan and calls upon
the Government of Sudan to build upon the steps it has already tak en to
implement the DDPD by engaging constructively with UNAMID, the UNCT the
International Implementation Follow-up Committee (IFC) of the DDPD and
relevant national stakeholders towards significant improvement in the situation
in Darfur and progress towards the proposed benchmarks and indicators.
“The Security Council acknowledges the need for resource mobilisation to
ensure the achievement of the benchmarks and indicators, as well as for the
broader transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, develop ment and
sustaining peace in Darfur, including the continued implementation of the
DDPD. In this regard, the Security Council takes note of the potential role of
the Peacebuilding Fund. The Security Council encourages member states and
donors to participate in the pledging conference proposed during the High-Level
Event on the Transition from Peacekeeping to Peacebuilding and Development
in Darfur on 28 September 2018 and in the on-going refresh of the Darfur
Development Strategy (DDS).”

18-21584

3/3
