S/PV.8741

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8741

st meeting
Wednesday, 4 March 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wu Haitao. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Gonsalves
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Allen
Mr. Barkin
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2020/145)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-05763 (E)
*2005763*

S/PV.8741

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in South Sudan (S/2020/145)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. David
Shearer, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, and Ms. Betty Sunday, Coordinator of
the Women’s Monthly Forum on Peace and Political
Processes in South Sudan.
Mr. Shearer and Ms. Sunday are joining us via
video-teleconference from Juba.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2020/145, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Shearer.
Mr. Shearer: Often when I brief the Security
Council on South Sudan, the news is not encouraging.
However, today is different. There have been positive
developments that have moved the country further
along the road to sustainable peace.
On 15 February, President Salva Kiir, against the
wishes of many of his supporters, agreed to a compromise
to return South Sudan to its pre-2015 position of 10
states, although he added three administrative areas.
With that shift, Riek Machar accepted the challenge
to join a transitional Government in Juba, serving as
the country’s First Vice-President, despite transitional
security arrangements not yet in place.
With the deadlock broken, four Vice-Presidents
were sworn in at a ceremony in Juba, attended by
senior leaders from the Sudan, South Africa and
2/20

04/03/2020

Uganda. The fifth was sworn in the following day. I
acknowledge the role of President Museveni of Uganda,
General Burhan of the Sudan and the Heads of State
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
as well as South African President Ramaphosa and
regional envoys Stephen Kalonzo and Ismail Wais, for
supporting the process. But the progress is attributable
to the political willingness of two men who put the
interests of their country first — President Kiir, to
make critical concessions, and Riek Machar, to agree to
return to the capital that he left during fighting in 2016.
We often speak of courage in war and battle,
but peace also requires courage. Relief was the
overwhelming feeling expressed to us around the
country, the consensus being that the priority is to form
the transitional Government so that the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan — and the country — can
advance. As we speak, parties are now negotiating over
the allocation of ministerial portfolios. Meanwhile,
non-signatory groups, through the mediation efforts of
the Community of Sant’Egidio, committed to ceasing
hostilities last month. The return to Rome next week
will aim to bring them into the agreement.
The new Government can prompt positive
change. The number of displaced and refugees
returning is likely to increase. Already, according
to the International Organization for Migration,
approximately 800,000 people have already come back
since the signing of the 2018 peace agreement. The
first joint statement from the new presidency — the
President and Vice-President — last week urged people
in protection-of-civilians sites and neighbouring
countries to return home. The collective message is
significant and timely, coming ahead of the rainy — and
planting — season. The message, of course, puts the
onus on the new Government to ensure that areas of
return are safe for those who are coming back.
For its part, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) has stepped up its protective presence
to build confidence in areas of return. In addition, the
United Nations police (UNPOL) is expanding technical
assistance and beginning to co-locate with the National
Police Service to enhance policing capabilities.
Yet, the dearth of health and education services
in rural areas has discouraged returns. The imbalance
between services in protection-of-civilians sites, for
example, and outside is glaring. It needs urgent redress
20-05763

04/03/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

by humanitarian and development actors, including
donors. The Bentiu protection-of-civilians site, for
example, faces high numbers of unaccompanied
children, who have been left at the site to continue their
schooling while adults go back, simply because schools
do not exist in their own villages.
The protection environment has also changed.
The ceasefire and the free movement of opposition
leaders across South Sudan have lowered the risk of
violence, which has been confirmed by the security risk
assessments conducted by UNMISS and its partners.
Consequently, UNMISS has prioritized peacekeepers
to hotspot locations and areas of return. Between five
and eight temporary operating bases, at any one time,
are being manned in remote areas. For example, the
force presence inside the Bor protection-of-civilians
site has been reduced by 70 per cent. That has freed
troops to respond robustly to protect civilians against
extreme intercommunal violence in Jonglei last week
and this week. Our Pibor base has been reinforced to
better protect 5,000 civilians who had fled there from
adjacent areas and three temporary operating bases
have been established in surrounding villages.
Nevertheless, the new Government faces a
daunting array of challenges on day one that will
test its unity. Most urgent is the need to move on the
transitional security arrangements. The pretransitional
structures are now redundant. The implementation of
those measures is dangerously lagging. UNMISS has
transported more than 250 tons of supplies to training
locations to plug urgent gaps. But universally across
sites, there is no registration, no substantial training
and a shortage of supplies for those troops assembled.
The new Government will also face a precarious
humanitarian situation in many of its states. The
anticipated improvement in harvest levels 12 months
ago was quashed by the extensive flooding last year.
Crops were destroyed, livestock were lost. The floods
contaminated water supplies, worsening health
conditions, particularly for children, in areas that have
sparse access to health resources. The flooding has also
contributed to communal violence among pastoralists.
It is no coincidence that the most severe food insecurity
conditions, but also the heaviest fighting, are in Jonglei
state, where livestock losses have undermined the social
fabric, which is centred around the production of cattle.
The threat of damage from locusts, amid South Sudan’s
never-ending woes, is yet to have a substantial impact
on the country. The Food and Agriculture Organization

S/PV. 8741

of the United Nations is gearing up its preparations to
spray to protect crops.
A unified Government heralds the start of a new
phase. The peace agreement, of course, will be the road
map for the coming three years. However, in parallel,
South Sudan needs to address four issues that are the
cornerstones of a properly functioning State.
First, impunity must end, which will require
increased support to police and the justice chain, from
the collection of evidence through to prosecutions and
court trials. Where crimes are committed, especially
the number of sexually based offences, perpetrators
need to be brought to justice.
Secondly, corruption must end. That requires
financial accountability and transparency. Government
mechanisms exist but are often bypassed. For example,
if Government workers and security services receive
their salaries regularly every month, they will focus
on their jobs, not on other activities to support
their families.
Thirdly, dependency must end. That requires a
determined shift by both the Government and the
international community to supporting programmes
that promote self-reliance where appropriate. Yes, there
are areas where humanitarian assistance is urgently
required, but such interventions should be progressively
more surgical and vigorously monitored.
Fourthly, exclusion must end, which means that
all South Sudanese are part of the democratic process,
that civil society has a greater role and that there is
a political space where it is alright to speak out and
criticize. Those are the underpinnings of the upcoming
constitution-making and election processes.
The mandate of UNMISS is due for renewal. South
Sudan, as we have heard and seen, is in flux as the new
Government is established; therefore, it is premature to
propose significant change. A better understanding will
be possible in the coming months. Until then, the current
UNMISS mandate is sufficiently broad, in my view, to
continue activities to build durable peace and protect
civilians. Nevertheless, there will be a need to focus on
two areas, namely, the mobility of peacekeepers, which
has improved, and plans are in place to enhance it further
through increased riverine and air support, particularly
during the rainy season; and the role of UNPOL and
our Rule of Law Unit to expand its activities to better

20-057633/20

S/PV.8741

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

tackle impunity and support the shift to civilian law
enforcement and accountability.
Finally, the doubters are telling us that we have been
here before. However, it is also important to acknowledge
that these are changed circumstances. The international
community will likely lean on the side of caution, wary
of repeating past mistakes. That, of course, is fair, but
neither can we totally step back to wait and see what
happens before making a commitment. Our actions
can push South Sudan further towards sustainable
peace; our inaction can help condemn it to failure. In
the past weeks, its leaders have shown leadership. It is
hoped that this will continue. It is imperative there be
no reneging on the peace agreement or the ceasefire.
International partners must remain engaged — both in
solidarity and, at times, with pressure — to encourage
compromise in order to achieve and maintain the
unity. South Sudan’s future depends on the ability to
compromise and maintain that unity.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Shearer for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Sunday.
Ms. Sunday: It is truly an honour for me, as a
South Sudanese civil society representative, to brief the
Security Council on the situation in my country and
since the completion of a historical milestone in our
long journey towards peace in South Sudan. I would
like to dedicate my remarks to all of the South Sudanese
women who fought so hard for this peace agreement
and who continue to work tirelessly to support their
communities on the ground.
My name is Betty Sunday. Today I represent the
Women’s Monthly Forum on Peace and Political
Processes in South Sudan. We have been bringing
together South Sudanese women from all walks of
life since 2014 to make sure that we play a critical
role in peace processes. I am also a member of South
Sudan Women’s Coalition and a staff member of the
Community Empowerment for Progress Organization,
which took part in the peace talks in 2015 and 2018.
I would like to start by thanking the Council for
its efforts in pushing for the full implementation of
the 2018 Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, including
through its visit to South Sudan in October. By meeting
with my colleagues in Juba, the Council has help us
to create a space for civil society in my country at a
4/20

04/03/2020

critical juncture. Just two weeks after the formation of
the much-awaited Transitional Government of National
Unity, I want to focus my remarks on the situation on the
ground in South Sudan from a civil society perspective,
in particular that of women-led organizations.
The completion of key aspects of the peace
agreement just before the 22 February deadline brings
us undeniably closer to the vision of an inclusive and
peaceful South Sudan that ordinary citizens have kept
alive in their hearts. The alternative could have brought
war back to our doorsteps, had the ceasefire that
drastically reduced political violence not held. South
Sudanese civil society organizations worked tirelessly to
keep the international community engaged and to make
our recommendations weigh in the political balance. I
am confident that I can speak for my sisters and brothers
in saying that we are grateful that the Council did not
turn a blind eye. Peace required substantial concessions
from all parties and, when it was all said and done, I
believe it was pressure from the region, from the
African Union and from the international community
as a whole, that compelled South Sudanese leaders to
put the good of our people first.
It is not the first time that we have had hope. But I
remember bitterly the return to violence and suffering
that followed the collapse of previous agreements,
which friends of South Sudan were all too quick to call
a success, when their disengagement enabled personal
interests to prevail once more. Women and girls paid
the highest price of that failure to see peace through
in a country where specific threats to them continue to
be extreme. The 125 survivors of the November 2018
mass rape in Bentiu should convince the international
community to vow “never again”, and to mean it
this time.
The recent breakthrough in the peace process
rekindles our hope for a South Sudan where guns have
been silenced and the Government can use national
resources to tackle key issues, such as girls’ education,
child marriage, youth job creation and basic services
for communities. While the situation on the ground
remains calm, we hope that the current political disputes
among parties haggling over ministerial attributions
will remain just that and that they will not bring us back
to the brink.
Yet serious challenges lie ahead. Violence continues
to displace communities in parts of the country, and
humanitarian assistance is as critical as ever for over
20-05763

04/03/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

7 million people in need. Women and girls are still
at extreme risk of rape and other forms of sexual or
gender-based violence when they fetch food and water.
Communities need rebuilding, with 1.5 million people
remaining displaced and experiencing uncertainty
about safety and services if they return. Over 2 million
refugees remain outside the country, the majority of
whom are women and children.
I recently visited the Rejab Unified Police Training
Center in Juba and was shocked to see how inadequate
the conditions were at the site, with pregnant women,
lactating mothers and some 700 children without
access to proper installations and services. After a visit
with the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, we had to go back as women of South
Sudan as an act of solidarity with our sisters to help
them deal with the suffering we had seen there. I argue
that measures should be implemented to tackle those
inadequate conditions and ensure that pregnant women
are not taken to the training centre until they give birth.
On the political front, we have been encouraged
to see that civil society organizations, including
women-led organizations, have increased their
influence through their unwavering engagement in
the peace process. They have played a critical role in
some of the recent progress by advocating women’s
increased representation, the 100-day extension of the
pre-transitional deadline and the resolution of a number
of state disputes.
South Sudanese women have fought hard for the
peace agreement to come to life and hold. However,
we are still far from achieving the 35 per cent quota
for women in the Transitional Government’s bodies,
particularly at the state level, where the list of
governors that is still being negotiated does not include
a single woman.
This brings me to my recommendations for what
the Security Council can do to support for the South
Sudanese people on our way to peace and security for
all. First, most importantly, I urge all friends of South
Sudan, including the Security Council, to maintain
full diplomatic engagement so that the parties may
work to resolve pending issues to ensure the swift
implementation of the peace agreement. In this regard,
we hope the Council could impress upon some South
Sudanese politicians that individuals on international
sanctions lists should not be part of a new Government.

S/PV. 8741

Hundreds of thousands of families are still waiting
for safe and dignified conditions to go back to their
homes. It will be critical for the Security Council and
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS) to urge the Government to ensure
that armed forces vacate civilian houses without further
delay, as required by the peace agreement. Likewise,
security sector reform needs to continue so that we can
have a professional, unified military equipped with
the appropriate training to keep all South Sudanese
citizens safe. This must include, for the safety of women
and girls in particular, training to counter genderbased violence.
After years of abuses, peace will require justice to
hold. We hope members of the Security Council will
reiterate their support for transitional justice in South
Sudan, which must include accountability for genderbased violence, if things are ever going to change in
my country.
It will take all of us to build a safe and prosperous
South Sudan. Grass-roots organizations are counting
on the Security Council to help by urging all parties
to respect the space for civil society to make a
contribution. Women-led organizations in particular
need to be recognized for the essential role they played
to build peace nationally and at the community level.
This young nation of ours will only achieve its full
potential through the meaningful participation in public
life of women and women-led organizations. We need
the Council to stand with us as we renew our call on all
parties to realize the hard-won promise of the 35 per
cent quota for women’s representation in Government.
Finally, as the Security Council considers
renewing the UNMISS mandate, it is crucial that all
existing provisions on women, peace and security be
maintained and that the Mission engage with diverse
women’s groups, in particular those working on ending
gender-based violence. We strongly believe that, to be
successful, UNMISS should consult a wide range of
women’s civil society organizations to guide its work in
the areas of protection of civilians, confidence-building
and mediation.
Women and girls have lived in fear for far too long
in South Sudan, where gender-based violence continues
to reach some of its highest rates in the world. As a
mother and a human rights defender, I want to make
sure South Sudanese women and girls are not relegated

20-057635/20

S/PV.8741

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

04/03/2020

to a status of victims: we have a voice, and we must
have a say in our country’s future.

Government to remove bureaucratic impediments that
prevent timely delivery of much-needed assistance.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Sunday for her briefing.

Transparent and accountable management of
resources and the Transitional Government’s continued
financial support for the peace process have never
been more important. To consolidate the gains of
peace, South Sudan’s people need to see the country’s
resources being used to provide services that can
support sustainable development.

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Barkin (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Shearer for his dedication to South Sudan and for his
timely briefing. Ms. Sunday’s continued advocacy
for an inclusive peace process in South Sudan is
commendable. We thank her for her remarks on behalf
of women and civil society in South Sudan.
The United States welcomes the decision by
the Government and the opposition to form a new
Transitional Government of National Unity. We
recognize the significant compromises agreed to by
all parties in order to take this important step forward
in the peace process. We also commend the efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
countries in the region and other stakeholders for their
direct and ongoing engagement with South Sudan’s
leaders in advance of the February deadline.
We are hopeful that the people of South Sudan
can now see a glimmer of hope and progress. For
this progress to be sustained, however, South Sudan’s
leaders must view recent developments as an important
first step on the long path to lasting peace. The hard
work of compromise and collaboration must continue.
The international community must continue
its engagement to encourage progress in areas that
address the underlying causes of conflict. Now is a
particularly sensitive time for the implementation of
security arrangements. The proximity of Government
and opposition forces during the cantonment and
training process creates a high risk of conflict. South
Sudan’s leaders must continue to reinforce the sanctity
of the permanent ceasefire and be prepared to defuse
tensions in the case of friction between forces. We
also urge South Sudan’s leaders to take measures to
stop persistent intercommunal violence, such as recent
clashes in Jonglei state.
Humanitarian assistance remains a crucial lifeline
for more than half of South Sudan’s population. Access
for humanitarians to the most vulnerable populations
must continue to improve, especially in the context
of increasing food insecurity. We call on the new
6/20

As the Security Council heard during its trip
to Juba last October, there can be no peace in South
Sudan without justice. South Sudan’s leaders must now
work together to address issues of transitional justice
and accountability, including establishing the African
Union hybrid court for South Sudan. The February
report from the Commission on Human Rights in South
Sudan documented alarming violations of human
rights, including the use of starvation as a tool of war
and ongoing conflict-related sexual violence committed
by forces on all sides. We expect the new Government
to take these findings seriously.
We particularly condemn the abduction of
women and girls by commanders of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition in
Western Equatoria. We are also concerned by reports
of sexual and gender-based violence perpetrated
by personnel of the South Sudan People’s Defence
Forces and the National Salvation Front in Central
Equatoria. With the formation of the new Government,
we expect safeguards to stop such abuses and to
ensure accountability.
One of the distinctions between the current peace
process and the previous failed attempts at peace in
South Sudan is some improvement in inclusivity with
respect to civil society, women, youth and faith groups,
among others. We encourage continued progress to
include South Sudan’s diverse communities in the
process of implementing the peace agreement.
The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) is playing a vital role in supporting stability
in South Sudan. The Council is aware that the formation
of the previous transitional Government triggered
years of violence and human rights atrocities. For that
reason, regarding the upcoming mandate renewal for
UNMISS, we seek to ensure that the Mission maintains
the necessary tools to support the peace process and to
respond to outbreaks of violence.
20-05763

04/03/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

For UNMISS to do its part to support the peace
process, it must be able to conduct its work without
restrictions or violations of its status-of-forces
agreement. We urge the new Government to support
UNMISS in fulfilling its mandate and leveraging
the United Nations presence to consolidate peace in
South Sudan.
South Sudan’s leaders have made important
political progress. We fully recognize their efforts.
We also recognize that maintaining momentum in
the peace process means continuing to demonstrate
a willingness to compromise and collaborate on the
challenging issues that I have discussed. Progress on
these issues is precisely what will allow the people of
South Sudan to reap tangible benefits from the recent
encouraging developments.
The United States continues to stand with the
people of South Sudan in their pursuit of peace, stability
and prosperity.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
wish to begin by warmly thanking Mr. David Shearer
and Mrs. Betty Sunday for their very enlightening
briefings and for their personal commitment to peace
in South Sudan.
After two postponements, we are now pleased to
be in a position to welcome the establishment of the
Government of National Unity. France commends the
parties on their spirit of compromise and dialogue and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the African Union on their steadfast commitment to
the process.
An important milestone has now been reached, but
the process of building a lasting peace remains lengthy.
The parties must appoint various ministers as well as
governors and members of the legislative body. There
is also a need for the effective, full and meaningful
participation of women and young people. In that
regard, the quota for women set out in the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan must be fully upheld.
It is now incumbent upon the Transitional
Government to expeditiously implement the reforms
agreed under to the agreement, specifically securitysector reform, transitional justice, accountability for
governors and transparency in public finance. The
Sudanese people must be able to freely express their
aspirations to peace in an open political space. Respect

S/PV. 8741

for basic freedoms for journalists and all citizens
is paramount.
Strengthening trust must be the watchword
during this transitional stage. Only respect for the
commitments undertaken under the agreement can
reweave a social fabric rent by years of conflict. Trust
should be rebuilt at the leadership level but also at the
local community level. In that regard, we welcome the
work done by the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) to pre-empt local conflict and to
work towards intercommunal reconciliation.
France encourages the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the African Union and South Sudan’s
main partners to remain fully mobilized during this
transition stage. Transitional stages, as is well known,
are precarious ones, and the parties will require
ongoing robust attention on the part of the international
community so as not to deviate from the course charted
by the peace agreement. In that respect, I welcome the
decisive role played by the Community of Sant’Egidio
in the achievement of a rapprochement among the
non-signatory armed groups and the Government.
It is high time that the South Sudanese people
finally be able to enjoy the dividends of peace. We are
aware of the tragic humanitarian situation and of the
fact that people’s needs have not diminished. I call upon
all parties to provide safe and unhindered humanitarian
assistance to all people in need of it. That requires the
protection of humanitarian and medical personnel as
well as civilian infrastructure.
Ms. Betty Sunday’s briefing underscored once
again the crucial importance of continuing to fight
against sexual violence and to protect children from
the grave violations to which they are been subjected.
The establishment of the hybrid court set up under
the agreement, with support from the African Union,
should help to counter impunity and contribute to
reducing such violence.
We are preparing to renew the mandate of UNMISS
at a time when encouraging progress is being achieved,
but the situation remains fragile and uncertain. We
therefore believe that it is reasonable to maintain
unchanged the format and the mandate of the Mission
for this year. Next year, if the peace process continues
to make headway, we could revisit the mandate to
reflect the new context so as to provide optimal support
to the peacebuilding stage.

20-057637/20

S/PV.8741

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

France fully supports the efforts undertaken to
increase the mobility of the Mission and enable it to
best deliver on its civilian-protection mandate. In this
regard, it is vital for the Mission to have freedom of
movement throughout the entire territory of South
Sudan. My delegation also encourages the Mission
to persevere in its efforts to strengthen the South
Sudanese justice system, particularly through mobile
justice courts.
Finally, my country extends its gratitude to the
Blue Helmets and the police and civilian personnel
deployed in UNMISS as well as to all humanitarian
actors present in South Sudan, who, under difficult
circumstances, are providing vital support to the South
Sudanese population.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I say, Sir, how
good it is to see you in the presidency during what I
think is your last month with us in the Council, so it is
very nice to see you there.
Let me also thank Special Representative Shearer
for his briefing and all he has done. I would also like to
thank Ms. Sunday for her very insightful briefing and
her continued efforts to seek justice and accountability
for women in South Sudan. It was an inspirational part
of our recent visit to Juba to meet her and her fellow
civil-society activists, and I am pleased to hear from her
that the Council’s interest then has helped her locally to
open that space.
Let me start, like others, by welcoming the very
positive news of the decision of the South Sudanese
parties to form the Transitional Government of National
Unity. The people of South Sudan have long awaited this
important step, and the people of the United Kingdom
join them in celebrating that important progress. Let
me therefore salute the leadership shown by President
Kiir and First Vice-President Machar in making the
necessary compromises, including on the number and
composition of states in particular. Putting the people
of South Sudan first is what matters and is their test
of leadership.
Let me also praise the role of the region in the efforts
to bring the parties together. I agree wholeheartedly
with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on the important unity shown and efforts made
by the subregion and beyond. Thanks are due widely,
as he said, reflecting the wide concern and interest of
the international community. However, he left out one
8/20

04/03/2020

person, so I wish to thank him personally for all that he
has done.
But let me also echo Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Shearer’s words of caution. It is
really important that the dividends of this progress be
felt by the wider population. That has not yet happened.
Our focus remains on helping the people of South
Sudan to lead their lives free from hunger, violence
and fear. Only through the genuine implementation of
the commitments made by all sides will South Sudan
move forward.
Let us not forget that this conflict has killed
nearly 400,000 people; left 7.5 million people in need
of humanitarian assistance; and has seen sexual and
gender-based violence used as a weapon of war, more
than 4 million people displaced and some 6.5 million
people at risk of acute food insecurity.
The United Kingdom will continue to stand by
South Sudan and its people in this endeavour. We
remain one of the largest humanitarian donors. Last
year the United Kingdom gave more than $220 million
in humanitarian assistance to South Sudan.
As I have said, recent steps are only the start of the
next phase of delivering change for the people of South
Sudan. Our hope is that this spirit of compromise will
continue and swift progress will be made to address the
many challenges ahead.
Most immediately, we need to see the timely
formation of an inclusive Government, with positions
and portfolios allocated. One very concrete step that
could be taken would be to ensure the meaningful
participation of women, as Ms. Sunday made clear,
both in this Government and in South Sudan’s future.
In that regard, I would simply say that the 35 per cent
quota should be the floor, not the ceiling. I welcome
Ms. Sunday’s comments in general, and I particularly
agree with her that South Sudan’s natural resource
wealth should be used in support of its people, including
girls’ education as a priority.
The tasks that should have been completed during
the pre-transition phase must now be addressed.
That includes with regard to unifying forces and
cantonment. Partial implementation would bring
new security challenges, which must not happen. We
would like to see full transparency in that regard,
including concerning funds that have already been
disbursed. Efforts to address the increasing levels of
20-05763

04/03/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

intercommunal violence and immediate steps to tackle
the humanitarian situation would show the Government
prioritizing its people.
The Council must remain alert to the risks. History
has shown that the violence in South Sudan can rapidly
escalate. In addition to the sustained commitment of
the new Government, we therefore believe that the
international efforts that we have recently seen reap such
benefits and dividends must remain present with South
Sudan in order to provide a conducive environment
for sustainable peace. As part of that, we believe that
it is important to maintain the sanctions regime to
discourage any potential spoilers of the peace, as well
as the arms embargo, which exists for the protection of
the people of South Sudan. Necessary exemptions must
of course be applied in the correct way.
The Security Council has stood with South
Sudan over the past years and months. It has been a
very difficult time but the strong interest and focus,
including our recent visit, have been important elements
in support of peace. As a Council, we need to maintain
that interest and focus. On the Security Council visit,
I vividly recall the words of one of the representatives
of civil society whom we met regarding South Sudan’s
parties. The representative said:
“When they are united, they loot us. When they
are divided, they kill us. It is better that they
are united.”
The people of South Sudan deserve a world in
which they are not in danger and in which they are able
to fulfil their potential and live their lives to the fullest.
As we say for all on the planet, let no one be left behind.
The President and Vice-President have shown
leadership to reach this point. True leadership means
being able to make compromises for the good of
their people. I applaud them for that. But this is just
the beginning. We need them and all South Sudanese
politicians to demonstrate true leadership now. The
hard work is just starting.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Shearer and
Ms. Sunday for their important briefings.
South Sudan has officially formed the Transitional
Government of National Unity. We welcome that
agreement and the readiness of the parties to put aside
their differences and make way for a sustainable peace
process. In that regard, we would like to acknowledge

S/PV. 8741

the role of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and other regional and international
actors for their mediation efforts in that process. We
hope that that encouraging step will make it possible to
advance the agreed reforms, particularly those relating
to transitional justice, accountability and transparency
in public administration. At the same time, we regret
the recent incidents of intercommunal violence, which
have exacted a high toll in terms of the dead and
injured, as well as the volatile security situation along
the border.
While it is clear that this rapprochement between
the parties is an important step forward, it is no less
certain that it will be successful only if it results in the
eradication of the root causes of the conflict. It is of
great concern that the recent report of the Commission
on Human Rights in South Sudan (A/HRC/43/56)
notes that more than half the population is acutely
food insecure. It is urgent that such a commitment be
reflected in an improvement in the quality of life of
a population where more than 7 million people are in
need of life-saving assistance.
That situation is exacerbated by the recent floods
and the continuing threat of diseases such as Ebola.
Also of concern is the serious threat in the Horn
of Africa of an outbreak of desert locusts, whose
reproduction is linked to the effects of climate change
and which has been described as a disaster by the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. In
that regard, it is necessary to promote State policies for
the development of resilience and the mitigation of the
undeniable risks resulting from climate change.
Meanwhile, we emphatically reiterate our call for
the implementation of all measures to end to sexual
and gender-based violence, the recruitment and use of
child soldiers and human rights violations in general. In
particular, we call for the implementation of transitional
justice mechanisms, such as the hybrid court for South
Sudan. In that vein, we would like to acknowledge
the ratification by the Government of South Sudan of
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and the signing of the comprehensive action
plan by the Government and the South Sudan People’s
Defence Forces.
The culture of entrenched impunity and the lack
of accountability prevailing in South Sudan have been
the main triggers of violence and must therefore be

20-057639/20

S/PV.8741

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

addressed in order to bring about genuine democratic
transformation. The Transitional Government must
urgently prioritize accountability and national
reconciliation. Peace will not be achieved if there is
no resolve to bring to justice those guilty of crimes
against humanity.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize the need
to promote the meaningful participation of women,
young people and civil society in the formation of the
Transitional Government of National Unity. We continue
to call for achieving 35 per cent participation of women
in leadership positions within the Government.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, allow me to warmly thank Mr. David
Shearer and Ms. Betty Sunday for their briefings,
their commitment and their excellent work in very
difficult conditions.
We welcome the decision of the parties in South
Sudan to form a Transitional Government of National
Unity and the swearing-in of the Vice-Presidents
on 22 February. That is an important step towards a
lasting peace. Such a development is the result of a
spirit of compromise by President Kiir and Mr. Riek
Machar and the commitment of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, countries of the region, the
African Union and a number of international actors.
We now encourage all parties to finalize the formation
of a balanced Government of National Unity and to
continue to fully implement the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan.
Despite the commendable progress in the past few
weeks, many challenges remain, such as the unification
of the armed forces, a genuine political dialogue, the
strengthening of transitional justice mechanisms and
rapprochement with the non-signatory parties to the
peace agreement. In that context, we welcome the
significant efforts of the Community of Sant’Egidio
in Rome.
The formation of the Transitional Government
and the distribution of ministerial portfolios cannot
be goals in themselves. It is essential that progress
on the political front now translate into a tangible
improvement in the lives of the people of South Sudan.
The population continues to face a serious humanitarian
crisis. More than 7.5 million people are in need of
assistance. Hunger is increasing as a result of droughts,
floods and the acute political instability of recent years.
According to the most recent World Food Programme
10/20

04/03/2020

statistics, 5.3 million South Sudanese are in crisis
or facing even more severe levels of food insecurity.
More than 1.3 million children will suffer from acute
malnutrition in 2020. Those statistics are unacceptable.
The ceasefire continues to be largely respected but
fighting continues in parts of Equatoria. Intercommunal
violence, sexual violence and crime persist throughout
the country, as indicated in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2020/145). The United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) reports an average
of 150 people killed, wounded, abducted or sexually
assaulted each month. We call on the Government to
bring the perpetrators to justice in order to end the
cycle of violence. Impunity for serious human rights
violations must also continue to be addressed, including
through the operationalization of transitional justice
mechanisms, such as the establishment of the African
Union hybrid court for South Sudan.
Let me now turn to the UNMISS mandate. The
encouraging developments in recent weeks can be
attributed to the new mandate, but we must remain
vigilant. In that regard, we believe that the mandate
should remain largely unchanged. The protection of
civilians must remain the priority for UNMISS. It is
too early for the reconfiguration of protection-ofcivilians sites, as the situation on the ground remains
difficult and unpredictable. The mandate should give
due attention to the issues of human rights, children in
armed conflict and sexual and gender-based violence,
as those are genuine challenges. We support the request
of UNMISS to integrate the Regional Protection Force
into the Mission’s strength. The operational posture
of UNMISS has continued to evolve to become more
mobile and to maximize its presence. We encourage the
Mission to continue its efforts in that regard to deter
violence against civilians.
For the first time in some time, there are genuine
reasons to be optimistic about the situation. A crucial
step has been taken. It is now time to tackle the
remaining challenges as well, as there are several. Only
in that way can the plight of the people of South Sudan
be improved in a sustainable manner.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): We thank Mr. David Shearer
for his hard work and that of all personnel of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). We assure
him of our full support. I also thank Ms. Sunday for
her briefing.
20-05763

04/03/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I would like to welcome our good friend
Ambassador Akuei Bona Malwal, Permanent
Representative of South Sudan, to today’s briefing.
Viet Nam is closely following recent developments
in South Sudan. We highly welcome the decision
taken by all stakeholders to establish the transitional
Government, including President Salva Kiir and First
Vice-President Riek Machar. We commend the efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the African Union (AU), South Africa and
other relevant parties. It is an extremely important
achievement, which we believe will lay the foundation
for long-term peace and prosperity in South Sudan. In
the light of the recent developments, allow me to make
the following observations.
First, we reiterate the importance of the full
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan by the parties in South Sudan. The establishment
of a transitional Government marks the beginning of a
new period, but much work remains to be done. Viet
Nam calls on the parties to resolve the pending issues
in a steady manner, in the spirit of mutual trust and
understanding. We are strongly convinced that, if the
parties show similar will and commitment as when they
formed the Transitional Government, they will be able
to resolve all pending matters. We look forward to the
national dialogue conference, which will take place on
16 March. We also welcome the recent peace talks in
Rome between the Government and the non-signatories
to the peace agreement. Within our capacity, including
as the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan, we
will continue to support all efforts in the process.
Secondly, we are encouraged to see that the ceasefire
has been maintained in most parts of the country and
the security situation has mostly remained stable,
as stated in the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on UNMISS (S/2020/145). We also note that the
issue of intercommunal violence remains a challenge.
Along with the efforts to establish the Transitional
Government, Viet Nam calls on all relevant parties in
South Sudan to continue to respect the ceasefire and
refrain from any actions that might undermine efforts
towards sustainable peace. Further effective measures
are also needed to address the issue of intercommunal
violence and its root causes. We commend the work
and efforts of UNMISS, especially that of female
peacekeepers, in the area of the protection of civilians.

S/PV. 8741

The increased participation of women peacekeepers,
as well as their safety and security, should be further
promoted. Vietnamese women represent 16 per cent of
our peacekeepers in UNMISS, and they do an excellent
job. The full potential of women remains to be unlocked.
Thirdly, we welcome the efforts of the regional
and subregional organizations, namely, IGAD and the
AU, in facilitating the implementation of the peace
agreement. The role of IGAD, as guarantor of the peace
agreement, will continue to be critical in the transitional
period. We welcome the efforts of UNMISS and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
providing good offices for the parties in South Sudan
and IGAD. We hope that the United Nations, AU and
IGAD can support more confidence-building measures
to facilitate the work of the transitional Government.
Fourthly, Viet Nam warmly welcomes the recent
positive economic development in South Sudan. The
forecast of 8.2 per cent gross domestic product growth
in 2020 is very encouraging. At the same time, we
acknowledge the critical humanitarian challenges
that the people in South Sudan still face. We call on
the Government of South Sudan and other parties in
South Sudan to put forth their best efforts in promoting
sustainable livelihoods for the people.
Fifthly, we reiterate our view that sanctions
measures should be used as a tool to promote
sustainable peace and security in the country and be
rightly targeted. They should not serve to negatively
affect the livelihoods of the people, the development
of the country or the effective functioning and capacity
of the Government, which is responsible for ensuring
security and stability in the country. Those measures
are subjected to adjustments in the light of the progress
achieved in the peace and reconciliation process and
the implementation of the commitments of the parties.
In conclusion, Viet Nam reiterates its consistent
position in supporting the unity, peace, stability and
sovereignty of South Sudan.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. David
Shearer, and Ms. Betty Sunday for their briefings. I
also thank the personnel of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) for their tremendous work
in South Sudan.
Estonia welcomes the encouraging developments
in South Sudan’s peace process, including the ongoing

20-0576311/20

S/PV.8741

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

talks to form a revitalized Transitional Government
of National Unity. We are hopeful that the parties will
come to an agreement. The leaders must understand
that it is not a zero-sum game.
Estonia welcomes the signing of the comprehensive
action plan to end and prevent all grave violations
against children. We would like to thank UNMISS
and UNICEF for supporting the process. However,
according to the February report of the Commission on
Human Rights (A/HRC/43/56), there are approximately
19,000 children in the ranks of the South Sudan
People’s Defence Forces and armed opposition groups.
We call upon all signatories to ensure a swift and full
implementation of the action plan. It is up to them to
make it a success. The South Sudanese people deserve it.
We understand that moving towards a unity
Government is only a first step. Much remains to be
done. Continued political will is required to move
forward with peacebuilding and reconciliation among
the parties, especially considering the unification of
forces. Cooperation is the only way forward.
We are very disturbed by the dire humanitarian
situation in the country. An estimated 7.5 million
South Sudanese will remain in need of humanitarian
assistance this year. More than 3.5 million persons
remain forcibly displaced as security concerns and
multiple other reasons continue to prevent them from
returning to their homes.
Combating sexual and gender-based violence has
to remain a priority. It is very important to tackle the
culture of impunity. We welcome the headway that
has been made with the mobile courts and encourage
UNMISS to continue those efforts. We also support
placing perpetrators of human rights violations under
sanctions and encourage the work of the Panel of Experts
in that regard. We would like to stress the importance
of the full, effective and meaningful participation of
women in all spheres and levels of political leadership,
the peace process and the pretransitional and
Transitional Government.
Estonia is concerned by the continuing
intercommunal violence, which has had a devastating
impact on the civilian population. The primary
responsibility of a State is to protect its citizens. In
the past three months, UNMISS has been unable
to respond to the violence on at least 46 occasions
because of the movement restrictions imposed by
the previous Government. We call on the leaders of
12/20

04/03/2020

South Sudan to deal with the violations of the statusof-forces agreement. I wish that the current leaders
would find more common ground and turn the lives of
the South Sudanese people around in the most positive
way possible.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Allow me to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General David Shearer
for his tireless work in supporting peace in South
Sudan and for his insightful briefing. I would also like
to thank Ms. Betty Sunday for her important briefing
this morning.
Indonesia welcomes the agreement to form the
Transitional Government of National Unity and
commends both parties for their spirit of compromise.
Their confidence shows their commitment to creating
an enabling environment for peace. While the ceasefire
continues to hold, we note clashes in areas of Western
and Central Equatoria and Upper Nile and that a
number of security challenges remain. However, we
are also confident that with the parties’ commitment
to fulfilling their respective responsibilities, the
challenges can be overcome. Sustainable peace and
stability with prosperity are very much possible. The
people of South Sudan deserve that fully. In that regard,
I wish to underline the following three points.
First, the formation of the Transitional Government
needs to be finalized. Recognizing that much work
needs to happen, including on transitional security
arrangements and the establishment of three
administrative areas, the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan remains the best overarching blueprint to build
peace with the wide support of the South Sudanese
parties. The effective implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement, including the finalization of the Transitional
Government, is of critical importance. We need to show
the South Sudanese that this time will be different. The
party’s leadership must deliver. In the process, every
effort must be made to cease any actions that might be
perceived as provocative by the other party. Indonesia
commends the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and South Africa, along
with other countries, for their support of peacebuilding
in South Sudan. The engagement of the United Nations
and regional and international partners remains vital.
Secondly, the humanitarian situation should be
improved. The opening up of space and positive political
developments should also be used to deepen and widen
20-05763

04/03/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

humanitarian action, which is presently unevenly
spread. Indonesia is concerned that 1.67 million people
remain internally displaced, with another 2.2 million
living in neighbouring countries. The SecretaryGeneral’s call to fulfil the $1.5 billion target under
the 2020 humanitarian response plan needs to be
responded to befittingly. We also commend the signing
of the comprehensive action plan to end and prevent
all grave violations against children, which indicates
that South Sudan has set the right priorities, and its
implementation must be supported fully.
Third is the role of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS). Indonesia supports the
renewal of the UNMISS mandate, which maintains
its current strength and role in supporting the peace
process. At the same time, the mandate must also reflect
the ongoing positive developments. Since physical
access is an important hindrance to humanitarian
assistance, UNMISS resource mobility, especially of
its air and water assets, should be enhanced. Indonesian
military and police officers, including women
police peacekeepers, are currently proudly serving
in UNMISS. Their professionalism and hard work,
including through local community engagement, have
already made a concrete impact.
In conclusion, the South Sudanese people’s journey
towards peace has come to a critical juncture. Its
commitment, with effective backing from the United
Nations and other partners, promise a peaceful and
prosperous future. I reaffirm Indonesia’s long-standing
support towards a lasting peace and stability in South
Sudan, including through its contribution to UNMISS.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s important meeting
on South Sudan. We also thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Mr. David Shearer and
our sister, Ms. Betty Sunday, for their briefings.
We commend them and their teams for their work in
South Sudan and their contribution to the country’s
stability. We also welcome our colleague and friend,
the Permanent Representative of South Sudan, to the
Council Chamber and look forward to his presentation
on the developments in his homeland.
I will limit my intervention to three issues, namely,
the political, security and humanitarian situations
and the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).

S/PV. 8741

On the political situation, South Sudan’s leaders
have presented their country with a dawn of renewed
hope through sacrifice and compromise. In that regard,
we would like to congratulate the Government of South
Sudan and all political parties on the overall progress
achieved to date in the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan. South Africa applauds President Salva Kiir
Mayardit, Mr. Riek Machar and the leaders of the other
opposition groups for reaching an agreement to form
the inclusive revitalized Transitional Government of
National Unity on the agreed date of 22 February.
With that renewed hope, we encourage all parties to
continue to address the outstanding issues pertaining to
the implementation of the peace agreement, as well as
to sustain the dialogue that has allowed them to make
notable progress to date. In that regard, we look forward
to the convening of the national dialogue conference
on 16 March. The progress needs to be translated into
peace dividends that ordinary people in South Sudan
can see in their daily lives, through socioeconomic
development, security and sustained stability.
South Africa commends the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and the
international community for their role in facilitating the
formation of the revitalized Transitional Government
of National Unity. Furthermore, we also commend the
Community of Sant’Egidio for facilitating the Rome
declaration with the non-signatory groups, which
agreed to a ceasefire in South Sudan and to joining the
peace process. This is a critical process that addresses
inclusiveness with a view to averting spoilers in the
political process that could undermine the valuable
progress that has been made to date.
We also welcome the valuable role played by the
women of South Sudan, and through Ms. Sunday and
through Ambassador Malwal we would like to pay
particular tribute to ordinary women in the far corners
of South Sudan who have supported the peace process.
We want to thank the women in the Government
and in the political parties who have made sure that
women’s voices are not only heard but are respected
and influence the current political developments in
the country. Women of South Sudan deserve to be at
the table, and the 35 per cent or more quota should be
fulfilled throughout the stages of the political process.
The Government of National Unity will have to
deal with security sector reform and the formation

20-0576313/20

S/PV.8741

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of unified security agencies. It will have to create
an appropriate environment for internally displaced
persons and refugees to return home, schools to open
where they had been closed, and children to pursue
their dreams. Like my colleague from Viet Nam, we
call for the concomitant removal of sanctions to support
these positive developments.
On the humanitarian and security front, we are
encouraged by the sustained cessation of hostilities,
which is a testament to the political will of the leaders.
However, we would like to raise our concern over the
intercommunal violence and sub-clan clashes in the
Jonglei and Pibor regions resulting in civilian deaths
and internal displacement. We urge the Government
to address skirmishes of intercommunal violence that
could threaten peace and stability; they have already
claimed significant lives and displaced millions.
The dire humanitarian situation requires our
collective action. We call on international donors to
support the South Sudan Humanitarian Response Plan
2020, which requires $1.5 billion to meet the life-saving
needs of 5.6 million people.
Furthermore, we urge all parties to fulfil their
commitments to ending and preventing violations
against children. In this regard, we welcome the signing
by the Government of a comprehensive action plan to
end and prevent all grave violations against children.
On the mandate for UNMISS, we first have to
commend the Mission for the important role it continues
to play in South Sudan. We are also encouraged by its
continued cooperation with the Government and call
on it to continue on this trajectory in supporting the
Transitional Government of National Unity. In this
regard, it is important that we maintain the Mission’s
current capacity and ensure that it has the requisite
mandate and capacity to discharge its duties.

04/03/2020

Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer for his
briefing and for his efforts aimed at assisting in making
progress in the peace process. We also thank Ms. Betty
Sunday for her briefing. We acknowledge the presence
of the Permanent Representative of South Sudan in the
Chamber today.
South Sudan is on a path towards a significant
milestone in its nine-year history, and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines stands with the people of South Sudan
as they embark on this new chapter of their journey.
We are conscious that the formation of a transitional
Government will not resolve all of South Sudan’s
challenges overnight, nor can it serve as a panacea for
the devastation wrought on the country over several
years. Notwithstanding these difficulties, we believe
that South Sudan is on a productive course to ensure a
prosperous future.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines applauds the
decision by the South Sudanese parties to form the
Revitalized Transitional Government of National
Unity in South Sudan, in keeping with the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. The spirit of compromise
exhibited by the parties to put aside their differences
for the benefit of the people is positive and reaffirms
the significance of dialogue in resolving conflict.
We also commend the effort to meet the 35 per cent
quota for women in the formal implementation
and monitoring mechanisms of the Revitalized
Agreement, in particular the Ceasefire Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism and the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission.

Lastly, we have reached a crucial milestone.
However, this is just the beginning. As the international
community, we need to sustain our valuable support
to all aspects of the peace process in order to prevent
a relapse into conflict. In this regard, South Africa
remains steadfast in its commitment to supporting
the peace process in country with the overall aim of
building a peaceful, stable, united and prosperous
South Sudan.

As South Sudan ushers in a new dawn in
nation-building, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
encourages all its leaders to assume their collective
responsibilities and to ensure that the hard-won gains
to form a transitional Government will be maintained
and enhanced. In this respect, the full implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement, including the permanent
cessation of hostilities, the commencement of the
National Dialogue Conference, the establishment
of a permanent Constitution and the appropriate
management of the Transitional Government within
the next 36 months geared towards general elections,
remain critical.

Ms. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks Special

My delegation is mindful that the promise of lasting
peace faces daunting challenges, including the lingering

14/20

20-05763

04/03/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

impediments to security arrangements and transitional
justice and the issues of poverty, corruption, the adverse
effects of climate change, conflict-related sexual
violence, the recruitment of children in armed conflict
and a dire humanitarian situation. Such challenges run
the risk of thwarting sustainable development for the
people of South Sudan. Though difficult to address,
they are by no means insurmountable.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines therefore urges
the South Sudanese leaders and all stakeholders within
the State to seize this moment and continue to work
together to ensure peace, security and development for
the future of the country and all its children and to refrain
from taking any adverse action that may undermine
the progress already made. A return to conflict and
widespread violence would not only compound the
suffering on another generation of South Sudanese but
also could cause irreparable damage, which would have
dangerous ramifications for neighbouring countries
and the broader continent.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends the
unstinting effort of the United Nations Mission in
the Republic of South Sudan, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union, the
Community of Sant’Egidio in Rome and the Government
of South Africa, in particular Deputy President David
Mabuza, South Africa’s Special Envoy to South Sudan,
for their constructive role in helping South Sudan to
reach this promising moment.
In closing, we reiterate our unwavering solidarity
with the people of South Sudan and remain enthusiastic
about the country’s rebuilding process. Unity is pivotal
for success. We call on the international community to
continue to support South Sudan during this new phase
of its history.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): When coming to the
Chamber this morning, I walked with our colleague
from South Sudan, who was in a very enthusiastic
mood. I asked him why he is in such a good mood. He
said, “well, do we not have a fantastic result here?” I
said, “well, it was the third deadline that was finally
met.” He said, “well, better late than never.” I agreed
with that, but we have to recall that where we are today
is where we were back in 2016, and in 2016 we also
thought that we had a solution for the problem. I think
therefore that we would be very well advised if we stay
a bit wary. Let me also recognize that the leaders, this
time, I would say, put the interests of the country and

S/PV. 8741

the people first. We all have to recognize that fact, and
we have done so.
But, as I said, we have to remain worried. There is
still no Government. I would also urge here, through
the Ambassador, that the promise be kept that 35 per
cent of ministers will be women. I heard someone say
with that with regard to the governors, we are not there
yet. I would also urge the Government and the parties
to see to it that 35 per cent of the governors are women.
The second part of the agreement that has not been
implemented yet involves the transitional security
arrangements. I would recall what David Shearer said
with respect to those arrangements: that in that area we
are dangerously lacking and that we must make every
effort to ensure that the process works well, that the
arrangements are put together properly and that the
proper training is provided, in particular with regard to
readiness to counter sexual violence.
Again, as I said, we need to be worried. Reports
of the International Committee of the Red Cross have
noted that the fresh regional violence has erupted and
that hundreds of civilians had to flee in Jonglei state.
There was a great deal of violence, and that is, by the
way, additional proof of the fact that climate change has
a direct effect on security, because, as we also heard
from the Special Representative, floods destroyed
crops and livelihoods and led to communal violence.
So what remains to be done? First, and I agree with
the programme that David Shearer presented, impunity
has to be addressed. There must be a continuing fight
against sexual violence; we need to have accountability
in that respect. Ms. Sunday also underlined this issue.
With respect to corruption, financial accountability
and transparency are key. However, I would also like,
because members all sit on the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan, to look at the report of the Panel of Experts.
The Panel reports regularly to the Sanctions Committee
about the lack of transparency with regard to the funds
released for the practical implementation of the peace
agreement. It would be good if there were not this lack
of transparency and the funds actually went into the
training camps in the containment areas. We heard
from Ms. Sunday about the situation on the ground in
the training areas.
The Panel of Experts also tracks the illicit
exploitation of and trade in the natural resources of

20-0576315/20

S/PV.8741

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudan and has noted the lack of oversight of where the
funds come from and where they go. South Sudan is a
rich country, but at the same time, as we heard from
the representative of the United Kingdom and other
countries, including Germany, millions are spent every
year to support the country. So I think that what we
can demand is actually that there be more financial
oversight and transparency.
Just to give the Council one concrete example
from the public report of the Panel of Experts, the
Ministry of Petroleum does not publish the names of
the companies bidding to buy South Sudan’s crude oil.
We know the crude oil, of course, is the country’s key
source of income.
So concerning impunity, the fight against
corruption and ending exclusion, I can only subscribe
to what Ms. Sunday said with regard to the need for
a greater role to be played by civil society and also
freedom of the press; that is key for a functioning State.
Concerning the future of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), again, we have to
be careful that there not be a repeat of what happened
in 2016, so I think we should keep the mandate as is.
UNMISS must continue to support the peace process.
Here I would also add my voice to those who have
asked the Government of South Sudan not to put any
restrictions on the movement of peacekeepers.
On the mandate, the first priority needs to be the
protection of civilians, and therefore I also support
what Mr. Shearer said with regard to the mobility of
peacekeepers and the support for the rule of law.
On the sanctions regime, we must look at it to see
if the lists have been updated, but I would warn again
against getting rid of the sanctions. The sanctions
were imposed for a reason; to achieve reconciliation,
we need accountability. We must not allow impunity
for the many crimes have been committed, including
violations of human rights, violations of international
humanitarian law and gross violations with regard to
sexual violence. So my plea is to continue with the good
work being done by the Sanctions Committee.
Last but not least, let me also add my voice to those
who have thanked Mr. Shearer and, through him, the
entire UNMISS team and all humanitarian actors. We
thank Betty Sunday and, through her, all of civil society
for their brave work. They are the one who have suffered
the most; women and children were the victims of this
16/20

04/03/2020

conflict, which lasted for too long. I would also like
to thank the African Union, the regional organizations,
South Africa and the Community of Sant’Egidio, which
is doing an important job.
Germany will continue to support the country
through development aid. Just a few weeks ago we
released a $5 million contribution to the UNMISS/United
Nations country team reconciliation, stabilization and
resilience trust fund, which supports community-based
programmes, addresses underlying causes of conflict
and provides socioeconomic incentives for peace; we
would like to encourage others to join us.
Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, and Ms. Betty Sunday for
their briefings.
Tunisia welcomes the latest developments in
the peace process in South Sudan, beginning with
the decision to establish the revitalized Transitional
Government. We consider this to be a new and crucial
step forward and hope that the international community
will continue to provide support to South Sudan so that
the transitional phase can be successful and security,
stability and peace can be established in South Sudan
and in the region.
Tunisia values the recent mediation efforts deployed
by the two special envoys of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and South Africa, under the
auspices of the African Union and a number of countries
of the region, in order to bring closer together the points
of view of the Government and the opposition.
We congratulate the South Sudanese parties, which
have shown flexibility and a sense of responsibility in
order to ensure that the interests of the people prevail.
We urge them to make further efforts to consolidate
trust and dialogue with a view to concluding the
establishment of a revitalized, inclusive Government
and to ensure greater participation by women. At the
same time, we encourage the Government and the
non-signatories to the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan to continue
the dialogue.
We reaffirm the importance of a final settlement of
pending issues, including borders between states and
transitional security measures, so as to further expedite
20-05763

04/03/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8741

the implementation of the peace process, pursuant to
the provisions of the revitalized agreement.

to it, especially in the area of protecting civilians and
monitoring and investigating human rights.

Based on its experience in political transition,
Tunisia believes that all transition stages can be
successful only through consensus. This is a strategic
option aimed at defusing political tensions and violence,
establishing democracy and promoting the participation
of women and young people, as well as supporting the
role of civil society. The latest positive developments
must not allow us to forget the remaining challenges
and complexities in South Sudan.

In conclusion, my country’s delegation expresses
its hope that the chapter of violence and fighting will be
closed forever in South Sudan, leading to a new phase
in its modern history based on sustained peace, justice,
national reconciliation and prosperity for the people of
South Sudan.

Tunisia welcomes the fact that the ceasefire
agreement is still widely in force. However, we express
our concern at the deterioration of the humanitarian and
economic situations and at the continued violations of
human rights, criminal acts and acts of sexual violence,
which are on the rise. These are violations described
in last month’s report of the Commission on Human
Rights in South Sudan.
We urge the Government to improve the security
situation throughout the country and to address
impunity. We also remind all parties to ensure respect
for international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and the delivery of safe and unimpeded
humanitarian assistance to those who need it, as well as
ensuring physical and emotional protection for citizens.
We emphasize the need for the international community
and the United Nations to continue to provide logistical
and technical support to the Government in order to
expedite the implementation of transitional security
measures, particularly with regard to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process and the
formation of a unified army, towards the creation of
a stable security, political and societal environment
for the safe and voluntary return of displaced persons
and refugees.
Tunisia supports the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
and believes that this is extremely important given the
current challenges. My country supports the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the Mission to advance the ongoing political
process under way between the South Sudanese parties.
We also support UNMISS in implementing its mandate
in accordance with its four strategic priorities. We call
as well for the facilitation of its work and freedom of
movement so that it can implement the tasks assigned

Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): There are no
small steps on the path of peace. Any distance covered
in the right direction brings us closer to the ultimate
goal — a return to peace. I fully share the optimism of
Mr. Shearer and encourage the South Sudanese political
actors to continue to demonstrate political courage
in order to make further progress along the difficult
but only viable path towards peace in the interest of
their people.
That optimism also shows through in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2020/145) in terms of respect
for the ceasefire and confidence-building between
the parties. The speech of peace by President Salva
Kiir on 22 February, in which he particularly called
for forgiveness and reconciliation among all sons and
daughters of the country, is a historic landmark that
should be commended.
The Niger supports the decision of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
to request a review of the composition and role of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
Regional Protection Force. We also welcome the plan
to hold regional conferences as part of the national
dialogue. We are well aware of the situation of women
and girls and appreciate the excellent work done by
Ms. Sunday to assist that vulnerable group of the South
Sudanese population.
In addition to the political glimmers of hope seen
recently, the improvement in the key macroeconomic
indicators is another positive sign that could strengthen
the current positive dynamic. In that way, South Sudan
could benefit from its vast resources and potential to
tackle the challenges that its people face.
How could we not congratulate the African Union,
IGAD, South Africa and South Sudan’s neighbouring
countries on their involvement in the peace process. We
express our support of UNMISS for its very positive
role in support of the peace process and hope that it

20-0576317/20

S/PV.8741

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

will have adequate resources to even better achieve
its mission.
Moreover, with regard to the very high price paid by
civilians, in particular women, my country would like
to recall the importance of implementing the provisions
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan of November 2018 concerning
transitional justice, whose true relevance we were able to
gauge during the debate organized on this issue during
the Belgian presidency of the Council (see S/PV.8718).
Only in that way will those severely affected by the
horrors of war overcome their trauma and start to pave
the way for a genuine reconciliation among all the sons
and daughters of South Sudan.
We await the good news that Ambassador Malwal,
who is here with us today, will certainly give us.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to note the briefing by Mr. David
Shearer, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and assure him of our full support in his
work and the United Nations peacekeeping operation
in South Sudan that he leads. We also thank Ms. Betty
Sunday for her briefing. We are also grateful to the
troop- and police-contributing countries within the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
South Sudan is a very young country at a crucial
moment in its history. It is the task of the international
community to provide the necessary support to the
South Sudanese to overcome the challenges facing
their country. Moscow welcomes the recent positive
developments in the peace process in South Sudan.
That was the result of the compromise agreements
reached by the main parties to the South Sudanese
process. We would like to highlight the important
initiative of President Salva Kiir, who showed political
will and made compromises on the administrative
division of the country. We also note Mr. Riek Machar’s
decision to join the process to form the Transitional
Government of National Unity and assume the post of
First Vice-President.
We believe that the beginning of the formation of
the country’s new governing bodies and the conclusion
of the pre-transition period within the previously agreed
time frame create the necessary conditions for South
Sudan to move towards political stability and national
reconciliation so as to successfully address the urgent
socioeconomic development challenges for the benefit
of all South Sudanese people.
18/20

04/03/2020

We believe it important that the parties be ready to
overcome their differences through frank dialogue. We
hope that all necessary formalities will be completed as
soon as possible and that the transition agreements will
continue to be implemented. We believe that only the
full and complete implementation of the commitments
undertaken by the parties will help to increase mutual
trust and prevent the recurrence of past mistakes.
We note the overall reduction in the level of armed
violence and in the number of intercommunal clashes
since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan of 2018. The
improvement in the security situation has facilitated
greater humanitarian access. The number of human
rights violations has decreased. All that has a positive
impact on the rate of return of South Sudanese refugees
and internally displaced persons to their places
of origin.
We attribute that primarily to the implementation
of confidence-building measures and contacts between
the opposing parties on the ground. It is important that
they continue to respect the terms of the ceasefire.
We call on the South Sudanese to strictly abide by
those agreements.
We also call on the non-signatory parties to the
Revitalized Agreement to join the State-building
process as soon as possible. We highlight the efforts
of the Community of Sant’Egidio and the Italian
Government to that end.
We have repeatedly stated and reiterate today that
the leading role in supporting the South Sudanese
peace process must be played by regional actors. In
that connection, we welcome the efforts undertaken
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the African Union, the Sudan, Kenya, Uganda and the
Republic of South Africa. It is important that their
approaches continue to promote unity. That will help
advance the implementation of the principle of African
solutions to African problems. We believe that progress
in settling the situation in South Sudan was not
facilitated by stronger sanctions against the country or,
in particular, the imposition of unilateral restrictions.
A key component in that progress was the contribution
made by regional mediators.
We trust that the South Sudanese will be able to
expeditiously reach an agreement on the whole array of
issues, which will give the Security Council a reason
to conduct an assessment of the sanctions regime, with
20-05763

04/03/2020

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

a view to tailoring it to reflect the real situation on
the ground.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
China thanks Special Representative of the
Secretary-General David Shearer for his briefing. I also
listened carefully to the briefing made by Ms. Sunday.
The political process in South Sudan has
recently made positive headway. China welcomes the
establishment, on schedule, of a transitional coalition
Government and congratulates South Sudan on that
achievement. We commend the leadership and courage
demonstrated by the leaders of South Sudan. That
marks an important step forward in the country’s peace
process with the active mediation by the international
community, especially by the African countries and
regional organizations concerned. In that regard, I
would like to highlight the following three points.
First, it is important to fully respect the leadership
of the Government of South Sudan. The parties in South
Sudan are primarily responsible for implementing the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan. International partners
should strengthen engagement and communication with
South Sudanese parties, especially the Government,
listen to and heed their input and suggestions and
provide financial, material and technical support to
ensure stability and security, as needed by South Sudan.
Secondly, it is vital to continue supporting the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
in its role as the main player in the area of mediation. The
international community should intensify coordination
with IGAD and the African Union, support their
mediation efforts and help all parties in South Sudan
build greater mutual trust and show more responsibility
and goodwill so that consensus can be reached as soon
as possible on all outstanding issues.
Thirdly, humanitarian and economic assistance
to South Sudan must be maintained. At present, the
focus should be on helping South Sudan address
its development problems, assisting the return and
resettlement of persons in camps for internally
displaced people and expanding investment in areas
such as agriculture, energy, infrastructure, education
and medical services to help the people of South Sudan
rebuild their homes and resume development efforts.

S/PV. 8741

China applauds the important contributions made
by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan to the
maintenance of peace and stability in the country,
supports the renewal of the Mission’s mandate and
continues to provide assistance to facilitate the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement and the
peace process so that the people of South Sudan can
reap peace dividends as soon as possible.
As in the past, China will support the peace process
in South Sudan and provide assistance as required. We
stand ready to work with the international community
constructively to help South Sudan maintain peace and
stability and achieve socioeconomic development.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Please accept our
good wishes to you, Mr. President, on your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March. My delegation is pleased
that China is President of the Council as South Sudan
shows positive developments in the implementation of
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict. China’s constructive engagement with the
region and the African Union to encourage the leaders
of South Sudan to work together is appreciated by the
people of South Sudan, and my delegation is ready to
closely cooperate with you during your presidency.
Allow me also to congratulate the new members
who joined the Council earlier this year. In particular,
we would like to wish a productive and successful
tenure to Tunisia and the Niger.
We would like to welcome Mr. David Shearer and
thank him for his briefing and his service to the people
of South Sudan. I also welcome our sister Betty Sunday.
I would like to assure the Council that the role of South
Sudanese women is irreversible. As my brother from
South Africa said, peace is dawning in South Sudan.
There is also the dawn of friendliness in the Council.
I agree with the representative of the United Kingdom,
as 35 per cent is indeed the floor. That percentage will
be increased as we move forward.
I would like to thank all members of the Council
for their statements today, which have demonstrated
a positive response to developments in South Sudan.
I have been vindicated because I have always told my
leaders that it is not what the Security Council does,
but rather what we do in Juba. Our actions are then

20-0576319/20

S/PV.8741

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

reflected in the Security Council. I thank all members
for their statements and encouragement. We hope to
continue on the same path.
My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General’s
report on the situation in South Sudan, covering the
period from 1 December 2019 to 15 February 2020
(S/2020/145). As always, we pay close attention to the
Secretary-General’s observations and recommendations.
The leaders and the people of South Sudan value
his support, encouragement and positive advice. As
has already been reported, there have been historic
developments in South Sudan since the report was
written. We are grateful that the Secretary-General we
able to include in his report the historic and momentous
decision of President Salva Kiir Mayardit to return
South Sudan’s federal system to 10 states, plus three
administrative areas, on 21 February.
Since that decision, the five Vice-Presidents have
taken an oath of office and Mr. Riek Machar has returned
to reside in Juba permanently. The parties signatory to
the agreement have been in continuous negations to find
a formula on how to divide the ministerial portfolios
equitably. The people of South Sudan are on standby to
hear the imminent announcement of the new Cabinet of
national unity any time between now and Friday.
With regard to the issue of sanctions, many Council
members today mentioned the peace dividend. The
new Government of National Unity should not have
to start its mandate with the dividend of sanctions as
the way forward. The Government is a new one, and
the international community should be in a position to
grant it some leeway to move the people of South Sudan
forward. If it is tied down with sanctions, I am afraid
that its progress will be slowed. However, that decision
lies with the Council.
As we celebrate the glimmers of positive
developments in South Sudan, daunting challenges

20/20

04/03/2020

remain. Our statement today would be remiss if we did
not repeat our appeal to the international community
to provide much-needed assistance and support to the
people of South Sudan in order for the peace agreement
to hold in the long run. The coming Government
of National Unity will need technical, material and
specialized expertise in order to establish liveable
cantonment sites and to ensure the orderly and peaceful
return of internally displaced persons and refugees
from our neighbouring countries.
Our appeal to peace-loving members of the
international community is simply this — if they have
stood with the people of South Sudan during the past
six difficult years, this is the most opportune time to
double or triple their care and support for the people of
South Sudan, for the sake of lasting peace and unity in
South Sudan. As a sign of the good things happening in
my the Council, I agree with my friend the Ambassador
of the Federal Republic of Germany. We welcome
his country’s engagement. We are not asking anyone
to move on to the next flavour. We still need Council
members to be engaged and to see to it that we are on
the right path. They are most welcome, and we want
to thank Germany for starting to submit its grants for
development projects. That is what will keep the peace
on track in South Sudan. When you have something
dear to hold on to, you are not likely to destroy it so
easily. We again thank Germany and hope that all
Council members will contribute to the development of
South Sudan in the near future.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

20-05763
