172

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

other measures in respect of their nationals and the
bodies corporate under their jurisdiction who own and
operate enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly
in Africa, which are detrimental to the interests of the
inhabitants of those Territories, in order to put an end
to such enterprises and to prevent new investments
that run counter to the interests of the inhabitants of
those Territories;
9. Requests all States to refrain from making any
investments in, or extending loans to, the minority
racist regimes in southern Africa and to refrain from
any agreements or measures to promote trade or other
economic relations with them;
10. Expresses its conviction that the scope of the
sanctions adopted against the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia should be expanded to cover all the measures
contemplated in Article 41 of the Charter and expresses
the hope that the Security Council will envisage adopting appropriate measures to this end;
11. Condemns all violations of the mandatory
sanctions imposed by the Security Council against the
illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia,
as well as the continued failure of certain Member
States to enforce those sanctions, as being contrary
to ,the obligations assumed by them under Article 25
of the Charter;
12. Requests all States to take effective measures
to end the supply of funds and other forms of assistance,
including military supplies and equipment, to those
regimes which use such assistance to repress the peoples of the colonial Territories and their national liberation movements;
13. Calls once again upon all States to discontinue
all economic, financial or trade relations with South
Africa concerning Namibia and to refrain from entering
into economic, financial or other relations with South
Africa, acting on behalf of or concerning Namibia,
which may lend support to iits continued illegal occupation of that Territory;
14. Requests all oil-producing or oil-exporting
countries which supply crude oil and petroleum products to the racist regime of South Africa to cease fo11thwith all exports of crude oil and petroleum products to
the racist regimes in southern Africa and to take the
necessary measures against oil companies which, in
violation of the United Nations resolutions on sanctions,
continue to deliver oil to those regimes;
15. Strongly condemns the racist minority regime
of South Africa which, in violation of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations and in open contravention of iits specific obligations under Article 25 of
the Charter, continues to collaborate with the illegal
racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia, and calls
upon that Government to cease immediately all forms
of collaboration with the illegal racist minority regime
in Southern Rhodesia;
16. Invites all Governments and organizations
within the United Nations system, having regard to the
relevant provisions of the Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, contained in General Assembly resolution 3201 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, and of the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, contained in Assembly resolution
3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, to ensure in

particular that the permanent sovereignty of the colonial
Territories over their natural resources is fully respected
and safeguarded;
17. Calls upon the administering Powers to abolish
every discriminatory and unjust wage system which
prevails in the Territories under their administration
and to apply in each Terri,tory a uniform system of
wages to all the inhabitants without any discrimination;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake,
through the Office of Public Information of the Secretariat, a sustained and wide campaign with a view to
informing world public opinion of the facts concerning
the pillaging of natural resources and the exploitation
of the indigenous populations by foreign monopolies
and the support they render to the colonialist and racist
regimes;
19. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to continue to examine this
question and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977

32/36.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
and the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, contained in its resolution 2621
(XXV) of 12 October 1970, as well as all other relevant resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and
the Security Council on this subject, including in particular Assembly resolution 31 /30 of 29 November
1976,
Having examined the reports submitted on the item
by the Secretary-General, 53 the Economic and Social
Council 04 and the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,"" as well as the !'elated report of the
United Nations Council for Namibia/H
Taking into account the Maputo Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the
Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe
53 A/3:!/87 and Add.1-3 and A/32/286; see also A/AC.109/
L.1174.
5-i Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/32/3), chap. VII, sect. E.
55
Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/32/23/Rev.1), vol. I,
chap. VI
6
5 Ibid., Supplement No. 24 (A/32/24), vol. I, part two,
chaps. II and V, and vol. II, annexes III, IX and X.

VII.

173

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

and Namibia, 57 adopted by the International Conference
in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia,
held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977, as well as
the Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheid, 58
adopted by the World Conference for Action against
Apartheid, held at Lagos from 22 to 26 August 1977,
Convinced that the struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia for self-determination and independence has entered its final and most crucial stage
and that it is therefore incumbent upon the entire international community to intensify concerted action in
support of the peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and
their national liberation movements for the attainment
of this goal,
Deeply conscious of the critical need of the peoples
of Zimbabwe and Namibia and of other colonial Territories for concrete assistance from the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations in their struggle for liberation
from colonial rule and in their efforts to consolidate
their national independence,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the specialized agendes and other organizations within the United Nations
system to take all effective measures, within their respective spheres of competence, to ensuve the full and
speedy implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
particularly in the provision of moral and material assistance, on a priority basis, to the peoples of the colonial Territories and their national liberation movements,
Noting with concern that, although there has been
progress in the extension of assistance to refugees from
the colonial Territories in Africa, the actions taken
hitherto by the organizations concerned in providing
assistanc,e to the peoples of the Territories through
their national liberation movements continue to remain
inadequate to meet the urgent needs of these peoples,
Expressing its confident hope that closer contacts
and consultations between the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and the Organization of African Unity and the national
liberation movements of the colonial Territories will
help to overcome procedural and other difficulties which
have impeded or delayed the implementation of some
assistance programmes,
Welcoming with satisfaction the report of the mission
dispatched by the United Nations Council for Namibia
to specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system with headquarters in Europe59 and the 11ecommendations contained therein, to
which reference is made in the Maputo Declaration,
Expressing its appreciation to the General Secretariat
of the Organization of African Unity for the continued
co-operation and assistance extended by it to the organizations within the United Nations system in connexion
with the implementation of the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations,
5 7 A/32/109/Rev.l-S/12344/Rev.1, annex V. For the printed
text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirtysecond Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977.
58 A/CONF.91/9 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.
59 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/32/24), vol. II, annex III.

Mindful of the necessity to keep under continuous
veview the activities of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in the implementation of the various decisions relating
to decolonization,
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the item; 60
2. Reaffirms that the recognition by the General
Assembly, the Security Council and other United Nations organs of the legitimacy of the struggle of colonial peoples to achieve freedom and independence
entails, as a corollary, the extension by the organizations
within the United Nations system of all the necessary
moral and material assistance to the peoples of the
colonial Territories and their national liberation movements;
3. Reiterates the appeal contained in the Maputo
Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia and the Programme of Action for the
Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia to the international community to redouble its assistance to the
peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and their national
liberation movements during this crucial phase in their
struggle for freedom and independence;
4. Expresses its appreciation to certain specialized
agencies and organizations within the United Nations
system which have continued to co-operate in varying
degrees with the United Nations in the implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples and other relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
5. Expresses its concern that the assistance extended
so far by the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to the colonial
peoples, particularly those of Zimbabwe and Namibia,
and to their national liberation movements is far from
adequate in relation to the actual needs of the peoples
conoemed;
6. Regrets that the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have not yet taken the necessary
measures towards the full and speedy implementation
of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, deplores in particular the fact that
those agencies continue to maintain co-operation with
the colonialist racist minority regime of South Africa
and urges the executive heads of those agencies to draw
the particular attention of their governing organs to
the present resolution with a view to formulating specific programmes beneficial to the peoples of the colonial Territories, particularly Zimbabwe and Namibia;
7. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to render
o_r continue to render, as a matter of urgency, all possible moral and material assistance to the colonial
peoples in Africa struggling for their liberation from
colonial rule;
8. Requests once again the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
to continue to provide all moral and material assistance
to the newly independent and emerging States;
9. Recommends that the organizations concerned
should initiate or broaden contacts with the colonial
GO Ibid.,
chap. VJ

Supplement

No.

23

(A/32/23/Rev.l),

vol.

J,

174

General A1sembly-Thirty-second Session

peoples in consultation with the Organization of African Unity, review their procedures. with respect to the
formulation and preparation of assistance programmes
and projects and introduce greater flexibility in these
procedures so as to be able to extend the necessary
assistance without delay to help the colonial peoples
and their national liberation movements in their struggle
to exercise their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
10. Urges those specialized agencies and organizations within the United Nations system which have not
already done so to include in the agenda of the regular
meetings of their governing bodies a separate item on
the progress made by those organizations in their implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
11. Urges once again the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, to take all
necessary measures to withhold any financial, economic,
technical or other assistance from the Government of
South Africa and the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia, to discontinue all support to them until they
restore to the peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence
and to refrain from taking any action which might imply
recognition of, or support for, the legitimacy of the
domination of the Territories by those regimes;
12. Notes with satisfaction the arrangements made
by several specialized agencies and organizations within
the United Nations system which enabl,e representatives
of the national liberation movements recognized by the
Organization of African Unity to participate fully as
observers in the proceedings relating to matters concerning their respective countries, and calls upon those
agencies and organizations which have not yet done so
to follow this example and to make the necessary arrangements without delay;
13. Recommends that all Governments should intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
of which they are members to ensure the full and effective impl'ementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations and, in that
connexion, should accord priority to the question of
providing assistance on an emergency basis to peoples
in the colonial Territories and to their national liberation movements;
14. Urges the executive heads of the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system, having regard to the recommendations
contained in paragraph 9 above, to formulate with the
active co-operation of the Organization of African
Unity and to submit, as a matter of priority, to their
governing and legislative organs concrete proposals for
the full implementation of the relevant United Nations
decisions, in particular specific programmes of assistance to the peoples in the colonial Territories and their
national liberation movements;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
assist the specialized agencies and other organizations
within the United Nations system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the present resolution and to prepare for submission to the relevant

bodies with the assistance of those agencies and other
organi;ations, a report on the action taken sin~ the
circulation of his previous report in implementat10n of
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, including
the present resolution;
l 6. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee. appropriate measures for co-ordination of
the policies and activities of the specializ·ed agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system in implementing the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
17. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977

32/37.

United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa,
in particular resolution 31/31 of 29 November 1976,
Recalling further its resolution 31/ 126 of 16 December 197 6 on emergency assistance for South African
refugee students,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the Programme for 1976/77, 61
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on emergency assistance for South African student
refugees, 62
Recognizing that, because of the continuing influx
of refugee students from southern Africa into neighbouring States and the significant increases in the cost
of educational and training awards, additional funds
are essential if the Programme is to continue in operation at a satisfactory level,
Reaffirming that the Programme has been a significant and worthwhile effort of the international community and that its continuation and expansion during
this crucial period are desirable,
I. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa;
2. Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa for the
work they have accomplished in strengthening and expanding the Programme;
3. Appeals once again to all States, organizations
and individuals to make generous contributions to the
Programme in order to ensure its continuation and
expansion in the light of the increased needs.

83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
61 A/32/283.
62 A/32/65 and Add. I.
