S/2019/159

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 February 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 15 February 2019 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to the request of the Security Council in paragraph 61 of its resolution
2409 (2018), I have the honour to submit a 30-day update, covering the period from
1 to 31 January 2019, on political and technical progress towards the holding of
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 23 December 2018 and on
obstacles to the implementation of the political agreement of 31 December 2016 (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

19-02738 (E)

220219

*1902738*

S/2019/159

Annex
Update of the Secretary-General on progress in the electoral
process and the implementation of the political agreement of
31 December 2016 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
31 January 2019
1.
The present update, which covers developments from 1 to 31 January 2019, is
submitted pursuant to resolution 2409 (2018), in which the Security Council
requested the Secretary-General to provide a written update every 30 days on political
and technical progress towards the holding of elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and on obstacles to the implementation of the political agreement of
31 December 2016.

I. Key political developments related to the electoral process
and the implementation of the political agreement
2.
Political developments following the presidential, legislative and provincial
elections of 30 December 2018 centred on the outcome of the polls, which culminated
in the inauguration of Félix Tshisekedi as President on 24 January 2019. Electoral
observer missions deployed by the African Union, the Economic Community of
Central African States, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and
the Southern African Development Community (SADC) noted that the elections took
place in an overall peaceful atmosphere despite some logistical challenges, gave a
generally positive assessment of the use of the voting machines and encouraged
parties to address any electoral disputes through existing legal mechanisms.
3.
National observer missions deployed by civil society and faith-based
organizations, notably the Episcopal Conference of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Synergie des missions d’observation citoyenne des élections, issued
preliminary reports on the electoral process following the polls. The Episcopal
Conference and Synergie des missions d’observation citoyenne des élections noted
the enthusiasm of the population to elect its representatives but enumerated several
issues that occurred on election day, including the late opening of some polling
stations, the malfunctioning of some voting machines and isolated attempts to coerce
voters. The Independent National Electoral Commission indicated that voting hours
had been extended for polling stations that had opened after a delay and th at
technicians had been deployed to repair the faulty machines, noting that the machines
had functioned well in 95 per cent of cases.
4.
On 3 January, the Secretary-General of the Episcopal Conference of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Donatien Nshole, issued a statement in which he
noted that the data collected by the Episcopal Conference from tally sheets of polling
stations “confirmed the choice of a candidate as President of the Republic ”. He also
called upon the Independent National Electoral Co mmission to publish electoral
results that “respect truth and justice”. On 4 January, in a letter to the Episcopal
Conference, the President of the Independent National Electoral Commission,
Corneille Nangaa, denounced the statement of Mr. Nshole, citing t he various laws
that proscribe the publication of results by any institution other than the Commission.
On the same day, the principal diplomatic adviser to former President Joseph Kabila,
Barnabé Kikaya Bin Karubi, condemned the Episcopal Conference ’s statement,
arguing that it had violated the Constitution, the electoral law and the electoral code
of conduct. On 5 January, the President of the Episcopal Conference, Marcel Utembi,
replied to the Commission’s letter, noting that the Episcopal Conference had not

2/9

19-02738

S/2019/159

violated any laws and was ready to meet the Commission to discuss the methodology
used to compile the results of the polls.
5.
Initially scheduled for 6 January, the publication of the provisional results of the
elections was postponed by the Independent National Electoral Commission until
10 January. Félix Tshisekedi of the Cap pour le changement platform was declared
the winner of the presidential election (38.57 per cent), ahead of Martin Fayulu of the
Lamuka coalition (34.83 per cent) and Emmanuel Ramazani Shadary of the ruling
Front commun pour le Congo platform (23.84 per cent). The voter turnout was 47.7
per cent. Initially scheduled to be published on 23 January in accordance with the
electoral calendar, the provisional results of the elections for 23 of the 26 provincial
assemblies were also released on 10 January. The provisional results of the elections
for the remaining three provincial assemblies were announced on 12 January. Initial
analysis of the results suggests that the Front commun po ur le Congo will likely have
the majority of seats in 23 of the 26 provincial assemblies, positioning it to play a
decisive role in electing the governors, vice-governors and senators. On 12 January,
the Commission also released a provisional list of 485 c andidates elected to the
National Assembly. The Front commun pour le Congo won more than 330 seats, Cap
pour le changement about 50 and Lamuka around 100. At least 50 women were
elected to the National Assembly, representing virtually no change in strength from
the outgoing legislature. A total of 15 seats have yet to be allocated in the four
constituencies of Beni city, Beni territory, Butembo, in North Kivu, and Yumbi
territory, in Mai-Ndombe, where elections have been postponed until March.
6.
With a few notable exceptions, initial reactions to the announcement of the
provisional presidential results were temperate, with supporters of Mr. Tshisekedi
gathering for spontaneous celebrations in Kinshasa and a number of cities in the
country. Reacting to the election results, Mr. Tshisekedi praised the work of the
President of the Independent National Electoral Commission, congratulated the
unsuccessful candidates for their participation in the presidential race and affirmed
that he would be a president for “all Congolese”. He also paid tribute to former
President Kabila. While expressing regret that their candidate had not won the
presidential election, senior members of the ruling majority welcomed the provisional
results.
7.
Mr. Fayulu rejected the provisional results published by the Independent
National Electoral Commission, noting that they had “nothing to do with the truth of
the ballot box”, and called upon the Congolese people to resist what he described as
an “electoral coup”. He also called upon the United Nations, the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, SADC and world leaders to
show “solidarity with the Congolese people” as the final election results are
established. The Episcopal Conference of the Democratic Republ ic of the Congo
issued a statement in which it noted that the provisional results of the presidential
election did not correspond to the data collected by its observers and urged Congolese
stakeholders to use legal means to challenge the results. The Minis ters for Foreign
Affairs of Belgium and France expressed doubts about the credibility of the results.
On 12 January, Mr. Fayulu challenged the provisional results before the
Constitutional Court, requesting, inter alia, a vote recount. On the same day, the
presidential candidate Théodore Ngoy filed a complaint before the Court in which he
protested against the Commission’s decision to postpone the holding of elections in
Beni city, Beni territory, Butembo and Yumbi territory. The Front commun pour le
Congo did not file any complaint regarding the results of the presidential election.
8.
Between 10 and 14 January, following the announcement of the provisional
results, isolated violent incidents occurred in Kinshasa and a number of cities in
Équateur, Kasai, Kwilu, Haut-Katanga, North Kivu and Tshopo Provinces, resulting
in the death and wounding of several people.
19-02738

3/9

S/2019/159

9.
On 13 January, in a press statement, the President of Zambia, Edgar Lungu, as
Chair of the SADC Organ on Politics, Defence and Security, issued a communiqué in
which he recommended a vote recount and called for a negotiated political settlement
paving the way for a government of national unity. On the same day, the President of
the Congo, Denis Sassou Nguesso, called for a vote recount and the form ation of a
national unity government. Mr. Fayulu welcomed the statements, thanking SADC for
requesting a vote recount and noting that such as measure would allow “the person
who actually won” to be declared president. A spokesperson of the Front commun
pour le Congo called upon Congolese political coalitions and foreign Governments to
refrain from giving “instructions” to the Constitutional Court of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. On 14 January, the Department of International Relations and
Cooperation of South Africa issued a statement in which it called upon all parties in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the international community to allow the
internal constitutional mechanisms and legal processes to follow their due course. On
the same day, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia, Joseph Malanji, stated to
South African media that President Lungu had “at no point indicated to any
stakeholders that there should be a recount”, noting that the process should follow the
Constitution of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
10. On 17 January, a Double Troika Summit of SADC on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was held in Addis Ababa. The Summit released a
communiqué in which it called upon the international community to re spect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity as well as the internal legal and political processes
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. On the same day, in Addis Ababa, the
President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame, as Chair of the African Union, convened a highlevel consultative meeting on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Following the meeting, a communiqué was released in which the Heads of State and
Government who attended the meeting expressed “serious doubts on the conformity
of the provisional results … with the votes cast”. They called for “the suspension of
the proclamation of the final results of the election” and indicated that they had agreed
to urgently dispatch a high-level delegation to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to interact with all Congolese stakeholders with a view to reaching a consensus on a
way out of the post-electoral crisis in the country.
11. In response to the various statements of regional actors, the Minister of
Information and Spokesperson of the Government, Lambert Mende, called upon
neighbouring countries of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to refrain from
supporting “destabilization plans and hostile external strategies by foreign powers ”.
He observed that the chairs of the African Union and th e International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region should exercise their respective mandates only in line with
decisions collectively agreed upon by member States, including the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
12. On 19 January, the Constitutional Court rejected the appeals against the
provisional results of the presidential election and confirmed Mr. Tshisekedi as
President-elect. The Court rejected Mr. Fayulu’s demand for the results to be rectified
and the votes recounted, noting that the request was unfounded owing to a lack of
evidence. His demand for a vote recount was dismissed as “absurd” insofar as only
the Independent National Electoral Commission, in the Court ’s view, had provided
“accurate, reliable and sincere results” of the polls. The Court also declared to be
unfounded his claim that the Commission’s decision to announce the provisional
results before the end of the results compilation process violated the electoral law.
Furthermore, the Court dismissed the appeals of Mr. Fayulu and Mr. N goy in which
they protested against the Commission’s decision to postpone the holding of elections
in Beni city, Beni territory, Butembo and Yumbi territory, arguing that the decision
was a violation of the constitutional right to universal suffrage. The C ourt ruled that
4/9

19-02738

S/2019/159

the Commission’s decision was justified by a case of force majeure in view of the
Ebola outbreak and security concerns.
13. On 20 January, Mr. Fayulu rejected the Court’s ruling, describing it as a
“constitutional coup d’état” and declared himself the sole legitimate President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. He called upon the international community not
to recognize Mr. Tshisekedi and urged the Congolese people to participate in peaceful
protests against the Court’s decision. His calls for demonstrations, however, went
largely unheeded. Several Congolese presidential candidates, political actors,
including the ruling majority, and civil society organizations welcomed the Court ’s
ruling. Other presidential candidates and civil society representatives, however,
rejected the Court’s ruling, arguing that it did not reflect the will expressed by the
people. Mr. Tshisekedi called for national unity and reconciliation as he celebrated
his victory with his coalition members and supporters.
14. SADC reacted to the Court’s ruling through a statement by the President of
Namibia, Hage Geingob, in his capacity as Chair of SADC, in which he congratulated
Mr. Tshisekedi on his victory; called upon the Congolese people and stakeholders to
accept the outcome of the election and support the President -elect and his
Government in maintaining unity, peace and stability; and reiterated the ne ed for all
actors to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The President of South Africa, Cyril Ramaphosa, echoed the Chair of
SADC and congratulated Mr. Tshisekedi on his election. Several other preside nts of
African States and world leaders congratulated Mr. Tshisekedi on his win. The
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, issued a
statement “taking note” of the Constitutional Court’s ruling and announcing the
postponement, without specifying a new date, of the visit of the delegation of African
Heads of State, which was scheduled to arrive in Kinshasa on 21 January.
15. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, Didier Reynders, expressed doubts
about the “transparency of the process” and his hope that the situation would not
degenerate into violence. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, Jean -Yves Le
Drian, reiterated his “doubts” about the outcome of the polls but indicated that priority
should be given to ensuring a peaceful transition. France subsequently took note of
the Court’s decision and encouraged the President-elect to pursue dialogue with all
Congolese stakeholders. A Spokesperson of the European Union stated that “doubts
remained” about the conformity of the results of the elections. However, on
22 January, at a joint press conference in Brussels, representatives of the African
Union and the European Union took note of the Constitutional Court ’s ruling and
stated their readiness to work with President-elect Tshisekedi. On 23 January, the
United States of America welcomed the Court’s certification of Mr. Tshisekedi as the
next President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and encouraged the
Government to be inclusive and address reports of electoral irregul arities.
16. On the eve of the inauguration of the President-elect, outgoing President Kabila
delivered a speech in which he highlighted the daunting political, security and
economic challenges he had faced when he had taken power in January 2001,
following the assassination of the then President Laurent-Désiré Kabila and amid
threats against the territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He
recalled the various measures his Government had needed to take to recover the
territorial integrity of the country, to reunite the country through political dialogue,
to initiate a democratic process and to launch economic recovery and development
plans. Noting the new political dispensation created by the elections of 30 December
2018, he urged Congolese stakeholders across the political spectrum to form a large
coalition for the consolidation of democracy and the defence of the sovereignty of the
country.

19-02738

5/9

S/2019/159

17. On 24 January, Mr. Tshisekedi was sworn in as President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo by the Constitutional Court at a ceremony held in Kinshasa.
The ceremony was attended by the outgoing President, senior government officials,
foreign dignitaries, civil society and faith-based organizations and a large crowd of
supporters of President Tshisekedi. In his inaugural speech, President Tshisekedi
highlighted the need for national unity and reconciliation and described the handover
of power as a historic moment in the democratic process of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. He paid tribute to former Congolese Heads of State and Government,
namely, Joseph Kasavubu, Patrice Lumumba, Mobutu Sese Seko and Laurent -Désiré
Kabila, for their crucial role in laying the foundations for the independence, dignity
and development of the country. He also paid homage to the unsuccessful presidential
candidates, Mr. Fayulu and Mr. Ramazani Shadary, and announced that the Minister
of Justice would identify all political prisoners in the country for their eventual
release. He congratulated former President Kabila for “reunifying the national
territory” and allowing the Congolese people to “freely choose its leaders”. He
stressed the importance of consolidating the rule of law, promoting fundamental
human rights and amending the electoral law with a view to establishing a voting
system adapted to the realities of the country. On 25 January, President Tshisekedi
and former President Kabila met to discuss matters related to the handover of power.
President Tshisekedi effectively assumed his functions on the same day and appointed
Vital Kamerhe, his ally and former Speaker of the National Assembly, as his Chief of
Staff.

II. Key electoral developments related to the implementation of
the political agreement
A.

Electoral developments
18. The time frame for the results tabulation process extended slightly longer than
envisaged in the electoral calendar but was largely similar to that which was observed
for the 2006 and 2011 elections. According to the Independent National Electoral
Commission, the receipt of results at the local results compilation centres was slowed
down by several factors, including the non-payment or delays in the payment of
salaries to some electoral officers, incorrectly filled -out tally sheets by polling station
officials, delays in the delivery of tally sheets from polling stations in remote areas
and the lack of Internet connection. The Commission took various measures to speed
up the process, including the payment of bonuses to electoral officers, the deployment
of personnel from the Commission’s headquarters to remote locations and an increase
in controls at the national centre in charge of examining the compiled results.
Electoral observer missions found that in general the results compilation process was
open to observers and representatives of political parties, although some complained
about a lack of access.
19. In line with its decision to assume all financial and logistical responsibilities for
organizing the elections, the Government did not request any logistical support from
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). On election day, however, MONUSCO provided limited
direct technical support at the request of the Independent National Electoral
Commission. MONUSCO was not involved in any results compilation or certification
processes.

6/9

19-02738

S/2019/159

B.

Restrictions on political space and violence related to the
implementation of the political agreement in the electoral context
20. Violations of freedom of the press and of expression were recorded during the
reporting period. On 1 January, in Samba, Kasongo territory, Maniema Province, the
Director of Mwangaza Radio and a civil society coordinator were reportedly
threatened following a broadcast about irregularities observed duri ng the elections.
The radio station was reportedly closed by the authorities two days later. On
5 January, in Mbuji-Mayi, Kasai Oriental Province, equipment of Radio Télévision
Debout Kasai, which belongs to a politician close to the opposition, was report edly
destroyed by a group of unidentified individuals.
21. On 1 January, the spokesperson of the ruling majority, André -Alain Atundu,
stated that the decision of the Government to cut Internet and mobile services
nationwide beginning on 31 December 2018 was aimed at “preventing malicious and
ill-intended” posts about elections on social media platforms. Members of the
opposition reacted strongly to the decision, arguing that it deprived stakeholders and
the public of the opportunity to scrutinize the electoral process. The campaign director
of Mr. Fayulu, Pierre Lumbi, denounced the initiative as “an act of electoral fraud”,
while members of the Cap pour le changement platform accused the Government of
suppressing the “truth of the ballots”.
22. Internet and mobile services were restored on 19 January. Several private radio
stations and television channels close to the opposition were reopened between 21 and
24 January. The signal of Radio France Internationale was also restored on 21 January.
23. The situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was generally calm
following the release of the provisional and final results of the elections. However, in
the immediate aftermath of the announcement of the provisional results, celebratory
demonstrations and protests against the results were violently repressed by national
security forces, notably in Kasai and Tshopo Provinces. In Kasai Province, on
10 January, during spontaneous celebrations, a man was reportedly killed by soldiers
shooting to disperse crowds in Mutshima, Kamonia territory. Three persons, including
a woman, were also reportedly killed by police officers who shot live bullets to
disperse a demonstration in Tshikapa. In Tshopo Province, several people were
injured in Kisangani when the police clashed with demonstrators protesting against
the provisional results. Demonstrations against the provisional results were violently
repressed by national security forces in several locations in Kinshasa, Équateur, Haut Katanga, Kwilu and Tanganyika Provinces. At least 15 persons, including 2 boys and
1 woman, were killed by national security forces in six locations in the
aforementioned provinces, and at least 14 incidents of arbitrary arrests were
documented. In Kwilu, the electoral stronghold of Mr. Fayul u, violent incidents
reportedly led to the wounding of 40 police officers and soldiers, the destruction of a
number of buildings and a prison break in Kikwit. In addition, incidents of retaliation
by armed groups related to the outcome of the elections wer e documented in North
Kivu. On 12 January, in Ntete, Masisi territory, six persons, including three minors
and one woman, were killed and a woman was raped during an incursion by suspected
members of armed groups, notably the Nduma défense du Congo -Rénové and the
Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain-Mapenzi. The armed men
shot indiscriminately at the civilian population, accusing them of having voted for the
wrong candidates in the elections. On 14 January, in Mashaki, Masisi territory, t he
same groups killed three women and a 16-year-old boy. There were also isolated
violent incidents with an ethnic undertone in some areas in Kinshasa and Kasai
Province.

19-02738

7/9

S/2019/159

C.

Confidence-building measures
24. There was limited progress in the implementation of the confidence -building
measures envisaged in the political agreement 31 December 2016. However,
following the pardon granted by President Kabila on 29 December 2018, two political
opposition leaders, Jean-Claude Muyambo and Gérard Mulumba, imprisoned on
charges of illegal sale of property and offences against the Head of State, respectively,
were released on 3 January 2019.

III. Good offices efforts for the implementation of the
political agreement
25. In pursuit of her good offices mandate, my Special Representative, Leila
Zerrougui, held meetings with key stakeholders, including President Kabila and
presidential candidates, to help to defuse tensions ahead of the publication of the
provisional results of the elections. She urged the presidential candidates to work
towards the peaceful conclusion of the electoral process through dialogue and to seek
redress for any grievances through established judicial mechanisms. She held several
meetings with the Independent National Electoral Commission, civil society and
faith-based organizations, including the Episcopal Conference of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. She also engaged regularly with the African Union
representative in Kinshasa and relevant key stakeholders following the ruling of the
Constitutional Court. As part of her good offices efforts, she met President Tshisekedi
and Mr. Fayulu on 29 and 30 January, respectively.
26. At the regional level, my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, Said
Djinnit, continued to engage key signatory countries of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
regional actors and international partners in support of concerted preventive action.
Underlining the need for close collaboration, he held a series of consultations with
senior officials from the Governments of Angola and the Congo, the Framework
guarantors (namely, the African Union, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and SADC) and the European Union.

IV. Observations
27. I wish to congratulate the Congolese people and all national stakeholders for the
largely peaceful presidential, legislative and provincial elections. While deploring the
isolated violent incidents that did occur, I commend the determination and restraint
displayed by the population, political actors and national security forces. I welcome
the dedication shown by national and regional actors in observing the electoral
process and the calls by the African Union, SADC, the Episcopal Conference of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, civil society and others for the resolution of any
electoral disputes through legal means. I note, however, the mistrust expressed by
some opposition, civil society and international actors regarding key elements of the
electoral process, notably in relation to the results tabulation process.
28. I take note of the ruling by the Constitutional Court and congratulate
Mr. Tshisekedi on his inauguration as President of the Democra tic Republic of the
Congo. I also note the role played by former President Kabila in ensuring a peaceful
transfer of power, marking the first orderly transition in the post -independence history
of the country. I urge all Congolese stakeholders to maintain dialogue, place the
national interest before partisan considerations and promote consensus.

8/9

19-02738

S/2019/159

29. The swearing-in of the new President on 24 January marks the culmination of
the implementation of the political agreement of 31 December 2016. Despite flaws,
notably regarding the implementation of the confidence -building measures, the
agreement led to a peaceful transfer of power and the election of new members of
institutions at the national and provincial levels. This represents a remarkable
achievement for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
30. I encourage regional and international actors to continue to support the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as it consolidates its democratic institutions with
a view to strengthening the foundations for the rule of law, the promotion and
protection of human rights and accountable, effective and equitable govern ance for
the benefit of all citizens. I thank my Special Representative, the United Nations
country team and all United Nations personnel who continue to support the Congolese
Government and people at various levels.

19-02738

9/9
