S/2021/839

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 September 2021
Original: English

Small arms and light weapons
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report is submitted pursuant to resolution 2220 (2015) and the
request to the Secretary-General to continue to submit biennial reports on the issue of
small arms and light weapons.
Since the previous report (S/2019/1011), small arms and light weapons have
continued to play a central role in initiating, exacerbating and sustaining armed
conflict, pervasive violence and acts of crime and terrorism.
The humanitarian impact of illicit small arms and light weapons flows, as well
as the negative implications for sustainable development and sustaining peace,
remained fully apparent.
In line with past practice, concluding observations and recommendations are
offered with a view to supporting Member States in their efforts to effectively tackle
threats arising from the misuse, illicit transfer and destabilizing accumulation of small
arms and light weapons. Various recommendations are also offered throughout the
thematic sections.

21-12603 (E)

051021

*2112603*

S/2021/839

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to resolution 2220 (2015) and the
request to the Secretary-General to continue to submit reports on the issue of small
arms and light weapons on a biennial basis.
2.
Since the previous report (S/2019/1011), threats related to the misuse, illicit
transfer and destabilizing accumulation of small arms and light weapons and their
ammunition have remained a defining factor in undermining peace and security at the
national, regional and global levels. From the Central African Republic to Libya,
South Sudan, the Sudan and Yemen, the proliferation of and illicit trafficking in those
weapons have deeply aggravated situations for vulnerable populations already
suffering from conflict.
3.
At least 176,095 civilian deaths were recorded in 12 of the world’s deadliest
armed conflicts between 2015 and 2020. In 2020, five civilians per 100,000 people
were killed in armed conflict, and one in seven of those was a woman or a child. Most
civilian deaths were caused by small arms and light weapons (27 per cent) or by heavy
weapons and explosive munitions (24 per cent). 1 The death toll of armed violence
occurring outside of conflict is even higher. Globally, more than half of all victims of
homicide are killed with a firearm. 2
4.
A continued rise in global military spending has fed into cycles of insecurity
and mistrust. In 2020, total global military expenditure rose to almost 2 trillion United
States dollars, despite the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID -19) pandemic.
5.
In the light of the urgency to rein in conflict in the face of the COVID-19
pandemic, the Secretary-General called for an immediate, global ceasefire in March
2020. While several regional organizations, 200 civil society groups and more than a
dozen non-State armed groups, including several parties to ongoing armed conflict,
have publicly endorsed that call, that rhetorical commitment has not yielded
sufficient, tangible results.
6.
While conflict continued unabated amidst the pandemic, some actors also used
the worldwide shift in focus to step up their covert, irregular or unchecked supply of
weapons and ammunition in theatres of conflict, leading to massive increases in new
supplies that are at risk of diversion in conflict and post-conflict situations. Illegal
markets, including the market for illicit small arms and light weapons, continued to
operate and adapt to the circumstances.
7.
The cross-cutting security, humanitarian and socioeconomic impact of the
misuse, illicit transfer and destabilizing accumulation of small arms and ligh t
weapons continued to make itself known at the national, regional and global levels
and to affect vulnerable groups, including children, disproportionately.
8.
Regional efforts still remain critical. States continued to recognize the distinct
regional dimension of the small arms scourge, including by elaborating and further
developing regional road maps for combating the illicit flow of small arms and light
weapons in the Caribbean, the Western Balkans and West Africa.

__________________
1
2

2/17

See https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2021/goal-16/.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Global Study on Homicide: Executive
Summary (Vienna, 2019).
21-12603

S/2021/839

II. Trends and developments
9.
In contexts where United Nations peace operations have been mandated, the
scourge of illicit arms flows have further heightened human suffering and hindered
peace efforts. As the international community intensifies its action towards the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, committed efforts to
find sustainable solutions to combat illicit arms flows are essential.
10. The role of small arms and light weapons must be taken into account in
discussions on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The expert meeting held
by the Government of Switzerland in November 2020 dedicated to international
humanitarian law and practice in performing medical activities in armed conflict
included such topics as managing the presence of weapons in medical transports and
facilities (S/2021/423, para. 68).
11. The Security Council remained actively seized of threats posed by illicit flows
of small arms and light weapons and their associated ammunition, in particular in
situations of armed conflict. In South Sudan, the steady supply of weapons and
ammunition has intensified the nature and scale of intercommunal violence and
directly affected the safety of United Nations personnel.
12. Efforts to prevent the acquisition of weapons by terrorists were also maintained,
including through the development by the United Nations of guidance on the
implementation of resolution 2370 (2017). Those guidelines are aimed at identifying
challenges and opportunities for strengthening preventive measures and cooperation,
also taking into account emerging technologies, to facilitate the implementation of
resolution 2370 (2017), relevant subsequent resolutions, good practices and relevant
international standards.
13. In March 2020, in connection with its consideration of the item entitled “Peace
and Security in Africa”, the Security Council issued a presidential statement in which
it recognized the impact and challenges posed by the illicit trade in and diversion of
small arms and light weapons in Africa, which enables terrorist groups to
considerably increase their armed capabilities (S/PRST/2020/5).
14. The impact of illicit arms flows throughout the Sahel and parts of the Central
African subregion remains of concern. The availability of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition in the subregion escalates local disputes and enables
violent extremists, terrorists and organized crime and armed groups to control large
territories.
15. Arms-related provisions, including those specific to small arms and light
weapons, continued to be implemented in the context of the United Nations peace
operations in Abyei, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Haiti, Libya, South Sudan and the Sudan. This growing number is indicative
of the role of United Nations support for conventional weapons control in the context
of building and sustaining peace, including through weapons and ammunition
management and small arms and light weapons control measures.
16. The Security Council integrated weapons-related language into country-specific
resolutions, underscoring the negative impact of illicit weapons and ammunition
flows on the peace, security and stability of the States concerned. Echoing its
resolution 2117 (2013), the Council expressed concern over the threat to peace and
security arising from the illicit transfer, accumulation and misuse of small arms and
light weapons in Mali, Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen. 3
__________________
3

21-12603

See resolutions 2584 (2021), 2520 (2020), 2514 (2020) and 2511 (2020), respectively.
3/17

S/2021/839

17. The mandates of recently established United Nations peace operations,
including for the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), 4 integrate
weapons and ammunition management as a key pillar for supporting peace processes,
good governance, the reduction of violence, and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. For established missions such as the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the
Security Council has enhanced the related language on weapons and ammunition
management.
18. States are encouraged to consider the relevance of weapons dynamics in its
thematic discussions, including children and armed conflict, peacekeeping, mine
action, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and women and peace
and security.5 The recognition by the Security Council of the interlinkages between
security sector reform and other important factors of stabilization and reconstruction,
including national small arms and light weapons management, through the adoption
of resolution 2553 (2020) is welcome.

A.

Development, humanitarian and security impacts of the illicit
transfer, excessive accumulation and misuse of small arms and
light weapons

1.

Sustainable development and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
19. The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular
Goal 16, on peace, justice and strong institutions, is demonstrative of the close linkage
between peace and development.
20. The collection of small arms and light weapons used in the context of armed
conflict, violent crime and drug trafficking and the establishment of their illicit origin
are important steps towards promoting peaceful and inclusive societies, in line with
Goal 16.
21. According to data received from States through biennial reports on the
implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, national authorities
collected 758,000 illicit small arms and light weapons from 2016 to 2019. According
to the Global Study on Firearms Trafficking 2020, published by the Monitoring Illicit
Arms Flows initiative of the United Nations, a total of 550,000 firearms were reported
as seized during each of 2016 and 2017. The data indicate that the country of
manufacture and the country where diversions and seiz ures take place are often not
the same. Therefore, the responsibility that manufacturing countries have to prevent
the diversion of firearms, their parts and components and ammunition requires
thorough risk assessments combined with effective post-delivery measures. That said,
the real global figure of seized and collected small arms and light weapons is believed
to be much higher, owing to underreporting, including as a result of a lack of reporting
capacity. Building the capacity of Member States to report the number of seized
and collected small arms and light weapons will be crucial for monitoring
progress on indicator 16.4.2 of the Sustainable Development Goals. States are
encouraged to develop synergies among their distinct reporting obligations.

__________________
4
5

4/17

See resolutions 2476 (2019) and 2524 (2020), respectively.
See S/2019/1011.
21-12603

S/2021/839

22. There is a clear need to ensure national ownership as a guiding principle on all
issues related to small arms and light weapons. In that regard, a review of the United
Nations Coordinating Action on Small Arms Mechanism, which supports holistic
United Nations action for assisting States in controlling small arms and light weapons,
has been initiated. Increased emphasis on national ownership will help to identify
specific needs and gaps at the national level, support country -level programmes and
the subsequent implementation of comprehensive and multidisciplinary small arms
programmes and facilitate the active engagement of United Nations country teams
with national authorities.
23. With a view to providing effective, efficient and coherent United Nations
assistance, two initiatives have been launched. First, United Nations Coordinating
Action on Small Arms Mechanism partners are developing system -wide guidance on
country-level approaches to integrate small arms control into the common country
analysis and sustainable development frameworks, in line with the guiding principle
of national ownership. In addition, the Saving Lives Entity – a funding facility within
the Peacebuilding Fund, developed further to a joint partnership between the Office
for Disarmament Affairs and the United Nations Development Programme – has
begun the allocation of grants to catalyse more comprehensive approaches to small
arms and armed violence reduction in priority countries.
2.

Grave implications for children
24. In 2020, the situation of children in armed conflict was marked by a sustained
high number of grave violations (see A/75/873-S/2021/437). In this context, the
escalation of conflict and armed clashes, often fuelled by the ava ilability of small
arms and light weapons, and disregard for international humanitarian law and
international human rights law had a severe impact on the protection of children.
Mitigating the impact of conventional arms, including small arms and light wea pons,
is central to ensuring that children do not bear the brunt of armed conflict as they
currently do. With more than 8,400 children killed or maimed, as verified by the
United Nations in 21 situations on the children and armed conflict agenda and in the
Lake Chad basin, small arms and light weapons can play a significant part in the
commission of grave violations against children and in the denial of their rights.
While attacks on hospitals decreased and those on schools increased, and were often
committed using small arms and light weapons, both continued to endanger children
and are particularly egregious in the context of the COVID -19 pandemic.
25. The Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict of the Security Council
offers a key forum for identifying specific recommendations for action by the
international community at large and specific States affected by conflict. While
conclusions of the Working Group specifically addressing the issue of small arms and
light weapons have yet to be issued, the Council is paying increased attention to
weapons that result in the killing and maiming of children (see A/73/907-S/2019/509).
26. All small arms and light weapons control initiatives should be carried out
with due attention to their potential impacts on children. Such initiatives should
be linked to other programmes related to children, adolescents and young people,
such as access to justice for children; adolescent and youth employment
initiatives; the separation and reintegration of children from armed groups and
armed forces and child-specific disarmament, demobilization and reintegration;
and community-based child protection.

21-12603

5/17

S/2021/839

3.

Gendered dimensions, including women and peace and security
27. While the availability of small arms and light weapons in armed conflict, post conflict settings and non-conflict situations affect both women and men, a growing
body of research suggests a significant link between gender and small arms.
28. While far more men than women die at gunpoint, men make up the vast majority
of small arms owners and dominate professions with easy access to those weapons
and arms-related activities, such as hunting and sport shooting. The possession, use
and misuse of small arms are closely linked with certain roles, practices and
expectations attributed to men that encourage at times violent behaviour. As such, the
ready availability of small arms plays a particularly egregious role in maintaining
male-dominated social norms and acts as an enabler and power multiplier that
frequently facilitates violence against women and girls.
29. Even though women constitute a minority of victims of homicide overall, they
suffer disproportionally from firearms violence. 6 Women are particularly at risk in a
domestic context, from their intimate partners, and in countries where weapons are
easily available. In conflict and post-conflict settings, the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons, along with the threat of violence, can be used coer cively to force
women into illegal activities, forced marriage, rape, slavery and human trafficking.
The presence of a small arm amplifies psychological violence, severely deteriorating
the sense of security for distressed women, both in the public space a nd at home. As
a result, when insecurity is widespread, small arms and light weapons represent a
serious threat to women and girls, generally reducing their space and mobility in
society, preventing them from fully participating in public life, hindering t heir
economic empowerment and affecting their political participation.
30. Small arms and light weapons control efforts converge with the objective of the
women and peace and security agenda on all four interconnected pillars, namely,
participation, prevention, protection and relief and recovery. Understanding arms
flows and associated challenges, as well as the gendered impacts of small arms and
light weapons, should inform the design of adequate responses in the women and
peace and security framework, including in peacebuilding settings. The Security
Council’s encouragement to States to streamline their small arms and light
weapons control efforts with those related to women and peace and security and
conflict-related sexual violence would be helpful, in particular by ensuring
frequent exchanges between national focal points and harmonizing national
action plans under the respective portfolios. 7
31. In its resolutions 2122 (2013) and 2242 (2015), the Security Council explicitly
referred to the full and effective participation of women in arms control and
disarmament decision-making at all levels and in all aspects of conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. Given the underrepresentation of women in the field of small arms and
light weapons control, their inclusion must continue to be fostered. 8
32. In the latest report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2021/312), the role
played by the proliferation and illicit circulation of small arms in facilitating violence
against civilians, including rape, was recognized, underscoring the nexus between
conflict-related sexual violence and the diversion of sm all arms. The proliferation

__________________

UNODC, Global Study on Homicide: Understanding Homicide: Typologies, Demographic
Factors, Mechanisms and Contributors (Vienna, 2019).
7
Henry Myrttinen, Connecting the Dots: Arms Control, Disarmament and the Women, Peace and
Security Agenda (Geneva, UNIDIR, 2020).
8
Hana Salama and Emma Bjertén-Günther, Women Managing Weapons: Perspectives for
Increasing Women’s Meaningful Participation in Weapons and Ammunition Management
(Geneva, United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR), 2021).
6

6/17

21-12603

S/2021/839

of and trafficking in small arms, which drive and exacerbate the commission of
sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict zones, must be addressed in line with
the Arms Trade Treaty and other global instruments.
33. In her report on the impact of arms transfers on human rights issued in June
2020 (A/HRC/44/29), the High Commissioner for Human Rights noted that the
ownership and use of arms related closely to specific expressions of masculinity,
power and control that furthered gender-based discrimination against women and
girls, and she stressed that it was essential to address the gendered root causes of
violence. The Security Council is encouraged to consider the recommendations
contained in that report, including the call to promote the participation of
women in all arms control and disarmament processes and forums.
34. While the lack of data disaggregated by gender and age in the field of small
arms and light weapons and ammunition often hampers the development of effective
gender-responsive initiatives, there are practically no data to differentiate the imp act
of licit and illicit small arms and light weapons by gender and age. The Security
Council’s support for the collection of data on small arms and light weapons,
disaggregated by sex and age, and further disaggregated by their licit or illicit
origin, when including mandates on small arms and light weapons control in its
decisions, would be particularly relevant. Member States are encouraged to
support civil society organizations, especially women’s organizations, and
international organizations with sustainable funding to undertake data
collection activities in that regard.
35. Gender-related considerations continued to be integrated into discussions held
in the framework of the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking
in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (Firearms Protocol). At
its tenth session, in October 2020, the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime remained concerned about the
negative impact of illicit trafficking in firearms on the lives of women, men, girls and
boys, and recognized that preventing, combating and eradicating illicit trafficking in
firearms were crucial to combating gender-based violence. The Conference
encouraged States parties to mainstream gender and age perspectives in firearms
policies and programmes and invited States parties to further collect gender- and agedisaggregated data on illicit trafficking in firearms.
36. In the framework of the Programme of Action on Small Arms, States have made
considerable progress on the issue of gender since 2016 and have committed
themselves to increasing their understanding of the gender-specific impacts of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons; promoting the meaningful participation
and representation of women in policymaking, planning and implementation
processes related to the implementation of the Programme of Action; collecting
disaggregated data; and seriously considering increased funding for policies and
programmes that take account of the differing impacts of illicit small arms and light
weapons on women, men, girls and boys. Building on the significant progress made
in 2016 and 2018, the outcome document of the Seventh Biennial Meeting of States
to Consider the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held
in July 2021, contained strong language on the highly gendered nature of small arms
and light weapons and called for the equal, full and effective participation of women
in all processes related to the Programme of Action ( A/CONF.192/BMS/2021/1,
annex).

21-12603

7/17

S/2021/839

4.

Linkages to terrorism and transnational organized crime
37. In its resolutions 1373 (2001), 2370 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019), the
Security Council, consistently stressed the need to address the illicit traffic in and
supply of small arms and light weapons to terrorists and recognized that terrorist
organizations could benefit from transnational organized crime, including the illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, as a source of financing.
38. According to recent research from the International Centre for CounterTerrorism, in the past decade, terrorists have used small arms and light weapons to
carry out 85,148 terrorist attacks. 9 At the same time, small arms and light weapons
can serve as a lucrative and durable trafficking commodity or as a tool allowing
terrorist organizations to facilitate trafficking activities carried out by others, for
example, by forcefully controlling trafficking routes and providing protection from
theft and armed robbery. In many cases, existing illicit trade routes overlap
significantly with territory controlled by terrorists.
39. In addition to weapons smuggled illegally across borders, including by foreign
terrorist fighters, terrorist organizations also rely on legal commercial supply chains
to procure weapons, ammunition and essential parts and components, including for
improvised explosive devices. States are encouraged to enhance their efforts to
detect and seize parts and components of weapons and ammunition, including
when shipped through fast parcel deliveries, to support the fight against various
types of illicit manufacture, including conversion and craft production.
40. Terrorists and organized criminal groups continue to exploit and benefit from a
lack of good governance and rule of law, porous borders, high levels of corruption,
weak democratic institutions and poor criminal justice systems. Terrorism and
transnational organized crime can cross-fertilize each other, while small arms and
light weapons can serve as an enabling factor for both phenomena. States and the
United Nations should address the terrorism-arms-crime nexus as interrelated
and multifaceted security threats that require complementary approaches and
responses.
41. Counter-terrorism financing measures play a crucial role in preventing and
counteracting the linkages between terrorism and the illicit traffick ing in small arms
and light weapons. In that regard, the Financial Action Task Force published in March
2021 a report on terrorist financing risks related to illicit arms trafficking in which it
identified several measures that Member States could take to detect those linkages,
including the conduct of proactive terrorist financing investigations to trace financial
flows between illicit arms traffickers and terrorists, and the reinforcement of financial
intelligence capabilities to detect linkages with terrorism.
42. Border controls play a crucial role in combating the illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons in the context of counter-terrorism efforts. In order to detect
and prevent the movement of illicit small arms and light weapons across borders
effectively, States should develop and implement comprehensive border security
and management strategies and engage all relevant national agencies effectively.
43. Recently, in its seventh review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, the General Assembly recognized the importance of preventing, combating
and eradicating the illicit use of small arms and light weapons by terrorists and
strongly condemned the continued flow of weapons to and between terrorists. The
Assembly called upon all Member States to find ways of intensifying and accelerating

__________________
9

8/17

Reinier Bergema, Tanya Mehra and Méryl Demuynck, “The Use of Small Arms and Light
Weapons by Terrorist Organisations as a Source of Finance”, International Centre for Counter Terrorism report (The Hague, 2020).
21-12603

S/2021/839

the related exchange of information, to enhance coordination at all levels and to
establish as a criminal offense the illegal manufacture, possession and stockpiling of
and trade in small arms and light weapons and their ammunition.
44. In Central Asia, the United Nations, through a joint collaboration between the
Counter-Terrorism Centre, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Office for Disarmament
Affairs, continued to enhance the capacities of national authorities to prevent and
combat the illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons and their illicit supply
to terrorists and supported the States of the region in the implementation of resolution
2370 (2017) and of the Madrid Guiding Principles. This inter-agency project is
adaptable to other regions.

B.

Weapons and ammunition management
45. Inadequately maintained stockpiles constitute serious humanitarian hazards,
have a negative impact on peace and security and can thereby jeopardize the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
46. The United Nations continued to enhance its support for national authorities,
including in the framework of its peace operations, in the area of weapons and
ammunition management. Through the Agenda for Disarmament and the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, the Secretary-General has committed the United Nations to
promoting more effective weapons and ammunition management in peace operations,
including when part of or linked to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes.
47. Concrete, practical support for the destruction of materiel and management of
stockpiles was provided in a range of contexts. In 2019, the Mine Action Service
extended its support to the assessment, rehabilitation and construction of 242 weapons
storage areas and 97 ammunition storage areas. In the Central African Republic,
training and assistance for national defence and internal security forces were
provided, alongside the rehabilitation and establishment of storage sites. Technical
advice was provided to the National Commission for the Control of Small Arms and
Light Weapons and the Reduction of Armed Violence and the national defence and
security forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In Libya, where small arms
and light weapons are prevalent, risk education efforts were pursued. The Mine Action
Service also supported the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei in
fulfilling its mandate to support a “weapons-free” area by destroying weapons and
ammunition confiscated by the mission and building the technical capacities and
physical infrastructure to store weapons and ammunition safely (resolution 2575
(2021)).
48. Integrated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes
increasingly take place in environments characterized by well-equipped armed groups
and high levels of illicit weapons, ammunition and explosives. In response to those
risks, innovative tools have been developed to complement traditional disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, including community violence reduction
and transitional weapons and ammunition management. As part of the community
violence reduction programme in the Central African Republic, 63 war weapons,
1,393 artisanal weapons, 143 rounds of ammunition and 20 unexploded ordnances
have been collected since 12 August 2021. Increased community violence in the
central part of Mali calls for a strengthened and coordinated action to reduce access
to weapons and ammunition at the community level, in particular along the tri -border
area of Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger.

21-12603

9/17

S/2021/839

49. The United Nations continued the implementation of a joint initiative on the
effective weapons and ammunition management in a changing disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration context to provide expert resources and guidance 10
in the design and implementation of tailored weapons and ammunition management
activities as part of integrated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes. A corresponding training course has been delivered since 2019. A standing
technical assistance mechanism was established in 2019 to provide support in line
with the guidance and expert resources developed under the initiative. Through the
mechanism, the United Nations continued, for example, to assist the national
authorities in Haiti in establishing a comprehensive arms control framework. The
mechanism also facilitated a study on weapons and ammunition dynamics in the
Sudan to support the start of UNITAMS in 2020.
50. In July 2021, the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research publi shed
A Reference Methodology for National Weapons and Ammunition Management
Baseline Assessments. 11 The methodology had been used to design and implement
national baseline assessments in 10 States (from 2015 to 2020) to assist States in
assessing their relevant institutions, policy and operational capacities in that area. The
establishment of such baselines enables the measurement of progress over time, as
well as the impact of strengthened national practices. National baseline assessments
link with, respond to and feed into relevant Security Council resolutions.
51. The Security Council is encouraged to promote the sustained and
systematic integration of weapons and ammunition management into the work
of the United Nations on peace and security, including when mandating peace
operations. In addition, it is recommended that the Council include more
systematically references to relevant normative frameworks and guidance, such
as the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines and the Modular Small arms-control Implementation Compendium, in applicable resolutions of the
Council, in line with the good practice highlighted in the Aide-Memoire: Options
for Reflecting Weapons and Ammunition Management in Decisions of the Security
Council. A second edition of the latter publication, which is aimed at assisting
Member States, in particular those serving on the Council, in accurately and
comprehensively reflecting state-of-the-art practices related to weapons and
ammunition management in relevant decisions of the Council, was published in
2020. 12

C.

Arms embargoes, including benchmark assessments
52. Illicit transfers of small arms and light weapons in the context of arms embargo
violations remain a concern. States in which arms are shipped through ports,
airports or territorial waters for transfer to embargoed countries should
redouble their efforts to enforce the embargoes by applying the preventive and
criminal justice measures provided under the relevant international instruments.
53. In recent years, the Security Council has increasingly used a partial lifting of
arms embargoes as a way to help States under embargo to strengthen national security
services. This practice has seen, in parallel, the increasingly frequent introduction of
weapons and ammunition management-related commitments and measures as part of

__________________

Effective Weapons and Ammunition Management in a Changing Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Context, 2nd ed. (United Nations publication, 2021).
11
Hardy Giezendanner and Himayu Shiotani, Reference Methodology for National Weapons and
Ammunition Management Baseline Assessments (Geneva, UNIDIR, 2021).
12
Aide-Mémoire: Options for Reflecting Weapons and Ammunition Management in Decisions of the
Security Council, 2nd ed. (United Nations publication, 2020).
10

10/17

21-12603

S/2021/839

the partial lifting of an arms embargo to address potential risks of arms diversion by
those security services and illicit arms proliferation and misuse. 13
54. The further employment of weapons and ammunition management by the
Security Council as part of the benchmark assessments of arms embargoes is a
welcome development. There is an ongoing need, nevertheless, to improve the
national and regional implementation and enforcement of arms embargoes, as well as
weapons and ammunition management standards and guidelines.
55. The Security Council has increasingly called upon States to investigate and
combat transnational criminal networks and armed groups involved in arms
trafficking in the context of violations of arms embargoes (e.g. resolution 2488
(2019)). COVID-19-related restrictions enhanced the challenges faced by sanctions
expert panels in conducting on-site inspections of weapons seized in connection with
arms embargoes imposed by the Council. In this context, the Security Council is
encouraged to continue to seek reports from Member States on the steps that
they have taken to implement the relevant measures, including arms embargoes,
as well as to cooperate and share information with the panels.
56. In its resolution 2562 (2021), the Security Council, requested the SecretaryGeneral to conduct a review of the situation in Darfur, including measures to tackle
the proliferation of weapons, and to provide recommendations for key benchma rks
that could serve in guiding the Council in its review of the measures on Darfur. In his
assessment submitted pursuant to that resolution (S/2021/696), he recommended four
key benchmarks, including the completion of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme, in order to support progress on transitional security
arrangements in Darfur. He also recommended the review and updating of the
weapons collection programme as a complement to the implementation of the national
action plan for the protection of civilians of the Sudan.
57. The Security Council has progressively adjusted the arms embargo measures in
the Central African Republic and requested the Secretary-General to assess and
provide three updates on progress achieved by the Government on the key
benchmarks that it had established on arms embargo measures, including weapons
and ammunition management. 14 In his assessment submitted pursuant to resolution
2488 (2019), the Secretary-General noted that the Government, with the support of
its international partners, had continued to make some progress on the arms embargo
benchmarks and that the decision of the Council to adjust the arms em bargo placed
on the Government had provided national authorities with encouragement. He also
noted that careful attention was required to ensure that the arms embargo on the armed
groups, which remained in full effect, had the necessary and desired outcome s to
benefit the security and political situation in the country (see S/2019/1008). In his
assessment submitted pursuant to resolution 2507 (2020), the Secretary-General
noted that the Government remained committed to achieving the benchmarks in order
for the arms embargo measures to be further eased or lifted. He also noted that the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013)
concerning the Central African Republic and its Panel of Experts could help the
Government and regional States to adopt the necessary measures against arms
traffickers (see S/2020/622). In his assessment submitted pursuant to resolution 2536
(2020), the Secretary-General noted that the collaboration of the Government of the
Central African Republic with MINUSCA, including through the Mine Action
Service, and international partners was needed to make further progress in the
__________________

See UNIDIR, Applying Conventional Arms Control in the Context of United Nations Arms
Embargoes (2018).
14
See resolutions 2488 (2019), 2507 (2020) and 2536 (2020).
13

21-12603

11/17

S/2021/839

operation of an effective weapons and ammunition management system (see
S/2021/573).
58. The Secretary-General submitted two reports to the Security Council concerning
the arms embargo measures in South Sudan. In his assessment submitted pursuant to
resolution 2521 (2020), he provided three options for developing benchmarks to
assess those measures according to progress on the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan (see
S/2020/1067). In response to a request from the members of the Council to elaborate
specific benchmarks, he recommended three benchmarks, including progress on
disarmament, demobilization and security sector reform (see S/2021/321). 15 The
Council took note of the recommendations when it adopted resolution 2577 (2021),
which set out key benchmarks to consider when reviewing the arms embargo
measures on South Sudan. One of the benchmarks was progress by South Sudanese
defence and security forces on properly managing their existing arms and ammunition
stockpiles, including by establishing planning documents, protocols and train ing for
the recording, storage, distribution and management of weapons and ammunition.

D.

Recent developments in the manufacture, design and technology of
small arms and light weapons
59. Of continuous concern is the impact of new and emerging techno logies on the
illicit trafficking in and production of small arms, lights weapons, their parts and
components and ammunition.
60. States have continued to express concern over the illicit reactivation of
deactivated small arms, including firearms. The Mod ular Small-arms-control
Implementation Compendium notes that deactivation requires that all pressure bearing components of a small arm be permanently altered in such a way as to render
the weapon unusable. 16 Article 9 of the Firearms Protocol sets out the general
principles of deactivation.
61. The introduction of new material technologies in the context of small arms and
light weapons manufacture and design has created security challenges. Specifically,
the use of polymer plastics in weapon manufacture has raised concerns, as markings
on such material are more vulnerable to erasure and alteration than on more traditional
materials, such as steel. The integration of modularity, whereby a weapon has multiple
components that can be reconfigured, also presents challenges for ensuring the
inclusion of a unique marking on the essential or structural component.
62. Online purchases of weapons, including on the darknet, are a growing concern,
as online availability might lower psychological barriers and inhibition t hresholds to
acquisition. Online weapons sales have resulted in a significant increase in the use of
postal and courier services to traffic in those items, owing to their relatively high
standard of anonymity, making criminal investigations into illicit tr ansfers difficult.
63. In the Kyoto Declaration on Advancing Crime Prevention, Criminal Justice and
the Rule of Law: Towards the Achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, adopted at the Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice (A/CONF.234/16, resolution 1), States committed to
strengthening mechanisms and strategies for border control for preventing and
combating the illicit trafficking in and diversion of firearms, their parts and
components and ammunition, including online trade, and the illicit reactivation of

__________________
15
16

12/17

See S/2020/1277.
See Modular Small-arms-control Implementation Compendium: Glossary of Terms, Definitions
and Abbreviations, version 1.5 (United Nations publication, 2018).
21-12603

S/2021/839

deactivated firearms, as well as to enhancing cooperation to address and counter
threats related to technological developments and changing modi operandi with
regard to the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, their parts and
components and ammunition and investigate and prosecute those crimes.
64. Discussions in the framework of transnational organized crime also continued
to focus on the implications of recent technological developments related to firearms.
The Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime invited States parties to the Firearms Protocol to foster and
harmonize their responses to modular weapons and the 3D printing of firearms, the
conversion of firearms, trafficking through postal services and the use of the darknet
and cryptocurrencies (CTOC/COP/2020/10, resolution 10/2, para. 14). At the seventh
meeting of the Working Group on Firearms, States recognized the threat posed by the
3D printing of firearms, the reactivation of deactivated firearms and the illicit trade
in firearms over the Internet. 17
65. Discussions within the framework of the Programme of Action o n Small Arms
and the complementary International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and
Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons have
covered those topics from the perspective of the implications of new technologies on
marking, record-keeping and tracing. At the Seventh Biennial Meeting of States,
States expressed divergent views on how to pursue the issue further. Nevertheless,
they agreed to continue to exchange views on recent developments in small arms and
light weapons manufacturing, technology and design, in particular polymer and
modular weapons, and on ways to address them. They also agreed to consider at the
Eighth Biennial Meeting a proposal for an open-ended technical expert group that
could develop action-oriented next steps. In addition, they requested the Secretariat
to develop a good practice document on marking practices for modular and polymer
weapons taking into account the views of all Member States and the role of
manufacturers. 18

E.

Climate-related security risks and the role of small arms and
light weapons
66. Climate-related security risks have been under discussion for more than a
decade, including under the auspices of the Security Council. As the effects of climate
change become more pronounced, a higher level of political will to address security related risks emerges, and a growing number of States have advocated concrete, more
consistent action to address the potential impact of climate change on peace and
security.
67. Often intersecting with other trends, climate change is a potential risk multiplier
with cascading effects that can exacerbate tensions and contribute to conflict, which
may already be aggravated by the presence of small arms and, in turn, fuel the demand
for more arms. There is also a growing body of research on the link between the
effects of climate change and organized crime and armed group activities, with
potential implications for the use of small arms and light weapons.
68. In western and eastern African countries, including Mali, Nigeria, Somalia,
South Sudan and Uganda, the increasing availability of weapons is a contributing
factor to the recent escalation in deadly disputes between farmers and pastoralists
over shrinking water resources and fertile land. Connections between communities
across borders, for example in the tri-border region of Kenya, South Sudan and

__________________
17
18

21-12603

See CTOC/COP/WG.6/2020/2 and CTOC/COP/WG.6/2020/4.
A/CONF.192/BMS/2021/1, paras. 92 and 94.
13/17

S/2021/839

Uganda, facilitate cross-border trafficking in small arms and light weapons with the
aim of arming themselves to protect their livelihood. Such local resource disputes
increasingly connect with national and regional conflict dynamics, escalating levels
of community violence and dragging armed groups into the theatre of conflict.
Climate change can intensify disputes linked to natural reso urces, exacerbate local
community grievances, destroy licit livelihood options and, as a result, provide armed
groups with opportunities to boost recruitment and support. In north and central Mali,
for example, armed groups have exploited such issues as la nd rights and capitalized
on limited State presence by mediating resource disputes, providing support to
farmers and herders and defining rules for livestock migration.
69. As conventional weapons remain a primary cause of death in armed
conflict, the examination of how climate change affects the use of conventional
weapons and how conventional arms availability and use affect climate-related
security risks is warranted. States, civil society and relevant expert organizations
are encouraged to consider this linkage in more detail.

III. Global, regional and subregional efforts to address illicit
small arms and light weapons
A.

Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects
70. At the Seventh Biennial Meeting of States, States considered key challenges and
opportunities for the full and effective implementation of both frameworks at the
national, regional and global levels for the purposes of preventing and combating the
diversion and illicit international transfer of small arms and light weapons to
unauthorized recipients. They deliberated on two additional substantive items,
namely, recent developments in weapons technology, manufacture and design, and
international cooperation and assistance, including proposals for the future
establishment of a training fellowship programme and the setting of national and
regional targets to enhance measurability in the implementation of the Programme of
Action on Small Arms and its International Tracing Instrument. The Seventh Biennial
Meeting concluded with the unanimous adoption of a substantive outcome document.

B.

Arms Trade Treaty
71. States parties to the Arms Trade Treaty continued to address small arms and
light weapons diversion as part of the ongoing work to enhance transparency around
and responsibility for international trade in conventional arms.
72. Under the Treaty, States parties are required to establish a national control
system to implement the provisions of the Treaty. Under article 11, States parties
involved in the transfer of conventional arms, including small arms and light
weapons, are required to take measures to prevent their diversion through their
national control systems, by assessing the risk of diversion of the exports and
considering the establishment of mitigation measures.
73. The work on diversion under the Treaty is guided by the Sub -Working Group
on article 11 under the Working Group on Effective Treaty Implementation. In 2020,
the Sixth Conference of States Parties to the Arms Trade Treaty established the
Diversion Information Exchange Forum, which is a sui generis body for informal
voluntary exchanges between States parties to the Treaty concerning concrete cases
of detected or suspected diversion and for sharing concrete, operational diversion -

14/17

21-12603

S/2021/839

related information. Furthermore, in 2021, the core thematic focus of the President of
the Seventh Conference of States Parties, the Permanent Representative of Sierra
Leone to the United Nations Office at Geneva, was the strengthening of efforts to
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and ensure efficient
stockpile management.

C.

Firearms Protocol
74. The first phase of the Mechanism to Review the Implementation of the United
Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto
was launched in December 2020. The Implementation Review Mechanism is a peer
review process that will support States parties to the Convention and its Protocols in
the effective implementation of those instruments, as well as help States parties to
identify and substantiate specific needs for technical assistance and to promote
international cooperation. The expert dialogue and its results have the potential to
support the Security Council in identifying, highlighting and addressing normative
challenges and good practices, including in conflict and post -conflict settings, and to
complement existing reporting obligations on small arms, such as those under the
Programme of Action on Small Arms, while supporting legislative harmonization
efforts across regions.

D.

Silencing the Guns in Africa
75. The United Nations has continued to step up its operational and project-based
support for the African Union in the framework of its Silencing of the Guns initiative.
In line with the decision by the African Union Commission to extend the
implementation of the Master Road Map of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in
Africa for a period of 10 years (2021–2030), the United Nations will continue to
support efforts towards achieving a conflict-free continent in the coming years.
76. The Office for Disarmament Affairs, together with the African Unio n
Commission and the Regional Centre on Small Arms in the Great Lakes Region, the
Horn of Africa and Bordering States, delivered practical support for the
implementation of the Africa Amnesty Month in seven countries in September 2020.
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia and Kenya conducted large -scale
awareness-raising and outreach activities on the negative effects of the illicit
ownership of small arms and on the enhanced capacity of national law enforcement
in community-based policing and physical security and stockpile management. In
2020, up to 3,090 small arms were securely collected, stored and destroyed.
77. United Nations-supported operational activities and strategic advice on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, community violence reduction and
weapons and ammunition management were provided to three peacekeeping missions
in Africa, namely, in the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Mali, to three special political missions, namely, in Libya, Somalia and
the Sudan, and to the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary -General for the
Great Lakes. Related weapons and ammunition management technical assistance was
provided in six non-mission settings in Africa, namely, in Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
the Congo, Ethiopia, Mozambique and the Lake Chad basin, all with a view to
supporting the achievement of the African Union initiative “Silencing the Guns in
Africa”.

21-12603

15/17

S/2021/839

E.

Regional road maps for small arms and light weapons control
78. Authorities in the Western Balkans continued to implement the commitments
stemming from the road map for a sustainable solution to the illegal possession and
misuse of and the trafficking in small arms and light weapons and their ammunition.
Ongoing work supported by the South Eastern and Eastern Europe Clearinghouse for
the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, in close cooperation with the United
Nations and international partners, included a review of the relevant legal
frameworks; formulation of evidence-based strategies fully integrating the gender
perspective; better understanding of the needs of border police services throughout
the region in preventing and countering trafficking in firearms; and i mproved
investigations into firearms-related crimes through capacitated firearms focal points.
Demonstrable progress was recorded, including the increased security of weapons
and ammunition storages, improved marking and tracing and strengthened operationa l
cooperation between law enforcement and criminal justice structures.
79. Following that positive example, with its emphasis on specific targets and
timelines, 16 Caribbean States developed and adopted in 2020 the Road Map for
Implementing the Caribbean Priority Actions on the Illicit Proliferation of Firearms
and Ammunition across the Caribbean in a Sustainable Manner by 2030. The Road
Map builds on Caribbean aspirations to combat the illicit trafficking in firearms and
enhance resilience and promotes the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. It combines
four goals: reinforcing regulatory frameworks; reducing illicit arms flows within and
beyond the region; bolstering law enforcement capacities to combat illicit firearms
trafficking and their illicit possession and misuse; and systematically decreasing the
risk of diversion of firearms and ammunition from stockpiles.
80. In September 2019, a technical review of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their
Ammunition and Other Related Materials was held in Niamey, during which member
States agreed to the objective of implementing a regional road map and institutional
framework that would guide the implementation of the ECOWAS Convention over
the coming years. At the ECOWAS annual meeting of national commissioners on
small arms control held in Monrovia in November 2019, member States
recommended that ECOWAS identify the best options for a road map and a matching
institutional framework. In response, in May and June 2020, ECOWAS conducted a
mapping exercise of national and regional priorities and consulted West African
experts on small arms and light weapons control. During the annual meeting of the
national commissioners held in Cotonou, Benin, on 25 and 26 November 2020,
ECOWAS, in partnership with the Bonn International Centre for Conversion,
presented the content of a five-year plan of action for the implementation of the
ECOWAS Convention (2021–2025). At that meeting, all 15 Member States adopted
the plan of action. ECOWAS and several stakeholders and partners are currently
developing the associated institutional structure and funding mechanism for its
implementation.

IV. Concluding observations and recommendations
81. The Security Council remains fully seized of the challenging matter of the illicit
transfer, excessive accumulation and misuse of small arms and light weapons, given
the intimate linkage between weapons dynamics and international peace and security.
The Secretary-General continues to advocate the full integration of the
consideration of weapons and ammunition into the work of the Security Council,
including in its country-specific and thematic discussions.

16/17

21-12603

S/2021/839

82. The 2030 Agenda represent an important step forward towards articulating how
arms control, peace and security contribute to development. Beyond addressing illicit
arms flows, there remains a vast potential for linking the implementation of
disarmament objectives at the operational level with many other Sustainable
Development Goals in order to bring the historical relationship between disarmament
and development back to the forefront of international attention.
83. United Nations peace operations continue to face different threats and risks
directly or indirectly associated with the illicit proliferation, circulation and misuse
of arms and ammunition by non-State armed groups, criminals, terrorists and other
perpetrators. The systematic processing of weapons and treatment of ammunition
recovered from such actors and the illicit sphere, in cooperation with the host State
and competent national authorities, are critical to identifying and addressing arms and
arms-related risks, vulnerabilities and threats, including those that affect other
mandated objectives of the United Nations peace operation.
84. Wherever a mission is mandated to provide support to the host State and
competent national authorities in the processing of recovered weapons and the
treatment of ammunition recovered from the illicit sphere, the Security Council
is encouraged to consider the establishment or designation of a dedicated
component, unit or cell within the mission. The Council could explicitly mandate
peace operations, in cooperation with relevant United Nations agencies, to trace
seized, found and surrendered small arms and light weapons, including their
ammunition, in line with international instruments and standards. Such efforts
should be coordinated and linked with already existing global data collection
exercises to monitor the achievement of target 4 of Sustainable Development
Goal 16.
85. In a similar vein, owing to their unique position for monitoring the flows of
illicit arms and ammunition in their areas of operation, United Nations peace
operations will continue to enhance support for the systematic collection,
centralization and analysis of data on seized, found and surrendered small arms
and light weapons, including their ammunition. Not only would this help with the
collection of data on progress with regard to the achievement of target 4 of
Sustainable Development Goal 16, but it could also yield important information about
sources and supply chains of armed actors and make important contributions to the
monitoring of arms embargoes.
86. The year 2021 marks the coinciding twentieth anniversaries of the Programme
of Action on Small Arms and the Firearms Protocol. Those instruments were born out
of the firm belief that the illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons can be
overcome by adequate and harmonized national legal frameworks and enhanced
international cooperation. They set a milestone in establishing a rules -based
international framework for small arms control. The Secretary-General will
continue to advocate the universalization of relevant legally binding instruments,
such as the Firearms Protocol and the Arms Trade Treaty, and the
implementation of politically binding instruments, such as the Programme of
Action on Small Arms and the International Tracing Instrument.

21-12603

17/17
