S/PV.7048

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7048th meeting

Wednesday, 23 October 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mehdiyev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laassel
Mr. Ahmad
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2013/607)

13-52710 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1352710*

S/PV.7048

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2013/607)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mohamed
Ibn Chambas, Joint African Union-United Nations
Special Representative for Darfur and Head of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Chambas,
who is joining us via video teleconference from
Khartoum.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/607, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chambas.
Mr. Chambas: I am grateful for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the work carried out
by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) in the implementation of its
mandate and to provide the Council with an overview
of political and security developments in Darfur since
July, when I last had the privilege of briefing the
Council (see S/PV.7010).
As highlighted in the report before the Council
(S/2013/607), the security situation in Darfur and
threats to UNAMID and humanitarian personnel

2/6

23/10/2013

continue to be a serious concern. On 11 October, a
Zambian peacekeeper was killed in a criminal incident
a few hundred metres from the Mission’s headquarters
in El Fasher. On 13 October, a Senegalese formed police
unit was ambushed near El Geneina, West Darfur, while
escorting a water convoy to our sector headquarters.
The attack led to the death of three personnel and injury
to one. I appreciate the solidarity with the mission
demonstrated by the United Nations Security Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, which issued statements condemning those
heinous crimes. On 15 October, I visited El Geneina to
pay my respects to our fallen colleagues. I will continue
to urge the Government of the Sudan to do much more
in order to bring to justice the perpetrators of those and
other attacks against UNAMID.
The situation in Darfur is further complicated by
the intertribal conflicts that continue to plague the
region. Fighting between the Southern Rezeigat and
the Ma’alia in East Darfur, the Misseriya and Salamat
in Central Darfur and the Aballa/Northern Rizeigat
and Beni Hussein in North Darfur have led to a larges
number of civilian casualties, mass displacement
and attendant humanitarian tragedy than the clashes
between forces of the Government and those of the
non-signatory movements.
As part of our efforts to mitigate the situation,
UNAMID worked closely with regional, State and local
authorities, including through the provision of logistics
and technical support, towards renewed attempts at
bringing about reconciliation between the conflicting
tribal groups. Although a number of agreements on a
cessation of hostilities have been reached, the situation
remains fragile.
UNAMID continued to facilitate the delivery of
relief assistance by humanitarian actors to affected
communities. Instances of denial of access and
restriction of movement and bureaucratic impediments
remain challenges that have a negative impact on
that common effort. At the meeting of the tripartite
coordination mechanism held on 28 September
at Headquarters in New York, representatives of
the African Union (AU) and the United Nations
underscored the importance of unhindered freedom of
movement for UNAMID. However, it must also be said
that the number of such restrictions taken in proportion
to the number of patrols and escorts carried out by the
mission, which the Council will have seen in the report,
is quite low.

13-52710

23/10/2013

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

Let me now update members on the status of the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. At its sixth meeting, held on 23 September
in Doha, the Implementation Follow-up Commission
expressed concern at its overall slow pace and called on
the parties to step up efforts.
Since the donor conference held in April, the
signatory parties have been concentrating on developing
institutional mechanisms for the implementation of the
Darfur Development Strategy. In September, the Darfur
Coordination Board for Recovery, Reconstruction and
Development, which has the mandate to coordinate
donor support for the Strategy, held its inaugural
meeting in Doha.
In August, public tenders were launched for the
first phase of 1,071 development projects for Darfur,
totalling 400 million Sudanese pounds — approximately
$82.5 million — in the areas of education, health and
water. The funding is to be sourced from the Darfur
Reconstruction and Development Fund.
With regard to the Darfur-based dialogue and
consultations, which are designed to complement efforts
to consolidate the peace process, I can report that a
draft concept developed by UNAMID on the conduct of
the dialogue and a communication strategy have been
shared with other facilitators of the dialogue, namely,
Qatar and the AU, and a meeting of the facilitators in
November will agree on a schedule for its convening.
There has been some progress, albeit limited, on
issues related to land ownership and the proportionate
participation of Darfuris in the civil and judicial
services. There has been no serious movement with
regard to the implementation of the provisions of the
permanent ceasefire and final security arrangements.
The realization of the agreement between the
Government of the Sudan and the faction of the
Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) formerly led by
Mohammed Bashar, signed on 6 April 2013, has yet to
gain traction. With logistic support by UNAMID, on
25 August, an advance delegation of the movement
travelled from its base in Kornoi in North Darfur to
Khartoum to commence the process. Only today, it
has been published that the President of the Sudan
has granted amnesty to members of the JEM-Bashar
movement, in conformity with the provisions of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.

S/PV.7048

I have remained engaged with the non-signatory
movements in an attempt to find common ground
for advancing the peace process in Darfur. I held
preliminary consultations with the leaders of
JEM-Gibril Ibrahim and the Minni Minawi faction of
the Sudan Liberation Army from 22 to 27 August in
Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, with a view to
developing a common understanding and appreciation
of the situation in Darfur and discussing the practical
ways it could be improved. The movements reiterated
their commitment to peace and a negotiated political
settlement in Darfur in the context of a holistic solution
to the Sudan’s problems.
Following the consultations in Arusha, various
officials from the Government of the Sudan informed
me that, while they welcomed my engagement, any
dialogue between the Government and the movements
should be based on the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. They also indicated that they were open to the
participation of the Darfur non-signatory movements
in a national dialogue. In line with the understanding
reached in Arusha, the Joint Mediators are exploring the
possibility of holding a follow-up meeting in the near
future, in the form of a workshop or seminar focused
primarily on issues relating to a humanitarian cessation
of hostilities and efforts to reach a comprehensive
peace.
With regard to UNAMID operations, reductions
in the mission’s overall troop and police strengths are
on track for completion by 31 January 2014, as part
of the outcome of the review of UNAMID uniformed
personnel. In August, a team from the Secretariat
undertook a review of UNAMID civilian staffing
requirements in line with General Assembly resolution
66/264, of 2012. The findings of the exercise will be
reflected in the report on the comprehensive review of
UNAMID requested by the Security Council.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to express
my deep appreciation to the Council for its continued
support to UNAMID.
The President: I thank Mr. Chambas for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to present
the most recent report of the Secretary-General on the

13-527103/6

S/PV.7048

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2013/607). I will be brief.
In general, the report before the Council outlines
the limited progress that has been made in the peace
process, a very worrying security situation and the
continuing need for substantial humanitarian aid in
Darfur. It also describes a very disturbing resolutionise
in violent attacks by armed assailants on UNAMID
personnel and humanitarian workers. I would like to
take this opportunity to express my condolences to the
Governments and the families of the peacekeepers who
were tragically killed in the most recent attacks. I would
like to add my voice to all those who are appealing to
the Government of the Sudan to speedily identify those
responsible for the attacks and take the necessary action.
Impunity for such reprehensible attacks must end. In that
regard, I would like to commend the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union’s call, in a 17 October
communiqué, on the Government of the Sudan to
identify those responsible as quickly as possible and to
bring them to justice. The Peace and Security Council’s
decision to follow up the investigation of the situation
in a month and to request an update on measures taken
is also encouraging.
(spoke in English)
At the same time, here at Headquarters we are
working with troop- and police-contributing countries
to ensure that uniformed personnel deployed to
Darfur are properly equipped, trained and prepared to
operate in a very challenging security environment.
That includes engaging bilaterally with contributing
countries to address equipment and serviceability
shortfalls. In addition, we are working with countries
preparing to deploy new units to Darfur to ensure that
their contingents meet the operational standards and
requirements. As Council members may be aware, that
involves appropriate preparations for deploying three
infantry battalions in order to replace units that have
been or are soon to be withdrawn, as well as a utility
helicopter unit.
In addition to presenting safety and security
challenges for UNAMID and aid personnel, the
intensification of conflict has increased the civilian
population’s need for protection and humanitarian
assistance. Furthermore, support for the peace
process and efforts to strengthen the rule of law
and human rights in Darfur remain much needed.
With a view to ensuring that the mission has the

4/6

23/10/2013

resources, configuration and procedures needed
to address those issues more effectively, we have
begun, in close consultation with the African Union,
a forward-looking and detailed review, as requested
in resolution 2113 (2013). The review will consist of a
conflict analysis and capability review phase, a senior
assessment mission to Darfur to validate the analysis,
the development of recommendations and options for
improving the mission’s effectiveness and, eventually,
presentation of the findings to the Security Council.
The analysis, which involves an updated assessment of
the causes, actors and drivers of conflict in Darfur and
of projected trends, as well as an examination of the
mission’s strategic and operation approach, is currently
under way. The senior assessment mission will take
place in late November and early December, and the
presentation of the findings and recommendations is
expected in February.
Despite very challenging circumstances, UNAMID
remains resolute in its commitment to providing muchneeded protection to civilians, facilitating the delivery
of aid and supporting the peace process. We here at
Headquarters will continue to work with the mission,
the African Union and other partners to ensure that
our peacekeepers in Darfur are able to carry out their
mandate in a robust, effective and efficient way. In
that connection, the Council’s continued support for
UNAMID’s operations and efforts to reach an inclusive
political settlement to the conflict remain very welcome.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his
statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would first
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the way
you have guided the Council this month. During your
Security Council membership, which ends in a little
more than two months, you have demonstrated your
ability to contribute to the maintenance of international
peace and security, thanks to your objective approach.
The abductions and massacres committed by
the rebel movements in Darfur against the civilian
population and peacekeeping troops are a major
concern for the Government of the Sudan, and far more
so than for the other parties involved. We hope that all
the efforts being made in this area can be coordinated
to support those of the Sudan to end the conflict in

13-52710

23/10/2013

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

Darfur, so as to re-establish peace and stability and, as
a result, prosperity for the people of Darfur.
As I begin my statement, I would also like to reiterate
the Government of the Sudan’s condemnation of the
incident in which one Zambian and three Senegalese
peacekeepers died, and to once again express the
condolences of the Government of the Sudan to the
Governments of Zambia and Senegal.
I would also like to underscore the fact that
the Sudanese Armed Forces have clashed with the
perpetrators of those incidents in which peacekeepers
and two members of the militias were killed, and a
vehicle was recovered after it had been intercepted
by the assailants. In addition, a soldier from the
Sudanese Armed Forces died and another was injured
in that incident. The latter is currently in the hospital.
The incident demonstrates with all certainty the
commitment of the Sudanese Government to dealing
with the acts perpetrated by the armed movements.
We also expect the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to fully
shoulder its role, in particular because UNAMID is
made up of peacekeepers and military personnel. The
military personnel should carry out their duties and
deal with the assailants, first and foremost to defend
themselves, and then to carry out their mission to
maintain peace in Darfur. In other words, the inability
of the UNAMID military personnel to defend and
protect themselves against attack, as well as the
Mission’s inability to shoulder other tasks, raises many
questions. How can UNAMID personnel remain sitting
on their hands when they are the targets of attack, with
the Sudanese Armed Forces having to intervene to
protect them?
We have just heard the briefing by Mr. Chambas,
which focused on his efforts to persuade those
movements that refuse to join the peace process to do
so. We highly appreciate his efforts. I would urge the
Security Council to ensure that Mr. Chambas’ efforts
are successful by seeing to it that influential countries
encourage the parties to come to the negotiating table
and re-establish peace in Darfur.
Mr. Chambas talked of the obstacles that hamper
the work of UNAMID. In that regard, I would like to
say that cooperation between the Sudanese Government
and UNAMID has made considerable progress in terms
of granting visas. Mr. Ladsous acknowledged that
fact when he met with the Sudanese Minister of the

S/PV.7048

Interior during his visit to New York last month; he also
mentioned it in his meeting with the Sudanese Minister
for Justice, who is from Darfur, specifically from
the Zaghawa tribe. Those two Sudanese leaders met
with senior officials of the United Nations, including
the Secretary-General, and confirmed the Sudan’s
cooperation and its determination to help UNAMID
carry out its role in the most effective manner. I can
confirm today that the Sudanese Government is
absolutely determined to continue its work along the
lines set forth heretofore, both here in New York, within
the Secretariat, and in the Sudan as well, in order to
facilitate UNAMID’s mission.
We have also heard the positive news regarding
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and its
implementation. Priority is currently being given to the
implementation of the development strategy in Darfur
that was approved at the donor conference that took place
in Doha in April 2013. The report presented to us today
(S/2013/607) discusses in great detail the measures
taken in that regard in coordination with UNAMID and
the United Nations Development Programme. Thus,
and given the progress that has been made in terms of
implementing the Doha Document, we strongly urge
the international community, in particular, the Security
Council, to support that progress. It is extremely
important, as I have already said, to exert the necessary
pressure on the rebel movements that refuse to join
the peace process to do so swiftly and without any
preconditions.
The report befoe the Council today (S/2013/607)
confirms in paragraph 7 that the Special Prosecutor
for Darfur informed UNAMID that he had, since being
appointed in June 2012, brought to trial nine cases of
serious crimes resulting in 42 convictions, and that he
was investigating another 57 cases. In that regard, we
reaffirm his assertion that the Sudanese justice system
is qualified and capable of meting out justice and make
rulings in cases.
I would like to underscore that during his visit
to New York last month, the Sudanese Minister of
Justice — who, as I said earlier, is from the Zaghawa
tribe of Darfur — met with the Secretary-General.
In that meeting, the Secretary-General praised the
Minister’s efforts to combat impunity and to lift
the immunity enjoyed by certain indictees. I wish to
confirm that we are going to continue along that path
in order to convict all perpetrators of those crimes. The
Government of the Sudan is also pursuing its efforts

13-527105/6

S/PV.7048

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

and investigations to bring to justice all those people
involved in attacks against UNAMID.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that
the report before us today states in paragraph 13 that
intercommunal fighting over land and other natural
resources poses a serious threat of physical violence to
civilians.
Furthermore, paragraph 41 of the report
underscores that intercommunal fighting in East
Darfur was responsible for the humanitarian situation.
I can confirm to the Council that such attacks and
intercommunal fighting have now been contained and
that, in that regard, we are cooperating with all parties
of influence at the regional level in order to promote
reconciliation between the tribes. The events of the
past month have been contained, and fighting has now
ceased between the tribes.

6/6

23/10/2013

Paragraphs 47, 48 and 49 of the report reflect a
decrease in cases of violations of the right to life, of
violations of the right to physical integrity, and of
sexual and gender-based violence — all as a result of
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur.
In conclusion, I would urge all Council members to
exert firm pressure to achieve the aims we all seek and
to convince those movements that have not yet joined
the peace process to do so as soon as possible in order
to restore peace and security.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

13-52710
