TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 12 AUGUST 1969

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1497) . . . , , . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . , , . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . .
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 24 July 1969 from the representatives of Chile, Colombia, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan, the United Arab Republic, Turkey,
Yugoslavia and Zambia addressed to -the President of the Security Council
(S/9359) . . . . . , . . , , . , . . . . , . . . . . . * * . . . . . . . - . . 1 . . . . . . . . .

1

Statement by the President , . , . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

S/PV.1497

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

eld in New York

AND NINETY-SEVENTH

on Tuesday,

President: Mr. Jaime DE PINIES (Spain).

MEETING

12 August 1969, at 3.30 p.m.
Zambia on the subject currently under consideration, but,
since I am speaking for the first time under your able
guidance, allow me to associate myself with previous
speakers who have offered you well-deserved tributes on
your assumption of the high office of President of the
Security Council for the month of August. I assure you of
the fullest co-operation of the Zambian delegation in the
discharge of your difficult but noble responsibilities.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l4971

5. Let me also express the satisfaction of my delegation at
the able and inspiring manner in which Ambassador
Ibrahima Boye of Senegal presided over our deliberations
last month. I sincerely hope that the representative of
Senegal will convey these sentiments of gratitude to
Ambassador Boye on his return to New York.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 24 July 1969 from the representatives of
Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, the United Arab Republic, Turkey, Yugoslavia
and Zambia addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9359).

6. The Security Council has been discussing the question
of Namibia since 30 July 1969. We have listened intently to
what all delegations have had to say about this sad and
tragic chapter in the history of our Organization. At the
very beginning of this debate I stated:

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

“We are convinced that there is no other way of dealing
with this problem but to appIy Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations.

The situation in Namibia
Letter dated 24 July 1969 from the representatives of
Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, the United Arab Republic, Turkey, Yugoslavia
and Zambia addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9359)

‘May I, in conclusion, express the hope that those who
oppose our call for the application of Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations against South Africa will,
in the course of this debate, offer us a more attractive
alternative which should inescapably and effectively be
aimed at compelling South Africa to comply with the
General Assembly and Security Council decisions relative
to Namibia.” [1492nd meeting, paras. 43 and 44.1

1. The PRESIDENT (transl@ed from Spanish): In accordance with the Council’s previous decision, I shall now
invite the representatives of Chile and India to take places
at the Council table.

7. Despite this appeal which was obviously directed at
those who have an overriding responsibility to bring
pressure to bear upon the racist Government of South
Africa to vacate Namibia, we have, as always, heard a
million reasons why the permanent members of the
Security Council, and especially the Western major Powers,
are not prepared to apply Chapter #VII of the Charter
against South Africa, without any attractive alternatives
being offered us. There is no doubt that the South African
Government has been greatly encouraged by these negative
pronouncements.

At the President’s invitation, Mr, F, Maquieira (Chile) and
Mr. A. Gonsalves (India) took places at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The
Council will now continue its consideration of the question
of Namibia.
3. Before calling on the first speaker on my list, I wish to
inform the members of the Council that a draft resolution,
sponsored by Algeria, Pakistan, Senegal, and Zambia, now
joined by Colombia, has been submitted and has been
circulated to the members of the Council in document
S/9384.

8. Not only has South Africa been unresponsive in a
positive sense to United Nations pressure, but it has in fact
continued with major legislative and administrative measures intended to give expression to its apartheid system. In
the period since 1946, and at an increasing pace since 1948,
South Africa has translated its obnoxious philosophy and

4. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): Mr. President, I have had an
opportunity during the course of this debate to outline
fully the policies of the Government of the Republic of
3

practice into the blueprint of a social structure that every
Member of the United Nations, regardless of its shortcomings, has declared to be reprehensible and repugnant to
human dignity and that many of us believe to be an exigent
threat to the peace of Africa and the whole world. It is out
of this increasing United Nations concern and pressure that
the problem is posed today in a particularly acute form.
Having failed to influence the Pretoria regime with mobilized opposition, we urge today, as we have done before,
that the time has come for action of a different sort. It
must surely be clear to all that South Africa has not been
swayed by logic or passion and must therefore be forced to
alter its dangerous and self-destroying course.
9. We are convinced that South Africa’s illegal occupation
of Namibia, if left as it is, will lead to a crisis so bloody and
so embittering to the whole population of Africa that it will
endanger the peace of the world and permanently deepen
the rift between b!ack and white peoples.
10. There are many nations in the world that are deeply
concerned about the inability of the Security Council to act
in matters which clearly fall within its jurisdiction. The
draft resolution [S/9384] which I introduce today on
behalf of the delegations of Algeria, Colombia, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Senegal and my own, is a sincere expression of
indignation and concern, which are shared by many
Members of our Organization that strongly feel that South
Africa should no longer be allowed to flout the decisions of
this Organization with impunity.

(8) Call upon all States to refrain from all dealings with
the Government of South Africa, purporting to act 011
behalf of Namibia.
(9) Request all States to increase their moral and
material assistance to the people of Namibia in their just
struggle against foreign occupation.
12. Those are grave pronouncements which will have
serious consequences on the Government of South Africa.
It is not enough to express sympathy in connexion with the
situation in Namibia or to make muffled utterances about
repugnance for South Africa’s policies in Namibia. Finn
and resolute action is required. We cannot continue the
legalistic juggling of phrases simply in order to evadethe
unpleasant consequences of responsibility. The permanent
members of the Security Council have a grave responsibility
placed upon them by the Charter of the United Nations to
ensure that the people of Namibia exercise their right to
self-determination and independence. We sincerely hope
that they will assume this inescapable burden which great
power demands.
13. With those few words it is my pleasure and privilege
on behalf of the delegations of Algeria, Colombia, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Senegal and Zambia to commend the draft
resolution contained in document S/9384 to the Security
Council for its unanimous adoption. In view of the pressjug
schedule of the Security Council, the co-sponsors would
like to request that a vote be taken on this draft resolution
today.

11. When the Council adopted resolution 264 (1969) on
20 March 1969, a solemn undertaking was made to the
effect that the Council would meet to consider appropriate
measures in accordance with the. relevant provisions of the
Charter. The present resolution is not the best that could be
drafted, but it is the best possible given the obvious
limitations and peculiar circumstances which surround all
Security Council resolutions. We regard it as a step in the
right direction. We set out in stronger and clearer terms to
achieve the following:

14. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I wish to
thank the representative of Zambia for the kind words he
has addressed to me.

(1) Remind South Africa of its obligations under the
provisions of Article 25 of the Charter.

1.5. Before continuing, I wish to notify the Council that 1
have just been informed that, as the representative of
Zambia has announced, the delegation of Paraguayhas also
become a sponsor of the draft resolution just introduced by
the representative of Zambia.

(2) Remind ourselves as members of the Security Council
of our responsibilities under Article 6 of the Charter,
(3) Condemn South Africa for its persistent defiance of
the authority of the United Nations.

16. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): May I welcome the SecretaryGeneral back to our midst and express our very great
satisfaction at his recovery?

(4) Declare that South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of Namibia constitutes an aggressive encroachment on the authority of the United Nations and also a
denial of the political sovereignty of the people of Namibia.

17. I now turn to the item on the agenda. Although we
know that the present draft resolution falls far short of the
requirements of the situation in that it fails to commit the
Security Council to a specific course of action under
Chapter VII of the Charter, which is what is vitahy needed,
we have not ceased to view the developments in this case
with our usual sense of optimism. In coming to grips with
the situation in Namibia, the draft resolution takes the
commitment of the Security Council much further than
resolution 264 (1969) in many important respects. It setsa
time-limit for South Africa’s withdrawal from Namibia;lt

(5) Recognize the legitimacy of the struggle of the
people of Namibia against foreign occupation.
(6) Set a date for the withdrawal
Namibia.

comply with operative paragraph 5, to take effective
measures in accordance with the appropriate provisions of
the relevant Chapters of the Charter. We regard this as a
final warning to South Africa before we embark upon the
inevitable, and South Africa would be well advised to take
heed of this warning.

of South Africa from

(7) Decide that we shall meet again, in the event of
failure on the part of the Government of South Africa to
2

above all, we must, at all costs, preserve the basis for our
Organization’s concern for the people of Namibia and for
all those people who are the victims of the hated policies
and practices of the Government of South Africa.

recognizes the legitimacy of the struggle of the people of
Namibia against the illegal occupation; it prohibits all
dealings with South Africa in so far as they relate to
Namibia; and last but not least, it calls upon all States to
increase their moral and material assistance to the people of
Namibia in their legitimate struggle for freedom, Those are
no mean achievements.

22. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): If no
representative wishes to speak at this time, I propose that
the Council should proceed to vote on the draft resolution
in document S/9384.

18. By setting a time-limit for South Africa’s withdrawal
from the international Territory, the draft resolution lays
the juridical basis for further consideration of the question
by the Security Council in the very near future, at which
time the permanent members of the Council who oppose
action in this regard might perhaps be persuaded to take a
positive view of their special responsibility under the
Charter.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favoLly: Algeria, China, Colombia, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia.
Against: None.

19. This is something which gives us some cause for
satisfaction. WC have been trying all along to commit the
Security Council, and above all its permanent members, to
an effective course of action with regard to the situation in
Namibia. We have, furthermore, been trying all along to
compel South Africa to adapt its behaviour to conform to
the common principles and discipline of the United
Nations.

Abstaining: Finland, France, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
The draft resolution was adopted by 1 I votes to none
with 4 abstentions. 1
23. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): That
concludes our discussion on the subject of the situation in
Namibia, for the time being.

20. As may be seen from the 8 August issue of the
Windhoek Advertiser, the Foreign Minister of South Africa
has again levelled charges against the “irresponsible and
wild elements in the United Nations”, and served notice
that his Government would treat the present resolution
with the same contempt with which it has treated all
previous resolutions. South Africa persists in its policy of
active belligerency against the United Nations. The permanent members of the Security Council have also continued to refuse to rise up to their special responsibility.

Statement by the President
24. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): Before
adjourning the meeting, I wish to inform the members of
the Council that I have received a letter from the Charge
d’affaires of Lebanon in which he requests an urgent
meeting of the Security Council. The text of the letter is
already in the hands of the members of the Council in its
original English version. Since it has not yet been possible
to translate it into the other official languages, I shall read
it.

21. So it would appear that our attempts have so far
proved futile. But so far as the delegation of Nepal is
concerned, we believe, as a matter of principle, in the
essential wisdom of the course of action which we have
been following. We must never cease in our attempts aimed
at committing the Security Council to an effective course
of action-action under Chapter VII of the Charter in this
case. It is neither wise nor necessary to deviate from those
attempts. We must act according to the concept of
collective action by the United Nations. We must respect
the principle of universality of our Organization. And,

[The President read out in English the text of document
S/9385/
25. Following the usual consultations, it has been agreed
that the Council will meet tomorrow at 5 p.m.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.
1 Seeresolution 269 (1969).

3
