A/RES/72/246

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 January 2018

Seventy-second session
Agenda item 72 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 24 December 2017
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/72/439/Add.2)]

72/246.

Effects of terrorism on the enjoyment of human rights
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 2 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 2
and other relevant international human rights instruments,
Taking note of all relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the Security
Council, the Commission on Human Rights and the Human Rights Council
concerning terrorism and the protection of human rights, including Assembly
resolutions 46/51 of 9 December 1991, 60/158 of 16 December 2005, 60/288 of
8 September 2006, 64/297 of 8 September 2010, 68/178 of 18 December 2013,
68/276 of 13 June 2014, 69/127 of 10 December 2014, 70/148 of 17 December 2015
and 70/291 of 1 July 2016, Commission on Human Rights resolution 2004/44 of
19 April 2004 3 and Human Rights Council resolutions 25/7 of 27 March 2014, 4
28/17 of 26 March 2015, 5 29/9 of 2 July 2015, 6 31/3 of 23 March 2016, 7 31/30 of
24 March 2016, 7 33/21 of 30 September 2016, 8 34/8 of 23 March 2017 9 and 35/34 of
23 June 2017, 10

__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23),
chap. II, sect. A.
4
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53),
chap. IV, sect. A.
5
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. III, sect. A.
6
Ibid, chap. V, sect. A.
7
Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/71/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
8
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/71/53/Add.1 and A/71/53/Add.1/Corr.1), chap. II.
9
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
10
Ibid., chap. V, sect. A.
1
2

17-23330 (E)

230118

*1723330*

A/RES/72/246

Effects of terrorism on the enjoyment of human rights

Reiterating its strong and unequivocal condemnation of all acts, methods and
practices of terrorism and violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever committed, regardless
of their motivation,
Recognizing that terrorism has a detrimental effect on the full enjoyment of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms, and impedes the full enjoyment of political,
civil, economic, social and cultural rights,
Strongly condemning the systematic recruitment and use of children to
perpetrate terrorist attacks, as well as the violations and abuses committed by terrorist
groups against children, including killing and maiming, abduction and rape and other
forms of sexual violence, and noting that such violations and abuses may amount to
war crimes or crimes against humanity,
Expressing deep concern that acts of sexual and gender-based violence are
known to be part of the strategic objectives and ideology of certain terrorist groups
and are used as an instrument to increase their power through supporting financin g
and recruitment and through the destruction of communities,
Emphasizing that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and
interrelated,
Reaffirming the fundamental importance of respecting all human rights and
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law, and reiterating that all States have an
obligation to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms and to
ensure implementation of their obligations under international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, as applicable,
Reaffirming also that the promotion and the protection of human rights for all
and the rule of law are essential to the fight against terrorism, recognizing that
effective counter-terrorism measures and the protection of human rights are not
conflicting goals, but are complementary and mutually reinforcing, and stressing the
need to promote and protect the rights of victims of terrorism,
Stressing that States have a responsibility to protect individuals within their
territory and subject to their jurisdiction from acts of terrorism, to take effective
counter-terrorism measures and to investigate and prosecute those responsible for
carrying out such acts, and emphasizing the importance of ensuring that counter terrorism laws, measures and practices are human rights-compliant,
Renewing its unwavering commitment to strengthening international
cooperation to prevent and combat terrorism and violent extremism as and when
conducive to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and reaffirming that any
acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation ,
wherever, whenever and by whomsoever committed,
Emphasizing that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group, and that tolerance, pluralism,
inclusion and respect for diversity, dialogue among civilizations and the enhancement
of interfaith and intercultural understanding and respect among people, including at
the national, regional and global levels, while avoiding the escalation of hatred, are
among the most important elements in promoting cooperation and success in
preventing and combating terrorism, and welcoming the various initiatives to that
end,
Reaffirming the commitment of Member States to take measures aimed at
addressing the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, including but not
limited to prolonged unresolved conflicts, the dehumanization of victims of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, lack of the rule of law and violations and abuses
of human rights, ethnic, national and religious discrimination, political exclusion,
2/4

17-23330

Effects of terrorism on the enjoyment of human rights

A/RES/72/246

socioeconomic marginalization and lack of good governance, while recognizing that
none of these conditions can excuse or justify acts of terrorism,
Conscious that there are a number of drivers underlying radicalization to
terrorism and that development based on the principles of social justice, inclusion and
equal opportunities can contribute to the prevention of terrorism and violent
extremism as and when conducive to terrorism, as well as to the promotion of
inclusive, open and resilient societies, notably through education, and affirming the
determination of States to work towards conflict resolution, to confront oppression,
to eradicate poverty, to promote sustained economic growth, sustainable
development, global prosperity, good governance, human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all and the rule of law, to improve intercultural understanding and to
promote respect for all,
1.
Strongly condemns all terrorist acts as criminal and unjustifiable, and
expresses grave concern about their detrimental effects on the enjoyment of all human
rights;
2.
Reaffirms its commitment to the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and a balanced and integrated implementation of its four pillars, as adopted
in its resolution 60/288, and at its fifth review, and recognizes the need to redouble
efforts for even attention paid to and even implementation of all the pillars of the
strategy;
3.
Expresses concern that terrorists and terrorist groups have targeted
communities and individuals, as well as Governments, including on the basis of
religion or belief and/or ethnicity;
4.
Deeply deplores the suffering caused by terrorism to the victims of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and to their families, expresses its
profound solidarity with them, and encourages Member States to provide them with
proper support and assistance while taking into account, inter alia, when appropriate,
considerations regarding remembrance, dignity, respect, justice and truth, in
accordance with international law;
5.
Recognizes that terrorism has a grave impact on the full enjoyment of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms and that it potentially hampers development,
including but not limited to destroying infrastructure, harming the tourism industry,
diverting foreign direct investment, impeding economic growth and increasing
security costs;
6.
Urges States to protect persons within their territory and subject to their
jurisdiction by preventing and countering terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, in full compliance with their international legal obligations, and to
respect and protect all human rights while countering terrorism in accordance with
international law, in particular international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law;
7.
Calls upon Member States to remain alert to the use of information and
communications technology for terrorist purposes and to cooperate to counter violent
extremist propaganda and incitement to violence on the Internet and social media,
including by developing effective counter-narratives, and to prevent terrorists from
recruiting and raising funds online for terrorist purposes, while respecting human
rights and fundamental freedoms, in compliance with their obligations under
international law, and stresses the importance of cooperation with civil society and
the private sector in this endeavour;
8.
Expresses its concern at the increasing use, in a globalized society, by
terrorists and their supporters, of information and communications technology, in
particular the Internet and other media, to advocate, commit, incite, recruit for, fund
17-23330

3/4

A/RES/72/246

Effects of terrorism on the enjoyment of human rights

or plan terrorist acts, urges States to take appropriate preventive measures in this
regard while acting in full compliance with their obligations under international law,
and reiterates that such technologies can be powerful tools in countering the spread
of terrorism, including by promoting tolerance, dialogue among peoples and peace;
9.
Emphasizes the importance of cooperation among stakeholders, including
through technical cooperation, capacity-building and the exchange of good practices,
information and intelligence on preventing and countering terrorism, and in this
regard calls upon States and relevant regional and subregional organizations, as
appropriate, to continue to implement the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and its four pillars in a balanced and integrated manner;
10. Reaffirms its profound solidarity with the victims of terrorism and their
families, and acknowledges the importance of protecting their rights and providing
them with proper support, assistance and rehabilitation, while taking into account,
when appropriate, considerations regarding remembrance, dignity, respect, justice
and truth in such a way that promotes accountability and ends impunity, and
encourages the enhancement of international cooperation and the exchange of
expertise in that respect, in accordance with international law;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation
of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session.
76th plenary meeting
24 December 2017

4/4

17-23330
