UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/16
7 April 1994
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND
FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3361st meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 April 1994, in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
concerning Rwanda", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council is deeply disturbed by the tragic incident that
resulted in the deaths of the Presidents of Burundi and Rwanda on
6 April 1994 and the ensuing violence. The Council expresses regret at the
incident. It invites the Secretary-General to collect all available
information with all means at his disposal and report to the Council as
soon as possible.
"The Security Council is following with great concern the situation as
described by the Secretariat in its oral report. There has been
considerable loss of lives, including the deaths of Government leaders,
many civilians and at least ten Belgian peace-keepers as well as the
reported kidnapping of others. The Council strongly condemns these
horrific attacks and their perpetrators, who must be held responsible.
"The Council strongly condemns all these acts of violence and in
particular these attacks against United Nations personnel and urges the
Rwandese security forces and military and paramilitary units to put an end
to these attacks and to cooperate fully with UNAMIR in the implementation
of its mandate. It further demands that all measures be taken to provide
security throughout the country and particularly in Kigali and the
demilitarized zone (DMZ). Furthermore, the Council expresses its extreme
concern at the implications for United Nations personnel and requests the
Secretary-General to report on and take measures necessary to ensure their
safety and security. The Council also demands that free access to the
airport be restored in order to allow those who wish to enter or leave the
country to do so.
"The Council appeals to all Rwandese and to all parties and factions
to desist from any further acts or threats of violence and to maintain the
positions they held before the incident. It urges respect for the safety
and security of the civilian population and of the foreign communities
living in Rwanda as well as of UNAMIR and other United Nations personnel.

94-17030 (E)

070494

/...

S/PRST/1994/16
English
Page 2

"The Security Council earlier this week renewed the mandate of the
United Nations Operation in Rwanda for a further four months, with a
six-week review provision on the understanding that progress would be made
in establishing all the transitional institutions under the Arusha Peace
Agreement. It reaffirms its commitment to the Arusha Peace Agreement and
urges all parties to implement it fully and in particular to respect the
cease-fire.
"The Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
