asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6925

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6925th meeting
Friday, 22 February 2013, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kim Sook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2013/96)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-24069 (E)

*1324069*

S/PV.6925

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2013/96)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Roger
Meece, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. Members of the
Council have before them document S/2013/96, which
contains the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Meece.
Mr. Meece (spoke in French): I am honoured to have
been given the opportunity to present to the Security
Council an overview of the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and on the work of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in the
context of the report of the Secretary-General distributed
to the Council last week (S/2013/96). Certain elements
of the current situation are encouraging, including the
relative continued weakness of the organization and
combatants of the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda (FDLR) in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Nevertheless, I regret to inform the Council that the
general security situation in eastern part of the country
has continued to deteriorate since my last briefing
(see S/PV.6868). Worse yet, certain areas have seen a
significant deterioration in security and humanitarian

2

terms. I refer here to the situation in northern Katanga.
Moreover, it is my intention to focus the Council’s
attention on the security situation and associated key
factors. Of course, I will briefly touch on certain other
important developments linked to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
(spoke in English)
The attention of both the Congolese authorities and
the international community has been focused mostly
on the mutiny originally started by Bosco Ntaganda
and now widely referred to as the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) rebellion. That attention is well merited.
The consequences of the rebellion arising both from the
direct action of the M-23 forces and the indirect effects
felt throughout North Kivu and neighbouring provinces
represent the most serious security threats to stability
in the region in general and the population in particular,
at least since I took up duties in Kinshasa in July 2010.
While there has been a general pause in M-23
offensive operations since its temporary occupation of
the provincial capital of Goma late last year, the M-23
has continued to consolidate its own administrative
structures in the portion of North Kivu it occupies, with
reports of widespread violence and threats of violence
within that area, targeting local authorities or others who
attempt to resist its authority. In addition, MONUSCO
continues to receive many reports of continuing M-23
recruitment of new combatants, including through the
use of force, and widespread recruitment of minors.
We have also observed that the M-23 has maintained
significant military positions just outside of the city of
Goma, in violation of the Kampala agreement reached
last year. Those positions include well-placed firing
positions on the Munigi Heights, which put the Goma
airport within firing range. There has been no evidence
to date of any general pullback of M-23 forces or a
significant change in their general military posture.
The M-23 forces maintain an appearance of being well
supplied, well provisioned and well armed.
The M-23 has also continued to conduct patrols
or stage other operations immediately adjacent to the
city of Goma. Those have provoked in recent weeks
increased fears and rumours in the area of an imminent
resumption of large-scale military actions. They are
indicative of a generally tense and fearful atmosphere
in Goma and the general region. The overall situation
is volatile and precarious and could break down at any

13-24069

S/PV.6925

time into large-scale conflict without much, if any,
prior warning.
Government forces, the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo (FARDC), are
maintaining a military presence in Goma of 650 troops,
in accordance with the Kampala agreement. The
FARDC Eighth Military Region headquarters has been
re-established in an area south of Sake in the province.
A renewed Congolese police presence has been
established in Goma with the support and collaboration
of MONUSCO, which has been maintaining order
despite a shortage of arms, vehicles and other resources
since the M-23 occupation of the city. Absent the
three-way security arrangement at the Goma airport
called for by the Kampala agreement, MONUSCO has
maintained overall control of the airport from the time
of the occupation through the present.
Associated with this situation, we have continued
to see a general increase in Congolese militia activity
through the province. Whether by design or simply
circumstance, the continuing clashes between armed
groups have assumed the character of proxy battles. For
example, in the very volatile area around Pinga in North
Kivu, there have been ongoing clashes between MayiMayi Cheka, with Cheka having shifted his collaboration
from the FDLR to the M-23, and the Alliance des
patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain, a militia
now sharing anti-M-23 objectives with the FARDC.
Other armed confrontations are regularly occurring
involving a number of other forces, including the FDLR,
Rahiya Mutumboki, Nyatura, the Front Congolais pour
la rétablissement de la démocratie, Mayi-Mayi Shetani,
and various other groups. Inter-community ethnic
tensions, sharply heightened since last year by the
M-23 rebellion, characterize many of these conflicts.
All contribute to a general situation of instability, an
overall degradation of security conditions, and a state
of quasi-permanent threat to much of the population of
the province.
The M-23 has been unable to establish any
significant base of support outside of its occupied
area of North Kivu, despite its strong efforts to do so.
Nonetheless, there has been a general increase in militia
activity in South Kivu province, increased insecurity in
the northernmost portion of North Kivu, and ongoing
strife in Ituri district of Orientale province, facilitated
by security voids and the general preoccupation of
authorities with the M-23 threat. This general increase
includes some increased activity by the Ugandan Allied

13-24069

Democratic Forces (ADF) group based in northern
North Kivu, although it is not clear at this time whether
this represents a longer-term trend or is a short-term
coincidence. Widespread reports of killings, sexual
violence including rape, the use of children and forced
recruitment, and other human rights abuses characterize
the violence in essentially all areas.
There are two relative brighter spots, if I may
use that term, in the general security scene in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. One is the continuing
weakness of the FDLR and its apparent inability to
rebuild or reinforce its general capabilities, despite
the general lessening of FARDC and joint military
operations directed against them since the beginning
of the M-23 rebellion. There has been a major reduction
in the number of FDLR personnel processed for
repatriation since a peak of 141 repatriated combatants
was achieved in March 2012, just before the outbreak of
the M-23 rebellion. This result was associated with the
joint operations then ongoing in South Kivu. Numbers
have fallen considerably since.
We did record an unusual surge in January of 66
repatriated Rwandan FDLR combatants, in contrast
to the 29 recorded in December. Forty-four of these,
however, were in South Kivu, apparently connected
with a large-scale move of the majority of FDLR
personnel left in that province, apparently seeking
areas safer from attack by Rahiya Mutumboki and
others. As of 15 February, however, only 19 FDLR
combatant repatriations have been recorded for the
month, apparently indicating a return to the generally
low repatriation levels of late 2012.
Despite these conditions, there is no evidence that
the FDLR has been able to build any new strength; in
fact, all reports suggest the opposite. While the FDLR
certainly does retain a significant capacity for making
trouble in the areas of its operations, particularly in
North Kivu, it seems clear that its overall position is
weak — certainly compared to that of two or more
years ago.
In Orientale district in north-eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the attacks and generally
activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) also
appear limited. In collaboration with the Dungu Joint
Intelligence and Operations Centre, we continue to
estimate LRA combatant levels in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to be very limited. Generally
operating in small and usually poorly equipped and

3

S/PV.6925

supplied groups, LRA fighters certainly do continue
to exact severe violence on civilians they target,
including abductions, significant violence and looting
by armed elements. Also, of course, the group retains
the capability to move forces across borders at will,
requiring ongoing vigilance and regional cooperation
to put an end to this regional threat. For some time
now, however, LRA operations and numbers in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have been of more
limited scale. It should also be noted that the sparsely
settled but very large areas of Haut-Uélé and Bas-Uélé
districts also continue to experience elevated levels of
violence from criminals, including poachers.
MONUSCO has sought to respond to all of these
threats using all available resources and to the limits
of our mandate. As noted in the Secretary-General’s
report, for example, and contrary to a considerable
amount of erroneous press reporting at the time,
MONUSCO was substantially engaged militarily
to oppose M-23 offensive operations, including the
November offensive against Goma. I would be happy to
supply Council members with a detailed account of the
military operations surrounding that M-23 offensive, as
may be desired.
Unfortunately, as is clear, this military engagement
and that of the Congolese FARDC forces failed to halt a
strong, well-conceived, well-equipped and determined
operation to take control of Goma. MONUSCO has
been continuously reviewing our deployments and
bases of operations to try to ensure maximum capacity
to respond not only to the M-23 operations, but also
to the threat posed by a wide variety of armed groups
throughout eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Our civilian and police components and United Nations
specialized agencies have all worked closely together
to respond as effectively as possible to a broad and
growing range of security and humanitarian issues. I
must underscore again, however, that our forces and
our resources are stretched very thin over a broad area.
Indeed, as new threats are emerging in other areas,
including Maniema and Katanga provinces, we have a
very limited opportunity to respond to them.
As the Council is aware, there have been a broad
range of regional and international efforts under way
in regard to this daunting array of issues, and most
especially in regard to the threats posed by the M-23,
FDLR, ADF and other armed groups in North and South
Kivu. These include the regional peace framework
initiative spearheaded by the Secretary-General’s office

4

to achieve a durable peace in the region, talks under
way in Kampala under the general coordination of
Uganda as chair of the International Conference of the
Great Lakes Region, and increased regional initiatives
associated with the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and the African Union. I will
not detail all of those here, as the Council has already
received substantial reporting and updates on these
efforts.
I will briefly mention, however, two particularly
important pending initiatives with a direct potential
impact on MONUSCO activities. The first has been
the proposal to add an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
surveillance capability to MONUSCO. I would like to
express my personal thanks and appreciation to the
Council for its support of this proposal, and I can assure
Council members that we are moving forward with the
relevant New York offices to ensure deployment of these
UAVs at the earliest possible time. Our field personnel
have affirmed to me the importance of the potential
benefits that can accrue from this new capability, once
deployed.
The other is the widely discussed proposal for an
additional military force or brigade within MONUSCO
equipped with a peace enforcement authority going
beyond a traditional United Nations peacekeeping
mandate. From my perspective, it has become
increasingly clear that the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
now MONUSCO, has long operated consistent with
a traditional United Nations peacekeeping model
developed and based on a post-conflict environment.
Unfortunately, of course, as recent events have
underscored anew, the environment in which the
Mission operates is much more and too often one of
active conflict.
Seeking to adapt a post-conflict peacekeeping
model to this context has not been particularly
satisfactory. I am convinced that a peace enforcement
capability on the ground is a necessary component to
help achieve the conditions necessary to obtain the
engagements and commitments needed by all parties
to permit a durable peace in the area to be established.
As a specific proposal for that prospective force is
finalized — likely utilizing military forces to be
provided by SADC — I would strongly encourage the
Council to give serious consideration to the proposal,
its needs and requirements and, I hope, provide the
necessary support and authorization for such a force to

13-24069

S/PV.6925

be deployed at the earliest time possible. I believe that
represents an urgently needed and important response
to the existing situation on the ground, especially in
North and South Kivu.
In discussing current security threats, I must also
note the recent worrisome security developments in
Katanga and other provinces. The Mayi-Mayi leader
known as Gédéon and associated militias, such as
Kata Katangais and others, have been increasing their
activities in northern Katanga province since Gédéon’s
escape from prison in late 2011. The situation has now
reached alarming proportions, affecting a growing
geographic region and already producing a major
humanitarian crisis. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs now estimates that there
are 316,000 displaced persons in Katanga because
of Gédéon-related military activity. That number is
growing.
We have received many requests for an increased
MONUSCO presence and response. Unfortunately,
we have a very limited presence in the area and,
correspondingly, a limited capacity for response.
Nonetheless, we are looking at all possibilities
involving all relevant country team agencies, as well
as MONUSCO, and working with local, provincial and
national authorities to identify options. I fear, however,
that the situation will likely grow worse in the coming
weeks.
Likewise, I have been concerned by events that
took place roughly a week ago, with the temporary
occupation of the town of Punia in Maniema province
by a cell of the Rayi Mutumboki militia group — a
considerable distance from what had been their area
of operations in South Kivu province. That represents
another expansion of the reach of militia activity and
violence and, again, beyond the area of any MONUSCO
presence. In that case, a FARDC counter-attack using
troops from Kisangani was able to drive out the Rayi
Mutumboki elements a day after their occupation of
the town, driving them east towards Kasese, a town
in Maniema that was still under Rayi Mutumboki
occupation as of early this week. Fortunately, there were
no casualties among the humanitarian workers from a
number of agencies operating in the area. Nonetheless,
that, too, represents a worrisome development to which
we have a limited ability to respond. I would also note,
in passing, as significant issues to monitor, potential
problems with continuing tensions in parts of Equateur

13-24069

province and reported significant refugee flows from
the Central African Republic into Equateur.
The increasing challenge to humanitarian agencies
has been growing increasingly acute, particularly in
the light of the ongoing financial pressures limiting
funding for needed operations. Humanitarian workers
are facing daunting challenges in delivering services
to needy populations, certainly including, but not
limited to, the large and growing numbers of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in the Kivus, but elsewhere
as well. The challenges include adequate access as
needed and associated security threats posing potential
immediate dangers to the individuals and agencies
involved. We are working as closely as possible with
MONUSCO resources and those drawn from all United
Nations agencies to respond to those needs. Those
include security concerns, focused on large and growing
IDP camps in North Kivu, in protecting those in the
camps from attacks. We have achieved some progress
in that regard. However, I would very much urge all
Member States and organizations to be as forthcoming
as possible to support those humanitarian efforts to the
maximum extent possible, so as to facilitate effective
responses to the already enormous, and likely growing,
needs.
Before concluding my remarks, I would like
to briefly note a few important developments also
touching on MONUSCO’s mandate.
The Nations Assembly recently adopted a new
election law providing for substantial reforms to the
Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC).
Just within the past week, the Assembly also passed
a required legal review by the Supreme Court, which
will be forwarded to President Kabila for promulgation
in the next few days, which we expect soon. That
will set the stage for INEC reforms, including a new
formulation of an oversight plenary and executive
board. As that unfolds, we will need to examine, in
collaboration with all engaged partners, the prospects
and timing for needed pending democratic and
transparent provincial and local elections to determine
an appropriate engagement to support the process.
That represents a critical phase of development for the
nascent democracy in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as for pending decentralization moves
consistent with the 2006 Constitution and popular
will, all in the general existing political context. It is
too early to reach definite conclusions about how those
processes can and will unfold. The issues represented,

5

S/PV.6925

however, are of obvious importance to the future of the
country and its people.
I must also note that critical reviews of the existing
stabilization and reconstruction plan for areas emerging
from armed conflict/international strategy for security
and stabilization programmes in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as moves
to advance to formal adoption the Peace Consolidation
Programme for other areas of the country, are also
moving forward. All of them are of great importance for
the stability and development of the country. All affect
the issues of MONUSCO involvement, the transfer of
functions, as possible, to country team members, and
how key issues may be addressed generally. I should
also note that all of those questions are directly linked
as well to issues of security and stability in the eastern
and other areas of the country; each is also important
by itself.
Security sector reforms, most critically military
reform efforts, also remain at the centre of key
immediate priorities. President Kabila recently
repeatedly reaffirmed the importance of that sector
and his intentions to implement major new activities
in that regard. However, it remains of vital importance
to define a comprehensive strategy that provides the
needed resources, engagements and expertise of all
parties under Congolese Government overall direction.
We will maintain an active dialogue with Government
authorities to define how those initiatives may unfold.
I should also note significant recent progress in
two key areas, including the formal adoption of a joint
United Nations/Congolese Government action plan to
stop and prevent underage recruitment, sexual violence
against children and other grave child rights violations
by FARDC and Congolese security services. We have
made considerable progress to define associated specific
actions, which represents a major and encouraging step
forward in a long-standing area of concern. As well,
I am pleased to report that we are nearing the formal
adoption of the long-awaited multi-year joint justice
programme, to be jointly signed by the Congolese
Minister of Justice and the United Nations, with its
implementation overseen by the Ministry of Justice.
I am optimistic that that will be ready for adoption
and signature in the near future. That will effectively
complement our ongoing efforts with the military
justice system in the fight against impunity, which
remains a high priority. We will continue to pursue
those activities as strongly as possible

6

Finally, before I conclude, let me take note of the
various discussions and options regarding potential
modifications of the MONUSCO mandate. I strongly
believe that such a review is appropriate. Indeed, I
have already indicated some areas where I believe a
modification is urgently needed, especially with regard
to a new peace-enforcement capability. Let me also
strongly urge that those discussions be held in full
cognizance of the overall context and the limitations
of MONUSCO’s available human and other resources.
Above all, I strongly urge that the temptation be resisted
to add more to the already very substantial compilation
of MONUSCO tasks and requirements. It is essential
that mandate-tasking be tailored to a realistic appraisal
of the overall context and available resources and
capacities.
(spoke in French)
I should like to reiterate my sincere gratitude to
all the members of the Security Council, as well as
Member States, for their active support for MONUSCO
and its personnel, who work under dangerous and
difficult circumstances. Allow me to express to all of
MONUSCO’s personnel, military and civilian alike, a
final word of gratitude and commendation against the
backdrop of a very worrisome situation in the Kivus
and Katanga. All United Nations staff carry out their
work with perseverance, often in the most difficult of
conditions, thereby demonstrating a spirit of sacrifice
and commitment that honours the ideals of the United
Nations. Blue Helmets and civilian personnel alike face
the challenges associated with the mandate that the
Council has entrusted to them with professionalism,
courage and determination. In that regard, they deserve
our gratitude and our admiration. My thanks go to them
and to the Council for its support and attention.
The President: I thank Mr. Meece for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would like to say
once again how much we are honoured to see you,
Mr. President, as the President of the Security Council
at this time and to reassure you of my country’s support
in the success of your very noble task.
I thank the Council for the opportunity to speak
at this meeting convened to consider the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is also

13-24069

S/PV.6925

an opportunity for me to especially thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, who, since taking up the
leadership of the Organization, has spared no effort to
find a solution to ensure the return of lasting peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The signing on
Sunday in Addis Ababa of the framework agreement on
peace, security and cooperation in my country and in
the Great Lakes region is further proof of his efforts.
I should like to welcome the presence of Mr. Roger
Meece, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I thank him
for giving the Council his assessment of the progress
achieved since November 2012 in the implementation
of resolution 2053 (2012).
I would like to begin, if I may, by first conveying
the following three points.
First, strengthening the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and swiftly
deploying an intervention force are major concerns
for my Government at the moment. That effort, as we
all know, is intended to respond to a real and urgent
security need in the eastern part of my country. After
many appeals by my Government, the SecretaryGeneral and a number of partners, both bilaterally
and multilaterally, we believe that the matter of
strengthening MONUSCO’s mandate is the correct
thing to do and requires swift action by the Security
Council.
Secondly, taking into account the fragility of the
situation on the ground, my Government calls on the
Security Council to consider as quickly as possible
adopting a resolution to change MONUSCO’s mandate.
Thirdly, with regard to human rights violations in
the area of Minova that are purported to be committed
by the forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
I should like to point out that the Government has never
refuted those accusations; quite to the contrary, it has
authorized the arrest of the perpetrators of those acts so
that they can be brought to justice before the competent
judicial bodies. That has been done, as noted in several
paragraphs of the report before the Council (S/2013/96).
I would now like to turn to that report, which
Mr. Meece has just introduced. I should first like to
refer to the annexes.
First of all, I would like to reiterate my Government’s
support for the goals of the revised comprehensive

13-24069

strategy that the Secretary-General proposes to replace
the current International Security and Stabilization
Support Strategy, as set out in annex I to the report.
Our hope is that attention will be given to achieving
the main goal, that is, promoting long-term economic
development to ensure sustainable stability in that area
of the country. With regard to the strategy and initiative
to transfer responsibility for some of MONUSCO’s
tasks to members of the United Nations country team,
as set out in annex II to the report, the Government
will express itself on that point once it has had an
opportunity to review the special report to be presented
by the Secretary-General to the Council.
The Secretary-General’s progress report, currently
before the Council, clearly establishes that the activities
of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) have significant
consequences on stability in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the Great
Lakes region, affecting hundreds of thousands of
innocent civilians, as noted in paragraph 78 of the report.
The same paragraph also concludes that the progress
achieved on a number of fronts has been hampered,
or even cancelled out, in certain areas. Moreover,
the Secretary-General indicates that the M-23 enjoys
external support for its destabilizing actions, which my
delegation has repeatedly condemned, as has the Group
of Experts in the clearest terms. The tension is widely
known, so I shall not go into the details. However, I
would urge those who still harbour doubts to read the
Group’s final report, dated 12 October 2012 (S/2012/843,
annex), as well as its 18 May 2012 interim report and
its annex (S/2012/348, annex). The reports highlight
the role of external actors in the current destabilization
of the situation in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
From a human rights and humanitarian assistance
perspective, the cruelty of the acts attributed to M-23
terrorists and the foreign forces supporting them have
resulted in a deteriorating situation that affects both
North and South Kivu, as underscored in paragraph 45
of the Secretary-General’s report. Numerous allegations
of violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law have been attributed to M-23 fighters
during the period under consideration, especially in
November 2012.
To return to the security situation in Goma, I
commend MONUSCO’s implementation of its internal
security plan in the context of Operations Wide Awake
and Silent Guns. Under the chapter on progress,

7

S/PV.6925

the report emphasizes the progress achieved in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with the adoption
by the two houses of Parliament of the organic law
establishing a national human rights commission, as well
as the continuing discussions on security sector reform
in general and reform of the armed forces in particular.
In that connection, I should point out that the necessary
legislation has already been adopted: law 11/012, of
11 August 2011, concerning the reorganization of the
armed forces; law 11/013, also of 11 August 2011, on
the organization and functioning of the national police;
law 13/005, of 15 January 2013, concerning the military
code for the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo; and the law governing the personnel of
the national police, which is now being promulgated.
Those efforts will be continued in order to give the

8

country an army capable of deterrence. What matters
at the moment, and what the Congolese people expect
as soon as possible, is the fulfilment of the promise to
change MONUSCO’s mandate, with a view to deploying
the intervention brigade whose establishment has been
announced.
In conclusion, we look forward eagerly to the
issuance of the special report of the Secretary-General
on the strategy to be followed in future.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

13-24069
