General Assembly- Fortieth Session
- - - - - - - - - - - ' - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - · - · - - - · - -···--

60

administration on that territory, constitute a continuing
threat to international peace and security;
8. Strongly deplores the negative vote by a permanent
member of the Security Council which prevented the
Council from adopting against Israel, under Chapter VII of
the Charter, the "appropriate measures" referred to in resolution 497 ( 1981) unanimously adopted by the Council;
9. Further deplores any political, economic, financial,
military and technological support to Israel that encourages Israel to commit acts of aggression and to consolidate
and perpetuate its occupation and annexation of occupied
Arab territories;
10. Firmly emphasizes once more its demand that
Israel, the occupying Power, rescind forthwith its illegal
decision of 14 December 1981 to impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration on the Syrian Golan Heights,
,. hich resulted in the effective annexation of that territory;
11. Reaffirms once more the overriding necessity of the
total and unconditional withdrawal by Israel from all the
Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since 196 7,
including Jerusalem, which is an essential prerequisite for
the establishment of a comprehensive and just peace in the
Middle East;
12. Determines once more that Israel's record, policies
and actions confirm that it is not a peace-loving Member
State, that it has persistently violated the principles contained in the Charter and that it has carried out neither its
obligations under the Charter nor its commitment under
General Assembly resolution 273 (III) of 11 May 1949;
13. Calls once more upon all Member States to apply
the following measures:
(a) To refrain from supplying Israel with any weapons
and related equipment and to suspend any military assistance that Israel receives from them;
(b) To refrain from acquiring any weapons or military
equipment from Israel;
(c) To suspend economic, financial and technological
assistance to and co-operation with Israel;
(d) To sever diplomatic, trade and cultural relations
with Israel;
14. Reiterates its call to all Member States to cease
forthwith, individually and collectively, all dealings with
Israel in order totally to isolate it in all fields:
15. Urges non-member States to act in accordance
with the provisions of the present resolution;
16. Calls upon the specialized agencies and other international organizations to conform their relations with
Israel to the terms of the present resolution;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
118th plenary meeting
16 December 1985

C
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/ 120 E of 10 December 1981,
37/123 C of 16 December 1982, 38/180 C of 19 December
1983 and 39/146 C of 14 December 1984, in which it
determined that all legislative and administrative measures and actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power,
which had altered or purported to alter the character and
status of the Holy City of Jerusalem, in particular the socalled "Basic Law" on Jerusalem and the proclamation of

Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, were null and void and
must be rescinded forthwith,
Recalling Security Council resolution 4 78 ( 1980) of 20
August 1980, in which the Council, inter alia, decided not
to recognize the "Basic Law" and called upon those States
that had established diplomatic missions at Jerusalem to
withdraw such missions from the Holy City,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of
22 October 1985, 81
I. Determines that Israel's decision to impose its laws,
jurisdiction and administration on the Holy City of Jerusalem is illegal and therefore null and void and has no
validity whatsoever;
2. Deplores the transfer by some States of their diplomatic missions to Jerusalem in violation of Security Council resolution 4 78 (1980) and their refusal to comply with
the provisions of that resolution;
3. Calls once again upon those States to abide by the
provisions of the relevant United Nations resolutions, in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations;
4. Requests the Secretary-Genera! to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
I 18th plenary meeting
16 December 1985

40/237. Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United
Nations
The General Assembly.
Recalling the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations,
Recognizing that the Organization is based on the principle of the sovereign equality of all its Members,
Mindful of the vital role of the United Nations m the
maintenance of international peace and security and in the
promotion of development and international co-operation,
Convinced that the improvement of the efficiency of the
administrative and financial functioning of the United
Nations could help it to attain the purposes and implement the principles of the Charter,
Considering the unanimous support for the United
Nations, expressed by Heads of State or Government or
their special envoys and by the representatives of Member
States during the commemoration of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations,
Noting that all participants stressed the need to promote
confidence in the United Nations and enhance the political
will of Member States to render more positive support to
the Organization,
Reaffirming the necessity of securing, in the employment of the Secretariat staff, the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, and the importance of
recruiting the staff based on the principle of equitable geographical distribution.
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, as the chief administrative officer of the Organization, to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the
Secretariat,
Bearing in mind the work of the relevant 5ubsidiarv
organs of the General Assembly,
•
Taking full}' mto account the views expressed during the
fortieth session,
I. Expresses its conviction that an overall increase in
t>fficiency would further enhance the capacity of the l lnited

II. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Nations to attain the purposes and implement the principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Decides to establish a Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the United Nations
with a term of one year, to carry out in full accordance
with the principles and provisions of the Charter the following tasks:
(a) To conduct a thorough review of the administrative and financial matters of the United Nations, with a
view to identifying measures for further improving the efficiency of its administrative and financial functioning,
which would contribute to strengthening its effectiveness
in dealing with political, economic and social issues;
(b) To submit to the General Assembly, before the
opening of its forty-first session, a report containing the
observations and recommendations of the Group;
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly, in
consultation with the regional groups, to appoint as soon
as possible the members of the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts with due regard to equitable geographical distribution;
4. Decides that the Group will consist of eighteen
members, and requests the Secretary-General to convene a
meeting of the Group as soon as possible to enable it to
elect its officers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Group with the necessary staff and services;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide full
assistance to the Group, in particular by submitting his
views and providing information necessary to conduct the
review;
1. Invites the relevant subsidiary organs of the General
Assembly to submit to the Group, through their chairmen,
information and comments on matters pertaining to their
work;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session an item entitled "Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of
the United Nations: report of the Group of High-level
I08 A/ 40/ I 08 5 and Corr. l and Add. I

61

Intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency of the
Administrative and Financial Functioning of the United
Nations".
121 st plenary meeting
18 December 1985

The President of the General Assembly subsequently
informed the Secretary-General'° 8 that, in accordance with
paragraph 3 of the above resolution, he had appointed the
following eighteen persons as members of the Group of
High-level Intergovernmental Experts:
Mr. Mark ALLEN (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland),
Mr. Maurice BERTRAND (France),
Mr. BI Jilong (China),
Mr. Lucio GARCiA DEL SOLAR (Argentina),
Mr. Ignac GOLOB (Yugoslavia),
Mr. Natarajan KRISHNAN (lndia),
Mr. Kishore MAHBUBANI (Singapore),
Mr. Hugo B. MARGAIN (Mexico),
Mr. Elleck MASHINGAIDZE (Zimbabwe),
Mr. Fakhreddin MOHAMED (Sudan),
Mr. Ndam NJOYA (Cameroon),
Mr. Vasiliy Stepanovich SAFRONCHUK (Union of Soriet
Socialist Republics),
Mr. Shizuo SAITO (Japan),
Mr. Edward 0. SANU (Nigeria),
Mr. David SILVEIRA DA MOTA (Brazil),
Mr. Jose S. SORZANO (United States of America),
Mr. Tom VRAALSEN (Norway).,
Mr. Layachi YAKER (Algeria).
