S/PV.9116

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9116th meeting

Thursday, 25 August 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun/Mr. Geng Shuang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Nyarku
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-47151 (E)
*2247151*

S/PV.9116

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

present threat of violence. Unless those fundamental
issues are addressed, the cycle of acute crisis followed
by short-term fixes will persist. Concerted efforts
are needed to restore a political horizon and resume
meaningful negotiations.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Philippe Lazzarini, Commissioner-General of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East; and Mr. Daniel Levy,
President of the U.S./Middle East Project.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: My previous briefing (see
S/PV.9107) took place just after Israel and Palestinian
Islamic Jihad (PIJ) each independently declared a
ceasefire, following three days of military escalation.
I am pleased to update the Security Council that the
ceasefire remains in effect and a fragile calm has been
restored in Gaza. The Erez and Kerem Shalom crossings
have remained open since 8 August, allowing for the
entry of essential goods and materials. The United
Nations is working with partners to ensure the delivery
of urgent assistance to those who need it most.
The ceasefire prevented the situation from
escalating into a full-scale war, which would have
had devastating consequences. It also allowed for the
resumption of the measures implemented over the past
year that have resulted in much-needed economic relief
to the people in Gaza. But a ceasefire is limited to
ending immediate hostilities; the underlying drivers of
the conflict are still unresolved.
Violence has increased across much of the occupied
West Bank. Israeli settlement activity continues, along
with demolitions and evictions. Fiscal and political
challenges threaten the Palestinian Authority’s
effectiveness in delivering essential public services.
The West Bank and Gaza remain politically divided.
Palestinians in Gaza face the challenge of economic
and movement restrictions linked with the Israeli
closure regime, the nature of Hamas rule and the ever2/21

25/08/2022

My briefing on 8 August provided an initial account
of the three-day escalation. Overall, the Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) conducted 147 airstrikes against what they
said were militant targets in Gaza. Palestinian militants
indiscriminately fired approximately 1,100 rockets from
densely populated areas in the Strip towards Israel. Of
those, Israeli officials reported that around 35 per cent
were intercepted by the Iron Dome and 18 per cent fell
short and landed within the Gaza Strip, causing damage
and, reportedly, civilian casualties.
The violence took a severe toll on civilians.
According to the most recent figures, 49 Palestinians
were killed, of whom at least 26 were civilians,
including four women and 17 children. According to
the Ministry of Health in Gaza, 360 Palestinians were
injured during the escalation. Israeli officials reported
70 Israelis injured, including nine children. In Gaza,
10 houses were completely destroyed, while another 48
were severely damaged. A reported 650 housing units
were damaged.
On 5 August, Israeli forces carried out a series of air
strikes, killing a senior PIJ leader and other suspected
militants. In the initial strikes, a 5-year-old girl was
killed in eastern Gaza City, along with two men, and
a 22-year-old woman was killed east of Khan Younis.
On 6 August, a 60-year-old woman was killed and
five were children injured in an Israeli strike. One of the
children, a 10-year-old girl, died in hospital on 8 August.
On the same day, seven other Palestinians were killed
in an Israeli strike in Rafah, including a 13-year-old
child, two women and a senior PIJ commander. Thirty
others were reportedly injured, including at least seven
children and five women.
On 7 August, five children were killed and four
others were injured in an explosion in Al-Falouja
cemetery, east of Al-Jabalia. On 16 August, citing
Israeli official sources, media reported that the IDF
had concluded that the casualties were caused by an
Israeli air strike. The IDF has not publicly confirmed
the finding.
On two separate occasions, Palestinian civilians
were killed or injured in explosions, the causes of
which have yet to be verified. On 6 August, seven
22-47151

25/08/2022

S/PV.9116

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinians — all civilians, including at least four
children — were killed in an explosion near the Emad
Aql Mosque in Al-Jabalia. Forty-three others, including
26 children, were injured. On 7 August, an explosion
in Al-Bureij killed three children and their 49-yearold father, whom the Al-Qassam Brigades claimed
as an operative. Israeli forces denied involvement in
the incidents, which they said were caused by rocket
launches from militant groups. Palestinian armed groups
have made no public statements on those incidents.

forces announced that
Palestinian suspects.

I am concerned that air strikes in densely populated
areas resulted in civilian fatalities and injuries. Israel
must abide by its obligations under international
humanitarian law, including the proportional use of
force and the taking of all feasible precautions to
spare civilians and civilian objects in the conduct of
military operations.

On 9 August, Israeli security forces shot and
killed a 16-year-old Palestinian and injured five others
during a clash in Hebron. Israeli officials said that the
Palestinian had thrown stones towards Israeli forces,
who responded with live fire.

I condemn the indiscriminate launching of rockets
by Palestinian armed groups from highly populated
neighbourhoods in Gaza into civilian population centres
in Israel, in violation of international humanitarian law.
I reiterate that children must never be the target of
violence or put in harm’s way.
Daily violence also continued at high levels across
the occupied West Bank. During the reporting period,
a total of 12 Palestinians, including four children, were
killed by Israeli security forces during demonstrations,
clashes, search-and-arrest operations, attacks and
alleged attacks against Israelis and other incidents,
and 289 Palestinians, including three women and 83
children, were injured. Israeli settlers and other civilians
perpetrated 39 attacks against Palestinians, resulting in
eight injuries and/or damage to Palestinian property.
In all, 28 Israelis and other civilians, including
at least four women and two children and four Israeli
security personnel, were injured by Palestinians in
clashes, shootings, stabbings and ramming attacks
or as a result of the throwing of stones and Molotov
cocktails, among other incidents. In total, Palestinians
perpetrated 75 attacks against Israeli civilians, of which
57 were stone-throwing incidents, resulting in injuries
and/or damage to Israeli property.
On 22 July, Nasser Al-Shaer, a Hamas-affiliated
former official, was shot multiple times and injured
by two unknown assailants in Kafr Qalil village,
near Nablus. The Palestinian Authority ordered an
investigation, and on 26 July, Palestinian security

they

had

arrested

two

On 24 July, Israeli security forces shot and killed
two Palestinians and injured six others in an exchange
of fire during an arrest operation in Nablus.
On 26 July, Israeli forces shot an unarmed 59-yearold man with a mental disability at the Huwwara
checkpoint, south of Nablus. The man died of his
injuries on 29 July.

On the same day, four Palestinians, including a
16-year-old, were killed, and 76 Palestinians were
injured with live ammunition during clashes that
erupted following an Israeli security forces military
operation in Nablus. Another 16-year-old Palestinian
subsequently died from his injuries.
On 14 August, a Palestinian opened fire at a group
of Jewish worshippers in Jerusalem’s Old City. Eight
civilians, including a pregnant woman, were injured,
two seriously. The assailant fled the scene, but later
turned himself over to the police.
On 15 August, Israeli security forces shot and killed
a Palestinian during a search operation and subsequent
clashes in Kufr Aqab, north of Jerusalem. Israeli police
stated that the man was shot while attempting to stab
officers. The man’s father, who was present during the
operation, denied that.
On 17 August, Israeli security forces shot and
killed a Palestinian and injured five others during
clashes in Nablus, which took place in the context of
Palestinians throwing stones and reportedly firing
towards buses transporting Israeli civilians to Joseph’s
Tomb for religious worship in accordance with
established procedures.
On 19 August, an unarmed 58-year-old Palestinian
man was shot and killed. A video appeared to show the
man to be a bystander returning from dawn prayers when
an exchange of fire broke out. There are conflicting
accounts as to the source of the shot. Israeli authorities
stated that they are investigating the incident.
Settler-related violence also continued during the
reporting period. On 29 July, a 15-year-old Palestinian

22-471513/21

S/PV.9116

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

was shot during a confrontation between Palestinians
and armed Israeli settlers accompanied by Israeli
security forces outside Al-Mughhayyir village, near
Ramallah. The boy subsequently died. According to
witnesses, he had thrown stones and was shot in the
back while running away. It remains unclear whether
Israeli settlers or security forces fired the shot. Two
other Palestinians were injured with live ammunition.
In three separate incidents, Israeli civilians used
batons and metal bars and threw stones to attack
Palestinian farmers working on their lands, injuring
five Palestinians, including an elderly man.
I reiterate that the perpetrators of all acts of
violence must be held accountable and brought to
justice. Security forces must use lethal force only when
strictly unavoidable in order to protect life.
Turning to settlement-related developments, on
25 July, the Jerusalem District Planning Committee
advanced plans for the construction of 1,215 housing
units at the Lower Aqueduct site, adjacent to Kibbutz
Ramot Rachel and the Palestinian neighbourhood
of Umm Tuba. Some of the units are intended for
construction across the Green Line in occupied
East Jerusalem.
On 27 July, Israel’s Supreme Court reversed its
previous ruling, which ordered the evacuation of
settlers from the illegal outpost of Mizpe Kramim,
near Ramallah. The Court accepted the Government’s
argument that the Palestinian land in the area had
been allocated to the settlers in good faith and that the
principle of market regulation should be applied. Rights
groups expressed concerns that the ruling would pave
the way for the retroactive legalization of other outposts
under Israeli law.
On 28 July, Israeli settlers, accompanied by Israeli
security forces, moved into an empty Palestinian house
in the H-2 Area of Hebron city.
I reiterate that all settlements are illegal under
international law and remain a substantial obstacle
to peace.
During the reporting period, Israeli authorities
demolished, seized or forced owners to demolish
78 Palestinian-owned structures in Area C and 18 in
East Jerusalem, displacing 103 Palestinians, including
50 children. The demolitions were carried out due to
the lack of Israeli-issued building permits, which are
nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain.
4/21

25/08/2022

On 25 July, Israeli security forces demolished
two homes housing multiple families in Qarawat Bani
Hassan village, near Salfit in Area B. Family members
of the residents were accused of having killed an
Israeli settlement guard in April 2022. The demolition
resulted in damage to three additional neighbouring
homes and displaced 18 people, including 10 children.
Three Palestinians were injured in related clashes with
Israeli forces.
On 8 August, Israeli security forces demolished
two houses in the village of Rummana, near Jenin, in
Area B. The houses belonged to family members of
Palestinians indicted for killing three people in Israel
in May. Thirteen people, including four children,
were displaced. I call on the Israeli authorities to end
their demolitions of Palestinian-owned property and
the displacement and eviction of Palestinians, and to
approve additional plans that would enable Palestinians
to build legally and address their development needs.
I am concerned about the recent announcement
by Israel’s Ministry of Education that it had given
instructions to halt the granting of permanent licences
to six Palestinian schools in occupied East Jerusalem
owing to what it described as incitement against Israel
in their curriculum. If a solution is not found, more than
2,000 students will be affected.
On 17 August, the Military Commander of
the Israel Defense Forces rejected appeals by five
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) objecting
to their designation in November 2021 as unlawful
organizations. The same day, Israel’s Defence Minister
announced that the designation of three of them
as terrorist organizations, made in October 2021
under Israel’s counter-terrorism law, had been made
permanent. Three other organizations have appealed
their designations. On 18 August, Israeli forces ordered
the closure of the offices of seven organizations,
including all six NGOs that had been designated as
terrorist organizations in November 2021, and searched
their offices in Ramallah. Equipment was confiscated
and in some cases destroyed, and confidential files
were seized. The Israeli authorities also summoned
the directors of at least three of those organizations for
questioning. I echo the Secretary-General’s concern
about the shrinking space for civil society in Israel and
the occupied Palestinian territory.
In Gaza, despite the disruptions caused by the
escalation, some positive steps were taken during the
reporting period. As of 1 August, more than 14,000
22-47151

25/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

economic-needs permits have been issued, including
more than 11,000 permits for workers from Gaza to enter
Israel and another 3,000 for traders and businesspeople.
Israel also extended social entitlements to workers
from the Gaza Strip. I would welcome seeing a steady
increase in the number of permits issued in future.
Since 8 August, when movement was resumed into and
out of Gaza, progress has been made on resuming the
incremental easing of access restrictions that we have
seen over the past year. However, delays in importing
essential goods and equipment continue.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains deeply
troubling. The escalation, and the closures of Israelioperated crossings between 2 and 7 August, exacerbated
the ongoing hardships and resulted in new immediate
needs. The United Nations has identified approximately
$15 million in additional funding requirements for
providing psychological support, shelter, livelihoods
and cash assistance, as well as essential medicines
and medical assistance. In addition, the humanitarian
response across the occupied Palestinian territory
continued to face chronic funding gaps. As of mid2022, only 25 per cent of the requirement for the
humanitarian response plan had been met. Meanwhile,
global price increases for key commodities have
strained the resources of humanitarian partners and left
vulnerable families at risk of food insecurity. The World
Food Programme is in immediate need of $26.5 million
to support vulnerable households in Gaza and the
West Bank. If the funding is not received, the support
to those families will stop in October. On 1 August,
in a welcome step towards facilitating imports to the
occupied West Bank via Jordan, the use of 40-foot
containers was permitted for the first time for shipping
goods via the Allenby Bridge. I am hopeful that it will
pave the way for addressing other significant obstacles
to Palestinian trade.
Turning to the region in the Golan, the ceasefire
between Israel and Syria was generally maintained
despite several violations of the 1974 Disengagement
of Forces Agreement. It remains important that the
parties respect their obligations under the terms of the
Agreement and prevent risks of escalation.
In Lebanon, the lack of progress on reforms, the
deadlock in the formation of a Government and the
increasing strain on institutions, including the Lebanese
Armed Forces and security forces, continue to weigh
heavily on the State authorities. Heightened tensions
persist in the area of operations of the United Nations

S/PV.9116

Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) in south Lebanon.
In recent months, at least four firing ranges unknown to
Lebanese authorities have been observed in regular use
south of the Litani River, which is a blatant violation
of resolution 1701 (2006). The increasing number of
incidents affecting UNIFIL’s freedom of movement is
unacceptable. Ensuring the mission’s access throughout
its entire area of operations, including the full length of
the Blue Line, is critical to implementing its mandate.
Israel’s regular and ongoing violations of Lebanese
airspace also remain of concern and constitute
violations of resolution 1701 (2006).
The measures taken by Israel to ease the conditions
in Gaza since the May 2021 escalation have improved
the lives and livelihoods of many Palestinians, and I am
encouraged to see them being restored following the
most recent escalation. The United Nations will continue
engaging with the parties to expand on the progress
made over the past year, with the aim of solidifying the
ceasefire and enabling further economic development.
But as the events of the past weeks have shown us once
again, managing the conflict is no substitute for real
political progress. We must again turn our attention to the
broader strategy of ending the occupation and realizing
a two-State solution in line with the relevant United
Nations resolutions, international law and previous
agreements. That strategy will require significant steps
from all sides. It must include the strengthening of the
Palestinian Authority and its ability to engage with
Israel on the political, economic and security fronts, as
well as efforts to achieve the return of the legitimate
Palestinian Government to Gaza.
It is crucial that we work to restore a political
horizon. As a first step, the tensions and violence
across the occupied Palestinian territory should be
stopped or significantly reduced, especially in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. Unilateral steps that
perpetuate negative trends must stop. The space for
Palestinian economic activity and further improvements
to access and movement in Gaza and the West Bank
should be expanded. At the same time, the Palestinian
Authority, including its institutional capacity, should
be strengthened. Considering the things that I regularly
have to report to the Council about, the status quo is
neither a strategy nor a strategic option — neither for
positive change on the ground nor for a restart of talks
between the two sides. I urge the Israeli and Palestinian
leadership, as well as the countries of the region and the
broader international community, to take firm action to
enable a return to meaningful negotiations.

22-471515/21

S/PV.9116

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lazzarini.
Mr. Lazzarini: Let me first express my sincere
appreciation to the presidency for giving me the
opportunity to address the Security Council today.
Since my previous briefing to the Council in May 2021
(see S/PV.8782), the situation of Palestinian refugees
has further deteriorated. More than 80 per cent of
Palestine refugees in Lebanon, Syria and Gaza live
below the poverty line.
In Gaza, the escalation of violence earlier this
month was a stark reminder that war and violence
can erupt anytime in the absence of a genuine and
comprehensive effort to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Some 60 Palestine refugee families lost their
homes, and 17 children were killed, 8 of whom were
students in schools operated by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). Nearly half of UNRWA students
suffer from trauma and need special assistance to cope
with the repeated cycles of violence and the economic
hardship in which their families live.
In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
political, economic and security conditions are
deteriorating as Palestine refugees experience high
levels of dispossession, violence and insecurity.
In Syria, after 11 years of conflict, the most
destitute families are returning to live amid the rubble
of their destroyed homes as they can no longer afford
rent. Children who returned to demolished camps,
such as Yarmouk or Ein Al-Tal, walk near unexploded
ordnance to take UNRWA buses to school.
In Lebanon, the pressure on the Agency to do more
to address the impact of the economic and financial
crisis on the Palestine refugee community is becoming
unbearable. Protests and acts of violence directed
against UNRWA are, at times, forcing my colleagues to
close our installations. Illegal emigration of Palestine
refugees is rising.
In Jordan, the pandemic left deep scars on the
labour market. Unemployment is soaring, particularly
for females and young people. Child labour and early
marriage are reportedly on the rise.
Despite those challenging operating environments,
UNRWA remains the lifeline for one of the most
underprivileged and desperate communities in the
6/21

25/08/2022

region. Going to school, getting health services or
receiving a food parcel are, for many Palestine refugees,
their only sources of normality. They look to UNRWA
for that normality.
For over 70 years, UNRWA has been a source of
opportunity and hope for a better future for generations
of Palestine refugees. With the support of Member
States, the Agency has contributed to one of the most
successful human development stories in the region.
From educating over 2 million Palestine refugee girls
and boys, to universal infant vaccination and reduced
maternal mortality that exceeds global standards, there
is a lot for which we can all be proud.
During armed conflicts, the Security Council’s
support has enabled UNRWA to provide shelter and
protection and helped rebuild destroyed neighbourhoods
and communities. The psychosocial support that
Palestine refugee children receive is key to their mental
well-being and essential for their ability to learn, and
the quality of the education that UNRWA students
receive is praised by such reputable validators as the
British Council, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the World Bank. On
average, they outperform their peers by one year of
learning.
In Syria, nearly 95 per cent of UNRWA students
passed their national exams this year. Rama, from
Yarmouk refugee camp, achieved the highest scores
despite prolonged displacement and repeated power
cuts. Success stories are everywhere, from Ghada, who
is the first woman technician in renewable energy in
Gaza, to Bara’a, who joined a medical research team
in Spain that is making groundbreaking progress in the
fight against pancreatic cancer.
Today children and young people must be able to
perform and compete in an increasingly digitalized
world. UNRWA is committed to giving Palestine
refugees that ability. Our information technology hub
in Gaza serves the entire United Nations system and
provides jobs for over 120 young women and men.
We reached gender parity in our schools a long time
ago, and our 700 schools across the region comprise the
only public-like educational institution to have rolled
out a comprehensive human rights curriculum. While
we are acutely aware that we operate in a politically
charged environment, we have made unparalleled
investments in promoting United Nations values and
22-47151

25/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

UNESCO standards across our programmes and
through staff attitudes.
Today our collective achievements are at risk.
For the past decade, the chronic underfunding of our
programme budget has made it increasingly challenging
for the Agency to fulfil the mandate given it by the
General Assembly. Shifting geopolitical priorities,
changing regional dynamics and the emergence
of new humanitarian crises have deprioritized the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Coordinated campaigns to
delegitimize UNRWA with a view to eroding the rights
of Palestine refugees are increasing in frequency and
in maliciousness. The Agency has also experienced
more than once how a change in domestic politics can
suspend support overnight.
Consequently, and despite immense outreach
efforts, funding has stagnated over the last decade,
forcing us to operate year after year with a shortfall of
around $100 million. Until last year, the funding gap
was managed through cost control, austerity and carryover of large liabilities from one year to the next. But
today we have no financial reserve. We have reached
the limit of austerity and cost-control measures. Today
UNRWA is facing an existential threat.
What is at stake is this: quality and principled
education for over half a million girls and boys; access
to health care for around 2 million Palestine refugees
and a social safety net for around 400,000 of the poorest
among the poor; psychosocial support for hundreds of
thousands of children; job opportunities for the youth
in Gaza and elsewhere; and emergency food and cash
assistance for over 2 million Palestine refugees across
the region to meet their humanitarian needs. What is at
stake is simply the sense of normality and hope that our
services bring to Palestine refugees.
A major aspect of the role of UNRWA in regional
stability stems precisely from the predictability of its
high-quality services. For Palestine refugees, UNRWA
remains the last standing pillar of the commitment
of the international community to their rights to a
dignified life and to a just and lasting solution. When
they see us delaying salaries, decreasing the quality of
the services and unable to respond to increasing needs,
they understand that the support of the international
community to their plight is fading.
Despair and a sense of abandonment are growing in
the refugee camps. Despair is a threat to mental wellbeing. Despair is a threat to peace and stability.

S/PV.9116

It is hard to believe that the lack of sufficient
resources results solely from financial constraints. The
impact of predictable services on the safety of refugees
and on regional stability should suffice to convince
every Member State to commit funding to UNRWA in
line with the resolutions they adopt.
Instead, the Agency continues to be under three
sources of intense pressure: first, the commitment
of the General Assembly to upholding the rights of
Palestine refugees and its instruction to UNRWA to
deliver a number of public-like services until a just and
lasting solution is found; secondly, the lack of sufficient
funding from Member States with which to implement
the mandate and the unpredictability of most of the
funding; and lastly, the objection to any perceived
change in the way services are delivered. Any such
change is seen as an attempt to encroach on the rights
of the refugees. Hosts and refugees fear that it may lead
to weakening UNRWA and, with time, dismantling
it altogether. Failing to reconcile those demands will
make the General Assembly mandate more and more
impossible to implement.
Our ability to fulfil the General Assembly mandate
lies with Member States and with their political will to
fully fund our core budget. I appeal today to Member
States that have reduced their funding to reconsider
the impact of their decision on the region’s stability.
I appeal to those that have changed their political and
foreign policy dynamics in the region to continue to be
part of the success stories of UNRWA’s education.
In a few weeks, the extension of the UNRWA
mandate will be put to the General Assembly for
approval. I appeal to all Member States to mobilize
politically and financially to support UNRWA and to
continue working towards a political solution that will
benefit the region and its peoples.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Lazzarini for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Levy.
Mr. Levy: I would like to thank the Security
Council, and the Chinese presidency in particular,
for allowing me to share some thoughts with Council
members today. The events of earlier this month
covered in detail by Special Envoy Wennesland are as
concerning as they are predictable. To be very clear:
Israelis deserve security; Palestinians deserve security.

22-471517/21

S/PV.9116

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Month in and month out the Council meets to
repeat its familiar condemnations, formulas and
slogans. I want to use this opportunity to rethink and
reappraise some assumptions and beliefs that may
inadvertently contribute to the intractability of this
conflict — to consider afresh reasons why it remains
so prone to stalemate and human suffering. I suggest
doing that through five concepts that may assist us in
such an endeavour.
The first concept is justice. The permanent
dispossession and denial of the most basic rights and
freedoms of the Palestinian people will never be a
recipe for achieving sustainable security. That, the
illegal blockade of Gaza and the unlawful occupation
represent forms of structural violence and collective
punishment that we cannot ignore. While the need for
a political horizon is acknowledged, the dimensions
of that horizon seem to shrink and shrivel, becoming
ever less ambitious. There can be no effective or
prolonged approach to Gaza in isolation — it is part
of the broader Israeli-Palestinian reality — whether in
terms of security, the separation policy or closure. And
crucially, there is a need to respect international law
across the board — whether in State responses to armed
threats or partisan resistance against State occupation.
I would also say, in that context, that there is a need
for Palestinian political renewal, internal reconciliation
and overcoming of divisions, as well as an international
need to engage all relevant actors without applying
unrealistic and selective preconditions.
The second concept is equilibrium. Any attempt
to resume negotiations between the parties without
addressing power asymmetries is a hollow and
redundant exercise. As Comfort Ero, President of Crisis
Group — with whom my organization, the United States/
Middle East Project, cooperates extensively — noted
to the Security Council recently (see S/PV.8913) — the
structural power imbalance between an occupying
State and an occupied people must be acknowledged. A
focus on relations of power, rather than both-sides-ism,
may help offer clarity of thinking and policy.
As an example, attempts at economic
confidence-building are consistently too little, too
late and too ephemeral when they are attempted under
conditions of permanent occupation. That defies
principles of harmony and reciprocity. Especially
with global resources stretched thin, the Palestinian
economic predicament should really be understood
as one that is primarily a function of politically
8/21

25/08/2022

imposed obstacles — on movement, borders, access to
land, confiscations, demolitions and ever-expanding
settlements — rather than the absence of charity.
We heard the briefing by the CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), Mr. Philippe Lazzarini, just now. There
must be that economic commitment to a predictably
resourced UNRWA capable of delivering services.
That is a security necessity, but also a commitment of a
political nature to Palestinian refugees who continue to
be denied a solution.
The third concept is accountability. I previously
had the opportunity to highlight to the Council two
core problems (see S/PV.8883): a legitimacy deficit
in Palestinian politics and an accountability deficit
vis-à-vis Israeli policies. It is Israel’s actions, as the
powerful occupying party, that pre-eminently determine
the direction of travel. I would suggest that profound
shifts are occurring as a result of the unwillingness to
hold Israel to account, not least on settlements.
Recent months have witnessed a disturbing
intensification of that trend with the targeting of those
least able to protect themselves and those most in the
front line bearing witness to violations of international
law. Following the shock expressed by the SecretaryGeneral over the number of Palestinian children killed
and maimed by Israeli forces last year, we have just seen
that same trend again this month in Gaza, as noted by
Special Coordinator Wennesland and CommissionerGeneral Lazzarini. We witnessed the killing of those
who report on and expose these crimes, Shireen Abu
Akleh being the latest journalist to pay with her life.
And now I would draw Council members’ attention
to the assault on those who document abuses and
defend human rights, with Israel’s actions against six
prominent Palestinian civil society organizations,
some funded by members in this Chamber. A terrorist
designation was made by the Israeli authorities against
six non-governmental organizations. A number of
countries went on record that compelling evidence
had not been forthcoming. Now the offices of those
organizations have been raided and shuttered and their
workers have been interrogated. A response limited to
expressions of condemnation is too easily dismissed. It
is impunity on steroids and, unfortunately, it encourages
more of the same, or even worse. There really should be
practical consequences at a multilateral and bilateral
level. We already have a hollowed out Palestinian polity
22-47151

25/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and economy, and this is now an attempt to emaciate
Palestinian civil society.
The fourth concept is context. It is no exaggeration
to characterize the current global disorder as a world
in metamorphosis — dangerously combustible while
potentially rewarding if we can be innovative while
realistic. In that respect, the Abraham Accords may
be many things, but they cannot be a substitute or
distraction from securing peace and the rights of
Palestinians. If not properly managed, normalization
can risk further nurturing a misplaced Israeli sense that
the Palestinians can be ignored and marginalized.
It is also the case that international law and
principles purported to be universal cannot be asserted
only when it is convenient, and then set aside when
friends or allies appear in the role of perpetrator. Our
world is too transparent; these things are noticed.
Fifthly and finally, there is the concept of
architecture. I would suggest that, contrary to the
prevailing perception that everything is stuck and a
stalemate, in actual fact Israelis and Palestinians are
passing through a quite profound transition. Talk of the
eclipse of the two-State option is neither alarmist nor
far-fetched, rather, it is a sober and probably a behindthe-curve rendering of the lived reality. I would say
that, for Israel itself, the absence of an off-ramp on this
journey towards a new paradigm should be a cause for
concern — placing in jeopardy that country’s future.
Neither the Palestinians nor the Israelis are going to
disappear, and finding a just way to live together has
never been more urgent. Over time, that profound shift
will most probably take every State represented here
out of its comfort zone. Let me conclude by briefly
explaining why.
We know of certain developments that can be
both politically uncomfortable and politically salient
at the same time. The increasingly weighty body of
scholarly, legal and public opinion that considers Israel
to be perpetrating apartheid in the territories under
its control is just such a development. A designation
made by Palestinian scholars and institutes and later
examined and endorsed by Israeli human rights
organizations, led by B’Tselem, has now become the
legal designation made by Human Rights Watch and this
year by Amnesty International. That is what the failure
to generate accountability and to achieve two States
looks like. As uncomfortable as I know it is for some, I
urge the Council not to underestimate the longer-term
significance and traction of what is happening. At the

S/PV.9116

Human Rights Council meetings held in Geneva in
March, representatives of States speaking on behalf
of the Group of African States, the Group of Arab
States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
all referenced that apartheid situation. It will come as
little surprise if that echoes and resonates in parts of
the world that have experienced apartheid and settler
colonialism and gone through decolonization. It is a
paradigm that will also bring the discrimination faced
by Palestinian citizens of Israel into sharper relief. It
must be a wake-up call.
Some 75 years ago, the United Nations offered
partition as the political paradigm for the Holy Land.
Today that land is de facto united under one dominion.
In the absence of unprecedentedly far-reaching action
to make good on partition, the successors to the
Council members of today will be coming to debate
the challenge of achieving equality under a reality of
non-partition.
If the Council seriously considers those five
principles and their implications, we may find a way out
of the repetitive impasse — the familiar condemnations,
formulas and slogans — and perhaps usher in a new
opening and path to justice and equilibrium for
Palestinians and Israelis.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Levy
for his briefing. Many of his views are thoughtprovoking and should enable the Council to better
reflect on the issue with a view to finding a solution
to it.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland and CommissionerGeneral Lazzarini for their briefings. We also appreciate
the briefing by Mr. Levy.
We welcome the continued maintenance of the
ceasefire enacted on 7 August, as well as the resumption
of fuel shipments to Gaza to ensure that hospitals and
other public services can maintain critical operations.
The United States would like to reiterate its appreciation
to Egypt, Qatar, Jordan and the United Nations for
their close engagement with all parties in order to
prevent another escalation of the conflict. We mourn
the loss of life, and we support a speedy and thorough
investigation into reports of civilian casualties. We
demand that terrorist organizations, including Hamas
and Palestinian Islamic Jihad, cease attacks on Israel.

22-471519/21

S/PV.9116

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Those indiscriminate attacks are on Israeli civilians
and recklessly put Palestinian lives in Gaza at risk.
We condemn all attacks on civilians, including the
14 August shooting attack in Jerusalem on worshippers
near the Wailing Wall.
The United States values the role that independent
non-governmental organizations play in monitoring
human rights violations and abuses in the West Bank and
Gaza, in Israel and elsewhere, and firmly believes they
must be able to continue that important work. Respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms, together
with a strong civil society, is critically important to
responsible, responsive and democratic governance.
The United States remains concerned about the
escalating tensions, especially in the West Bank. We
urge Israelis and Palestinians to refrain from unilateral
actions, including settlement activity, evictions and
the demolition of Palestinian homes, incitements to
violence and disruptions of the historic status quo at
holy sites, all of which risk a resumption of violence. As
President Biden reaffirmed while visiting Israel and the
West Bank last month, the United States believes that
“the Palestinian people deserve a State of their
own that is independent, sovereign, viable and
contiguous. Two States for two peoples, both of
whom have deep and ancient roots in this land,
living side by side in peace and security. Both
States fully respecting the equal rights of the other
citizens. Both peoples enjoying equal measure of
freedom and dignity”.
There are no shortcuts to statehood. It is imperative that
all stakeholders help to develop the conditions needed
for negotiations on a two-State solution and embrace
a political horizon that would support it, and that can
be achieved only through direct negotiations between
the parties. The Negev Forum highlights what can
be achieved by working together to overcome shared
challenges in the region. We believe the Forum can
support the emergence of a more peaceful and prosperous
Middle East. The United States also believes that those
efforts contribute to tangible progress towards the
goal of advancing a negotiated peace between Israelis
and Palestinians.
The United States is committed to serving as
a strong partner of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) and is proud to be the Agency’s largest
single donor. As we have just heard, UNRWA plays
an essential role in promoting regional stability, and it
10/21

25/08/2022

cannot do so without adequate funding. Many countries
offer rhetorical support to UNRWA here in New York
but do not match their words with financial support.
We encourage Member States to provide robust,
reliable funding to help address the Agency’s longterm sustainability, as the Commissioner-General has
just outlined.
In conclusion, we call on all countries to join us in
our commitment to peace and security in the Middle
East. We urge all parties in the Council and around the
world to support efforts and initiatives that help meet
the economic, political and humanitarian needs of both
Israelis and Palestinians.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland
and Mr. Philippe Lazzarini, Commissioner-General
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, for their briefings.
We also listened with interest to the briefing by
Mr. Levy.
Today’s discussion of the situation in the Middle
East comes three weeks after the escalation in
Palestinian and Israeli clashes, which became an
armed confrontation with casualties. Another uptick
in tensions was provoked by Israeli air strikes on the
Gaza Strip, in response to which firing began onto
Israeli territory. It is very disheartening that these are
far from being the first such outbreaks of violence. In
that regard, we welcomed the ceasefire agreement and
call on all the parties concerned to exercise restraint
and avoid taking unilateral steps or engaging in
inflammatory rhetoric. They should also comply with
international humanitarian law and not allow another
escalation of hostilities.
We note in particular the mediation efforts by
Egypt and Qatar that ultimately led to the ceasefire.
However, we are concerned about the possibility that if
a scenario of this kind recurs, it could cause a full-scale
military clash and further deterioration in the already
dire situation in the Gaza Strip, whose residents need
immediate humanitarian assistance, including with
regard to rebuilding ruined infrastructure.
It is becoming ever clearer that, in the context of
the Palestinian question, which has gone unresolved
for so long, and a lack of due attention from the
international community, any provocation could lead
to a new large-scale regional confrontation. A trigger
for the resumption of violence could be the ongoing
22-47151

25/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

unilateral steps, taken primarily by Israel, to create
an irreversible situation on the ground, such as the
construction of settlements in the occupied territories;
the eviction of Palestinians and the destruction of their
homes; the expropriation of property; arbitrary arrests;
a de facto carte blanche for the Israeli military to use
force; and systematic violations of the status of the
Holy Places of Jerusalem.
Over the past month, the Israeli authorities have
provisionally approved a plan to build 1,446 housing
units in the settlement of Sur Baher in the southern
part of the Jerusalem municipality. A decision was
also made to expand the settlement of Mevo Horon in
Ramallah governorate by 251 housing units.
The annual report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2022/493) also
expresses concern about the number of Palestinian
children killed by the Israeli army. In 2021 alone, 78
minors were killed, 982 were injured and 637 were
arrested. Western countries have turned a blind eye to
the systematic violations of Palestinians’ rights over
the course of the longest occupation in post-World War
history, while giving excessive attention to individual
regions and conflict situations — a clear indication of
their double standards.
It has recently become clear that one of the
factors hindering the achievement of a just peace for
Palestinians is the actions of the United States, which
seeks to monopolize the peace process and reformat it
according to its desired mould. There have been obvious
attempts to impose economic peace on the Palestinian
people instead of meeting their legitimate aspirations
to create their own independent State. Washington
effectively blocked the activities of the Middle East
Quartet of international mediators, whose most recent
ministerial-level meeting level took place in 2016.
For our part, we advocate for a just solution to the
Palestinian question on the basis of a two-State solution
and the universally recognized international legal
framework providing for the creation of an independent
Palestinian State along the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital. During direct negotiations
between the parties, other final-status issues should
also be settled, including on borders, refugees and
water resources. In doing so, concerns about Israel’s
security must be taken into account.
We are taking consistent steps to support collective
efforts to achieve peace in the Middle East and will

S/PV.9116

continue to work with all interested parties in the region
and in the Security Council.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank Mr. Wennesland and Mr. Lazzarini for their
informative briefings. I also listened with great
attention to Mr. Levy’s briefing.
The ceasefire announced on 7 August is still
fragile. Without concrete measures to reduce tensions
in the Palestinian territories and in Israel, there is a
real risk of the resumption of violence. Unfortunately,
in the past few days, we have witnessed actions with
no aim other than to shatter the current truce. I refer
in particular to the attack against Jewish worshippers
in Jerusalem on 14 August. I join Mr. Wennesland in
deploring the fact that certain groups justify such acts
of terror.
Brazil is also concerned by the large number of
Palestinian civilians who were killed or injured, and
children in particular, as a result of recent clashes.
Brazil condemns all attacks against civilians, and we
call on all parties to exercise the utmost restraint and
abide by international humanitarian law.
The cessation of acts of violence and terror,
de-escalation and rebuilding trust are all necessary
and urgent, but they are not ends in themselves. Unless
there is progress towards a just and sustainable political
solution to the conflict, the danger of renewed cycles
of violence will persist. Respect for international law
and for the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
must be the basis of any lasting peace. Brazil stands
ready to contribute to finding concrete solutions and
ways forward. We reiterate our support for a two-State
solution, with Israelis and Palestinians living side by
side in peace, security and prosperity.
As the conflict drags on, the civilian population pays
a heavy toll — not only in terms of lives lost and people
injured, but also in terms of frustrated expectations and
dreams cut short. Economic growth and development
are necessary to give the Palestinian people hope and to
help reduce the appeal of violent ideologies.
As we have stated before, financial support to
the Palestinian Authority is an integral part of efforts
for peace and security. Moreover, the Palestinian
economy as a whole needs support for its industrial
and agricultural sectors. In that context, Brazil would
like to praise the untiring work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) and its Commissioner-General,

22-4715111/21

S/PV.9116

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Philippe Lazzarini, who strive to fulfil their mission
in spite of persistent underfunding. Even though our
Government budget faces constraints of its own, Brazil
announced in June an additional financial contribution
to UNRWA, and we support the renewal of UNRWA’s
mandate at the next session of the General Assembly.
Diplomacy and the efforts of the international
community have prevented the most recent flare-up
of violence from escalating further. Let us not be
satisfied with a mere ceasefire. Instead, the Security
Council should spare no effort to bring about real
progress towards a political solution. The international
community and the populations affected expect no less
from us.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Every time we meet here on
this issue — which happens quite often — we express
our serious concerns about the worrisome trend of
violence and tension, with the fear that such negative
developments will take the Israelis and the Palestinians
further away from efforts to resolve the tragic conflict.
That is why upholding the ceasefire between Israel
and Palestinian militants is critical to avoiding another
explosion of violence and safeguard the gains that have
been made through the tireless efforts of many actors
over the past couple of years. That is especially true with
regard to Gaza, where the ability of an increased number
of Palestinians to work in Israel has a real positive
impact on the population and contributes to improving
prospects for rapprochement and peaceful coexistence.
Violence is a tragedy within a greater tragedy,
which is and remains the unresolved Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Therefore, every effort must be made to prevent
escalation, and every opportunity must be seized to
bring the parties closer together. We will not tire in
reiterating our categorical rejection and condemnation
of every terrorist attack against Israel or anywhere else.
We abhor terrorism in all its forms and call on all to
denounce it vigorously and unreservedly. We mourn
every loss of life from such senseless and cowardly
attacks, especially when they involve civilians.
We support Israel’s right to defend itself and
respond to terrorist attacks with proportionality and
within the bounds of both domestic and international
law. We are also concerned about the loss of life among
Palestinians, especially children. Civilians in general,
and children in particular, should never be a target or
put in a harm’s way in any circumstance. Those tragic
cases should be properly investigated to deter similar
cases in the future.
12/21

25/08/2022

Each and every innocent victim of violence serves
as a tragic reminder of how desperately peace is needed
now, not tomorrow. That is why we support every effort
to resume the peace talks within the legal framework
created by the United Nations, in order to find a lasting
and just solution to the conflict, with a democratic and
secure Israel and a viable and democratic Palestinian
State living in peace with one another, with Jerusalem
as their shared capital. While peace is always signed on
paper, it is actually implemented on the ground through
concrete and resolute actions that are palpable and
beneficial to all. There can be no doubt that peace will
remain an elusive dream until Israelis and Palestinians
enjoy full and equal rights — the basic conditions
for a dignified life. Rights are the foundation for
reconciliation and mutual recognition between Israelis
and Palestinians.
Let me also reiterate our strong support for civil
society as a critical pillar of any democratic society.
We join the European Union and others in expressing
our concern about Israel’s action against six Palestinian
non-governmental agencies, as well as in calling on
Israel to refrain from any action that would prevent
those organizations from continuing their critical
human rights, humanitarian and development work.
We have said it many times, but we believe it is
important to reiterate once again that the parties should
refrain from actions that run counter to genuine efforts
to promote the peace process. In that respect, we will
continue to highlight our position that settlements
and their expansion contravene international law and
constitute an obstacle to a two-State solution, the
cornerstone of the peace process. They are wrong and
must be stopped. We urge all sides to refrain from
inflammatory rhetoric that escalates tensions and
endangers the peace process.
We see no way other than peace talks to reverse
the worrisome trend of escalating tensions and periodic
and cyclic outbursts of violence. If there is one lesson
to be learned from the decades of this conflict, it is
that violence has never been conducive to any positive
development. On the contrary, it has always brought
suffering to both Israelis and Palestinians. The
negotiation table is the only place where a viable and
just solution can be found. We support all efforts to
bring the parties together and deal with the difficult and
complex issues with patience, determination, resolve
and vision, through dialogue, mutual recognition of
each other’s concerns and aspirations, understanding
22-47151

25/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and respect. We should not let hope die, since nothing
good is ever done without hope, and nothing important
is ever built without dreams.
Mrs. Alhefeiti: (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Mr. Wennesland and
Mr. Lazzarini for their comprehensive briefings. We
also listened with interest to the briefing by Mr. Levy.
The recent developments in the Gaza Strip reflect
many significant issues. The security situation is still
precarious, and the continuing cycles of violence
continue to be worrying. They underscore that the
only way to end such cycles is a comprehensive, just
and lasting settlement of the Palestinian question. That
ultimate objective must remain the focus of the relevant
parties and the international community. Merely
managing events on the ground as they occur is not a
viable approach. We therefore stress the need for the
parties to resume constructive negotiations that can lead
to achieving a two-State solution and the creation of
an independent and sovereign Palestinian State within
the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living side by side with Israel in peace, security
and mutual recognition. The international community
should also play its part in maintaining peace and
security by providing the necessary support for the
political process. In conjunction with those efforts, we
reiterate the need to maintain the ceasefire in the Gaza
Strip. We commend Egypt’s mediation efforts, which
once again played a significant role in restoring calm.
We emphasize that more cycles of violence will
only lead to further deterioration in the humanitarian
and economic situations in Gaza. According to United
Nations reports, more than 80 per cent of the nearly
2 million residents of Gaza rely on humanitarian
assistance. The unemployment rate among young
people is at 80 per cent, and the children of Gaza
are suffering from serious psychological traumas.
Children who turned 15 years old this year have already
witnessed five terrible conflicts in their lifetime. That
is why reducing tensions in Gaza and improving the
humanitarian and economic situations of its people
are in the best interests of all parties. They are also
vital to achieving security and stability, and therefore
demand that the United Nations and its international
partners intensify their efforts and support the process
of recovery and reconstruction in the Gaza Strip.
The worsening humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory requires further
humanitarian, economic and development support. We

S/PV.9116

therefore call on the Palestinian and Israeli authorities
to intensify their efforts on the economic, health and
services fronts with a view to improving the livelihoods
of Palestinians, especially refugees. We recognize the
important role that civil-society stakeholders can play
in the occupied Palestinian territory and note that recent
developments in that regard are a source of concern,
which is why we stress the importance of cooperating
with civil-society organizations in the efforts to realize
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people.
We once again condemn all unilateral measures
undermining the possibility of a two-State solution,
and specifically the continuing settlement activities
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, which represent
a clear violation of international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We also condemn settler
violence against Palestinians, which must end. It is also
important to safeguard the legal and historical status
quo in the holy places of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, since it is
crucial to halt all measures that attempt to change the
identity of the city.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates
underscores its readiness to support all regional and
international efforts aimed at achieving progress in the
Middle East peace process and a two-State solution.
We stress in that regard that diplomacy and peaceful
dialogue are the best ways to ensure de-escalation.
Continued violence is not in the interests of any of the
parties. On the contrary, its many victims of innocent
civilians, including women and children, deserve a
better life and a better future.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Mr. Wennesland and the CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) for
their very comprehensive briefings. I also welcome
Mr. Levy’s participation in today’s meeting.
The immediate priority is ensuring that the
ceasefire in Gaza is maintained. Keeping the Erez and
Kerem Shalom crossings open for the flow of goods
and people is key to meeting the people’s most pressing
needs. Building on the truce should also include a
resumption of the reconstruction work that was stopped
during the most recent escalation. France stands ready
to fully play its part in those efforts. We welcome
the work of the United Nations, especially UNRWA,
whose activities are crucial to achieving stability in the
region. We call on all donors to step up their financial

22-4715113/21

S/PV.9116

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

support for the Agency, as France has done by doubling
its contribution since 2019.
A new escalation will be inevitable, however,
without a paradigm shift and the relaunch of a genuine
political process. A strictly economic approach that does
not restore a political horizon will not bring stability
to the region. That is why ending unilateral measures
is imperative. As we know, that requires stopping
settlement activities, demolitions and evictions. In
that regard, France is extremely concerned about the
situation in Masafer Yatta and Ein Samiya. France calls
on Israel to abandon plans for the E1 area. The parties
must also refrain from hate speech and incitements
to violence, and we particularly want to point to the
responsibility of leaders on all sides in that regard. We
also recall the importance of respecting the status quo
at the holy sites.
Like its European partners, France is deeply
concerned about the recent Israeli raids on several
Palestinian non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
Such actions against NGOs are unacceptable. A free
and vibrant civil society is essential to promoting
democratic values and implementing a two-State
solution. In the absence of evidence of those NGOs’
support for or participation in terrorist activity, France
will therefore continue its cooperation with civil society
in the Palestinian territory and with those same NGOs.
Only a two-State solution can bring about a just and
lasting peace. It is the only solution to date that meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people and
ensures Israel’s security, on which France will never
compromise, by the way. France calls on the Council to
work without further delay to restore a political horizon
to implement it.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his briefing, particularly regarding
the aftermath of the recent escalation of violence
in Gaza.
The briefings delivered by Mr. Philippe Lazzarini,
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), and Mr. Daniel Levy, President of
the US/Middle East Project, once again remind us
that, as long as the underlying political, social and
development factors of this protracted conflict remain
unaddressed, the cyclical trends, including the eruption
and resurgence of conflict in Gaza, the West Bank and
East Jerusalem, will persist.
14/21

25/08/2022

We welcome the fact that the 8 August ceasefire
agreement in Gaza continues to hold. We commend all
parties that have been instrumental in ensuring that,
including neighbouring countries, for their efforts.
By the same token, we note that, in the already
delicate economic conditions, as depicted in Gaza,
every escalation worsens the humanitarian situation,
heightens existing tensions and makes full recovery
ever-more elusive. As such, it is critical that the
Security Council strongly condemn the terrorist attacks
of such groups as Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and
their affiliates.
Addressing Gaza’s economic isolation from the
wider regional and the global economy will be critical
to the peace, security and stability of the broader Middle
East region. In that regard, the Government of Israel’s
recent assessment and decision to increase the workpermit quota for Palestinians in Gaza and to reopen the
Erez and Kerem Shalom crossings is welcome. Such
steps contribute to the implementation of resolution
1860 (2009), which, among other things, emphasizes
the safety and well-being of all civilians, as well as the
need to ensure a sustained and regular flow of goods
and people through the Gaza crossings.
Kenya reiterates that peace efforts, both at the
official and grass-roots levels, that comprehensively
integrate the socioeconomic development of all sectors
of society will always be critical to the stability and
peace of the region in the interim and in the long term.
In particular, a grass-roots approach will contribute to
harmonious coexistence and conditions conducive to
official negotiations.
As we heard this morning, UNRWA continues to
play a key role in facilitating critical health, education,
social protection, microfinance and other services to
the Palestinian population. We note, however, that its
fiscal situation remains dire. In that regard, in addition
to fulfilling pledges to ensure adequate and predictable
funding for UNRWA, we urge strengthened efforts to
identify areas of cooperation and collaboration between
the Agency and other peacebuilding and development
entities. We believe that those services, alongside
confidence-building measures in the area of commerce
and security between Israeli and Palestinian authorities,
speak to what is immediately practical in the context
of an elusive peace process. Nevertheless, they are not
a substitute for the resumption of the political process
22-47151

25/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and dialogue between the parties for long-term stability
and peace.
Our delegation underscores that the actualization
of the long-held goal — a region where two democratic
States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side in peace
and within secure and recognized borders, based on the
1967 lines — will require a meaningful commitment
to the peace process by all parties in alignment with
international law, the Charter of the United Nations,
the Council’s resolutions, including the comprehensive
pillars of resolution 2334 (2016), and the existing
regional peace initiatives and frameworks.
A commitment to an independent, sovereign,
viable and contiguous Palestinian State also means the
immediate and complete cessation of Israeli settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, as demanded in resolution 2334 (2016).
Ms. Bongo (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland
and Mr. Philippe Lazzarini, Commissioner-General of
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) for their briefings.
I welcome Mr. Daniel Levy, whose presentation we
listened to attentively.
Although the security situation on the ground
remains very fragile, the briefings we just heard
indicate a lull since our most recent meeting (see
S/PV.9107). Gabon reiterates its appeal to all parties to
show restraint and to refrain from unilateral action that
could lead to the resumption of hostilities and hamper
the peacebuilding process.
The work of civil society, which plays a major role in
the Palestinian territories and contributes to improving
the social fabric and promoting human rights, must
not be hindered. It is essential for the populations that
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) can continue
to do their work freely in a difficult context.
As we just heard, the humanitarian and economic
situations in the Palestinian territories remain
critical. The unprecedented financial crisis facing the
Palestinian Authority and the budgetary problems of
UNRWA accentuate the urgency facing the international
community, but also the usefulness of NGOs.
We note with interest as a sign of détente that the
Israeli military authorities decided to increase the
number of Palestinian workers authorized to enter Israel.

S/PV.9116

My country reaffirms its commitment to the twoState solution, with two countries living side by side
on the basis of the 1967 borders. We urge all parties to
relaunch negotiations to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
crisis in order to achieve a real and lasting peace based
on respect for the principles agreed by the parties and
the implementation of international law.
The involvement of the countries of the subregion
is fundamental. The recent visit by President Mahmoud
Abbas to Türkiye after its resumption of diplomatic
relations with Israel is an encouraging factor. The
normalization of relations between Israel and the Arab
countries must contribute to the peace process in the
Middle East, and thereby meet the legitimate needs and
aspirations of the Palestinian and Israeli peoples.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for the
mandate of Special Coordinator Wennesland and
express our encouragement for his tireless efforts on
the ground to ensure the stability of the region.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland and
Commissioner-General Lazzarini for their briefings.
We also attentively listened to Mr. Levy’s statement.
Today I will focus my statement on the following
points: the situation in Gaza, the work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA), violence, settlements and
civil society organizations.
On the situation in Gaza, we note the continuation
of the ceasefire that put an end to the violence unleashed
at the beginning of the month, resulting in the deaths of
more than 40 people, including 15 minors. We call for
an exhaustive investigation to identify those responsible
for those civilian deaths.
We also witness the reopening of border crossings
and the increase in work permits for Palestinians.
Nevertheless, the situation in the Gaza Strip is still
critical. We once again call for an end to the blockade.
It is simply unacceptable that the children of Gaza,
41 per cent of the population, know no way of life other
than the blockade. Without prospects for a political
horizon moving towards sustainable peace, the cycle of
violence will continue.
As stated previously in the Security Council, the
work of UNRWA is essential to meet the needs of
close to 6 million Palestinians in humanitarian aid,
reconstruction and the provision of basic services.

22-4715115/21

S/PV.9116

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Unfortunately, the chronic financial deficit reduces the
Agency’s ability to meet those needs.
Mexico takes note of the recent report of the
Commissioner-General on the financial situation
of UNRWA. We commend efforts to use resources
efficiently, promote transparency and diversify
funding sources. As a show of its commitment, since
my country has contributed annually to the Agency’s
budget since 2008.
Mexico deeply regrets the multiple incidents of
violence in recent days. We deplore the attack in the Old
City of Jerusalem on Jewish worshippers and condemn
the glorification of such acts.
We are also concerned about the raids and
operations by Israeli law enforcement that have led
to clashes in the West Bank. In the first seven months
of this year alone, lethal ammunition has killed 45
Palestinians and injured nearly 4,300, including 503
children. Mexico condemns the disproportionate use of
force. We also condemn the fact that shots were fired
at two Palestinian Red Crescent ambulances and that
three other ambulances were prevented from reaching
people, in violation of international humanitarian law.
Mexico deplores the decision to approve the
construction of 1,400 additional housing units in the
settlements of Har Homa and Givat Hamatos. The
construction and expansion of settlements in the
Palestinian territory is contrary to international law and
the resolutions of the Security Council and an obstacle
to the viability of a two-State solution. My country
takes note of the decision by some European nations to
continue cooperating with six Palestinian civil-society
organizations in the absence of evidence linking them
to terrorist groups, since any designation of a terrorist
entity should be duly substantiated. We call for an end
to the harassment of those organizations, including the
detentions of their personnel and the seizure of their
materials and equipment. A democratic State should not
be acting in ways that limit the space for civil society.
Finally, Mexico reiterates its commitment to a twoState solution as the only viable option for resolving
the conflict. It is what is needed in order to address
Israel’s legitimate security concerns and to enable
the consolidation of a sovereign, politically and
economically viable Palestinian State, in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions.
16/21

25/08/2022

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking Mr. Wennesland, Mr. Lazzarini and Mr. Levy
for their valuable briefings today. Let me start by
welcoming this month’s two-year anniversary of the
Abraham Accords, which are a historic milestone that
brings us closer to the goal of shared prosperity and
peace throughout the region.
As we stated during the Security Council’s
emergency meeting on 8 August (see S/PV.9107), the
United Kingdom welcomes the ceasefire in Gaza and
reiterates its call for the parties to make every effort to
sustain it. It is critical to ensure humanitarian access
in and out of Gaza in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
We were appalled by the terrorist attack in Jerusalem
on 13 August. The United Kingdom unequivocally
condemns all acts of terrorism, and our thoughts are
with the victims and the families of those affected.
We reiterate our unwavering commitment to Israel’s
security. This conflict has taken a terrible toll on both
sides. We are concerned about the record number of
Palestinians killed by Israeli security forces this year
and urge Israel to show restraint in its use of live
ammunition and to ensure a thorough and transparent
investigation of all fatalities.
We have been clear regarding our concern about
the Israeli Government’s decision last year to designate
six Palestinian non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) as terrorist organizations. The subsequent
raids on the offices of seven Palestinian NGOs, as
well as the arrests of their staff, are equally alarming.
Civil-society organizations play an important role in
upholding human rights and democracy, and they must
be able to operate freely in the occupied Palestinian
territory. We continue to engage with a number of
those organizations.
We call on the Israeli authorities to halt plans to
advance evictions from Khan Al-Ahmar and from the
settlement plan in the E1 area. Advancing settlements
into E1 would seriously hinder a two-State solution.
Settlements are contrary to international humanitarian
law. This month we also saw demolition orders issued
in Masafer Yatta and against a donor-funded school
in Ein Samiya. Such demolitions cause unnecessary
suffering and, in all but exceptional circumstances, are
contrary to international law.
The United Kingdom is a long-standing supporter
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
22-47151

25/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) because
of the vital role it plays in providing core services and
humanitarian and protection assistance to Palestinian
refugees across the region. We were pleased to announce
at the Agency’s pledging conference in June that we
have finalized a new multi-year funding agreement
with UNRWA and will provide £15 million this year.
In conclusion, the situation on the ground
demonstrates the urgent need to make progress towards
a two-State solution that ensures a safe and secure Israel,
living alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian State,
based on the 1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the shared
capital of both States. The United Kingdom remains
committed to working with all the parties to reduce
tensions and take steps towards a sustainable peace.
Mr. Nyarku (Ghana): I join previous speakers
in thanking Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland,
Commissioner-General
Philippe
Lazzarini
and
Mr. Daniel Levy for their comprehensive briefings,
which have given the Security Council an assessment
of the situation prevailing on the ground.
The briefings we have heard today are not very
different from previous ones. We had hoped to hear
much more promising prospects for improvements on
the ground in this decades-old conflict, which is a clash
not only over territory but over rights and aspirations
to peaceful coexistence and development. Regrettably,
from what we have heard, the parties’ positions are
far apart and the situation on the ground continues to
hinder the possibility of achieving a two-State solution
anytime soon.
We welcome the reports, consistent with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, of the renewal of friendly relations between
Israel and Türkiye, as reflected in their decision to
return their Ambassadors and Consuls-General to each
other’s capitals. We hope that such efforts will help to
strengthen regional stability and support the renewed
dialogue between the parties that is essential to the
achievement of a two-State solution.
While we are conscious of Israel’s security
concerns, we are nevertheless also concerned about
the worsening human security, the dire humanitarian
situation and the prevalence of human right abuses,
violations and detentions without charge or trial in
parts of the occupied Palestinian territory, especially
in the West Bank, Gaza and East Jerusalem. We are
especially alarmed by the fact that several innocent

S/PV.9116

unarmed Palestinians, including children, have been
killed or injured.
We share the international community’s concern
about the unilateral actions by Israeli settlers aimed
at forcing Palestinian communities and families from
their land across the occupied West Bank and in East
Jerusalem. After their designation last year as terrorist
groups, the raiding and shutting down of the offices of
six prominent Palestinian civil-society organizations
that are known to have contributed to the protection of
human rights in the occupied Palestinian territory is
equally worrying. We do not condone terrorism in any
shape or form, but we believe that such designations
require clear justification if they are to be adopted by
the entire international community.
Achieving peace requires deliberate actions aimed
at building trust. In that regard, we urge the parties
to de-escalate the existing tensions and generate the
political momentum required for direct negotiations.
We urge Israel to respect the inalienable rights of all
residents of the occupied Palestinian territory and abide
by its legal obligations and responsibilities under the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War.
We reiterate that all parties in the conflict must
fully comply with international humanitarian law, the
United Nations Charter and the many relevant United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
As an occupying Power, the Israeli Government has
a responsibility to protect the civilian population;
guarantee complete, unhindered and secure access
for humanitarian assistance to the vulnerable, in
particularly the elderly, women and children; and
facilitate the free movement of humanitarian workers
throughout the occupied territories.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our position that
violence cannot be a tool for the resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and that the path for lasting
peace and stability in the Middle East runs through
the internationally negotiated two-State solution, with
Israel and Palestine living side by side on the basis of
the pre-1967 borders. However, realizing the goals of
the Middle East peace process requires the Council
and the wider international community to sustain the
engagement of the parties, whose good-faith efforts are
required to resolve this decades-long conflict.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his timely briefing. We

22-4715117/21

S/PV.9116

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

also appreciate the contributions of CommissionerGeneral Lazzarini and Mr. Levy.
First, let me acknowledge and again thank the
Special Coordinator and the United Nations for all
their efforts to establish a ceasefire following the latest
hostilities in Gaza. We would also like to highlight
the critical roles played by Egypt and Qatar. It is now
essential that the ceasefire continue to be respected
and that the economic measures and the easing of
restrictions on access and movement be maintained.
Some 17 children were killed in Gaza, and hundreds
injured, during the hostilities earlier this month. These
escalations have consequences. We condemn all
indiscriminate attacks and attacks against civilians. All
parties are obliged to protect civilians and fully respect
international humanitarian law, including its principles
of distinction, proportionality and precaution.
Furthermore, Norway strongly condemns all acts
of terror, including the attack on Israeli civilians in
Jerusalem on 14 August, where eight people were injured.
Everyone — Israelis and Palestinians alike — deserves
to live in security. There is an urgent need for a more
long-term solution, including a political horizon.
Turning to other relevant developments, we are
deeply concerned about the shrinking space for civil
society, including the recent Israeli raids against several
Palestinian civil society organizations in Area A in
Ramallah. And we are troubled by subsequent reports
of threats against the employees of these organizations
and their families. Such actions are unacceptable. These
organizations carry out important work defending the
human rights of Palestinians vis-à-vis both the Israeli
and Palestinian authorities. They must be allowed to
continue to work in a safe and enabling environment.
Norway has clearly stated that the information
Israel has provided does not sufficiently justify
designating the organizations as terror organizations.
We will continue our support for Palestinian civil
society. A strong and vibrant civil society is key to
promoting democracy and human rights in Palestine
and supporting the two-State solution.
Norway will convene the Ministerial Meeting of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC), the
donor group for Palestine, at the margins of the General
Assembly on 22 September. The aim of the AHLC
is to help build the foundations for the Palestinian
State. Items on the AHLC agenda include further
18/21

25/08/2022

strengthening the Palestinian Authority’s institutions
and Palestinian Authority reform; increasing the
Authority’s revenues; transferring more authority
from Israel to the Palestinian Authority; developing
infrastructure; and easing restrictions on travel, trade
and economic activity both in the West Bank and
Gaza. This work must also include Palestinian leaders
contributing to strengthening the legitimacy and
accountability of the Palestinian Authority. We urge the
parties to use this opportunity to step up their efforts to
make progress on the State-building agenda.
As Commissioner-General Lazzarini has outlined,
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East plays a key role in
ensuring that the needs of Palestine refugees are met and
that their rights are ensured. The Agency’s continued
ability to serve this function also remains crucial for
regional stability. We are deeply concerned by the
warnings of yet another financing crisis in the autumn,
once again putting the Agency’s delivery of services at
risk. The recurrent budget crises have had a detrimental
effect on the Agency, its staff and the Palestine refugee
population in general. We call for renewed efforts to
mobilize resources, provide flexible financing and put
the Agency on a more stable financial footing.
In closing, let me repeat our call for increased
efforts aimed at preparing for negotiations towards a
political settlement. The two-State solution, based on
the 1967 lines, is the only viable solution to ensure
peace and security for both Israelis and Palestinians.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I also thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland and Commissioner-General
Lazzarini for their briefings. It is very good to see
Mr. Levy back in New York, and we thank him for
his incisive insights, which have given us a lot of food
for thought.
Today I wanted to focus on three issues: the
protection of civilians, the issue of accountability and
the critical issue of civil society space for Palestinian
civil society.
Ireland welcomes that the ceasefire agreed on
7 August between Israel and Palestinian Islamic
Jihad continues to hold. We also welcome the lifting
of additional restrictions imposed on 2 August on the
crossings into the Gaza Strip. Nonetheless, we share
concerns about the fragility of the ceasefire and the
potential for another major escalation, particularly as
tensions remain high in the West Bank.
22-47151

25/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In all conflicts, the protection of civilians must be
paramount. As a result of the hostilities this month, 49
Palestinians were killed in the Gaza Strip, including 17
children. It is appalling that today, once again, we must
address in the Security Council the killing of innocent
children. International humanitarian law is clear: any
attack must comply with the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precautions. All civilians in Gaza,
the West Bank and Israel must be protected.
We know what is needed to protect civilians in
Gaza: a permanent ceasefire and the lifting of the
blockade in line with resolution 1860 (2009) of the
Security Council. People in Gaza have nowhere to go.
The most recent escalation has exacerbated the already
severe humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip.
As we have heard from the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and others, humanitarian actors are
providing essential support in Gaza. Continued support
for UNRWA, which as we have just heard from the
Commissioner-General is so vital for all Palestine
refugees, is absolutely essential.
Ireland is gravely concerned at the alarming
increase in Palestinian civilian fatalities, including
the killing and maiming of children in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, as a result of the use of live
ammunition by Israeli forces. We call on Israel to
refrain from using excessive force and for impartial and
transparent investigations into all incidents that led to
death or injury. Those responsible for violations must
be held accountable.
Ireland condemns the gun attack on a bus carrying
Jewish worshippers in Jerusalem on 14 August, which
led to the injury of eight civilians. So long as there is
an absence of accountability and the root causes of the
conflict remain unaddressed, cycles of conflict and
violence throughout the occupied Palestinian territory
and Israel will continue. Ireland is also concerned
about Israel’s extensive use of administrative detention,
which is now at its highest level since 2008. We call on
Israel to act in accordance with its obligations under
international human rights and humanitarian law,
and in particular to refrain from arbitrary arrests and
detention.
The Israeli raids on six Palestinian civil-society
organizations on 18 August, and the measures that have
followed, are unacceptable and represent a worrying
reduction of space for civil society in the occupied

S/PV.9116

Palestinian territory. In common with others, we have
received no information from Israel that would justify
reviewing our policy towards those non-governmental
organizations. Ireland supports the United Nations High
Commissioner’s call to Israel to revoke the designations
of Palestinian civil-society organizations as terrorist
entities. We have serious concerns about the misuse of
counter-terror legislation to reduce civil-society space
in the occupied Palestinian territory. Israeli incursions
into Area A undermine previously signed agreements
and the prospects for a two-State solution.
Ireland’s view of Israel’s settlement activity and
practices of evictions and demolitions have been clearly
stated in the Council before. Any settlement activity
and advances by Israel in the E1 area in particular
would undermine the viability and territorial contiguity
of a future Palestinian State and jeopardize a two-State
solution. We urge Israel not to proceed with its eviction
decision in Masafer Yatta and its planned demolition of
a donor-funded school in Ein Samiya.
Finally, Ireland would like to reiterate the need to
restore hope for a political horizon and a meaningful
peace process towards a two-State solution based on the
1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the shared capital of both
States. Ireland reaffirms the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination. It is incumbent on the
parties and on the Security Council, together with
the wider international community, to revive direct
and inclusive engagement so that all Israelis and
Palestinians can live in peace.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland, Commissioner-General Philippe
Lazzarini and Daniel Levy for their briefings.
The escalation of hostilities in the Gaza Strip
earlier this month has only exacerbated the dire
humanitarian situation of the Gazan Palestinians, who
have already been suffering, including as a result of
the non-availability of funds for the United Nations
humanitarian response plan and the global increase
in commodity prices. We hope the situation will be
addressed soon with increased donor funding.
We welcomed the ceasefire in the Gaza Strip.
We urge the parties to abide strictly by the ceasefire
agreement so that the ongoing intensive diplomatic
efforts can be strengthened. In that context, we
appreciate the efforts of the international community,
especially the role of Egypt, in the process. We also
note Israel’s efforts following the ceasefire to resume

22-4715119/21

S/PV.9116

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the movement of people from the Gaza Strip and the
entry of humanitarian goods and fuel. But while we are
focusing on strengthening the ceasefire, we must also
continue to work together towards a political solution
to effectively address the underlying drivers of the dire
economic and humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip.
We remain deeply concerned about the
developments in the West Bank and Jerusalem. Violent
attacks and the killing of civilians continued during the
reporting period. Acts of destruction and demolition
are also continuing. Provocative actions and rhetoric
have again raised tensions around Jerusalem’s holy
sites. The historical and legal status quo at Jerusalem’s
holy places must be respected and upheld. We are also
gravely concerned about the acts of terror and incidents
of violence in Israel and the West Bank. There can
be no justification for any act of violence committed
against civilians. We have consistently opposed all acts
of violence, especially against women and children, and
we reiterate our call for a complete cessation of violence.
We urge the parties to refrain from unilateral measures
that vitiate the conditions necessary for promoting peace
and to focus instead on bridging the trust deficit. It is
the international community’s collective responsibility
to send a strong signal opposing any step preventing the
possibility of a two-State solution.
The financial challenges of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) are compounding every year.
There is a significant risk that UNRWA’s services will
have to be curtailed if adequate funds are not made
available soon. The Agency’s services to millions of
Palestinian refugees are crucial from the humanitarian
and development perspectives and contribute to
the overall stability of the region. As far as India is
concerned, and in response to UNRWA’s funding crisis,
India has increased its annual financial contribution
to the Agency. We have contributed $20 million to its
programme budget since 2018. We have also pledged
$5 million for this year, half of which has already been
released. We encourage donors to consider stepping up
their contributions so as to help the Agency overcome
its liquidity crisis this year.
The situation again underscores the need for an
immediate resumption of peace talks between Israel
and Palestine. The absence of such direct negotiations
is not conducive to securing long-term peace and will
only increase the risk of a recurrence and escalation of
violence in Israel and Palestine. It is therefore crucial
20/21

25/08/2022

to immediately launch credible direct negotiations in
order to return to the political dialogue process as soon
as possible. India has consistently called for direct
peace negotiations between Israel and Palestine aimed
at achieving a two-State solution, taking into account
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people for
statehood and Israel’s legitimate security concerns. The
United Nations and the international community must
prioritize a resumption of those negotiations.
In conclusion, I reaffirm India’s unwavering
commitment to establishing a sovereign, independent
and viable State of Palestine, living within secure and
recognized borders, side by side and at peace with
Israel, taking into account Israel’s legitimate security
concerns. There is no alternative to a negotiated twoState solution.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland,
Commissioner-General Lazzarini and Mr. Levy for
their briefings. Their views and recommendations
have served as useful inspiration for the work of the
Security Council.
For the past month, the volatile situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory has disturbed the whole
world. The conflict in Gaza has led to hundreds of civilian
casualties and massive damage to its infrastructure,
once again pushing the situation to the brink of war and
leaving the people of Gaza in a state of fear and a life in
desperate straits. We appreciate the active mediation by
Egypt, Qatar, Jordan and other countries of the region,
as well as Special Coordinator Wennesland, aimed
at reaching a ceasefire. All the parties must be urged
to respect the ceasefire and exercise restraint so that
calm can be rapidly and fully restored in Gaza. The
diplomatic efforts should continue on all fronts.
During the conflict the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) and other humanitarian agencies have dealt
with many problems, actively carried out humanitarian
operations and provided the people in Gaza with
emergency relief and assistance, for which China is
grateful. The path to recovery and reconstruction in
Gaza is tortuous and long. The international community
should accelerate its humanitarian response, offer
assistance to Palestine through multiple channels and
provide strong support for UNRWA. We call on Israel to
22-47151

25/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

facilitate the entry of humanitarian and reconstruction
supplies into Gaza and to promptly and fully lift its
blockade of Gaza.
The frequent incidents of violence on the West
Bank are a cause for concern. China condemns
all indiscriminate attacks on civilians and serious
violations against children in the occupied Palestinian
territory. We are opposed to the Israeli security forces’
excessive use of force and call for investigating such
violent incidents and ensuring accountability for
them. More than 100 days have passed since female
journalist Shireen Abu Akleh, of Al Jazeera, was shot
dead, yet there has still been no credible explanation of
the incident.
For years, Palestine’s civil-society organizations
have played a vital role in helping vulnerable
populations, including women and children, improving
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory and upholding the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people. The recent actions taken by Israel
against several Palestinian civil-society organizations
have caused widespread concern among the international
community, and we call on Israel to respond earnestly
to those concerns.
The status quo in the occupied Palestinian territory
is unsustainable. The international community must
rise above piecemeal crisis management, squarely face
the root causes of the situation, take effective action
and work to put a settlement of the Palestinian question
back on the right track.
First, we must encourage Palestine and Israel
to pursue common security. Israel and Palestine will
remain neighbours. Their security is interdependent
and indivisible. Seeking the absolute security of one
side, taking unilateral action and basing one’s own
security on the insecurity of the other can only deepen
mistrust, heighten tensions and trap the parties in an
endless cycle of violence. The international community
should consider the security concerns of both Palestine
and Israel as equally important and encourage both
sides to find the highest common denominator, through

S/PV.9116

dialogue and cooperation, in order to achieve common
security. At the same time, the occupying Power should
properly fulfil its obligations under international law to
protect the safety of the people in the occupied territory.
Secondly, the negative trends on the ground must
be reversed immediately. The continued expansion of
settlement activities encroaches on Palestinian land,
consumes Palestinian resources and violates Palestine’s
right to self-determination, putting a contiguous,
independent and sovereign State of Palestine further out
of reach with each passing day. Every inch of settlement
expansion puts a new obstacle on the path to a twoState solution. We call for the immediate cessation of
all settlement activities, an end to unilateral changes to
the status quo in the occupied Palestinian territories and
the demarcation of the final borders between Palestine
and Israel through peaceful negotiations.
Thirdly, a two-State solution must be advanced on
all fronts. The Palestinian question has been dragging
on for more than 70 years. Generations of Palestinian
refugees have lost their homes and been displaced, and
countless Palestinian children have been deprived of
hope and a future. What is lacking in the settlement of
the Palestinian question is not grand plans or strident
slogans but the courage to stand up for justice and
action to honour commitments. The ability, or lack
of it, of the United Nations and the Security Council
to demonstrate responsibility and dare to act is
being monitored by the international community and
recorded by history. It will be vital to muster a sense of
urgency, take substantive steps to advance a two-State
solution and support the Palestinian people in restoring
and exercising their inalienable rights so as to achieve
peaceful coexistence for Palestine and Israel, harmony
between the Arab and Jewish nations and lasting peace
in the Middle East.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

22-4715121/21
