S/PV.7004

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7004th meeting

Thursday, 18 July 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. DeLaurentis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Musayev
Ms. Jiang Hua
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Meek

Agenda
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Thirty-second report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2013/377)

13-39846 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1339846*

S/PV.7004

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Thirty-second report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (S/2013/377)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Côte d’Ivoire to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé Ladsous, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2013/377, which contains the thirty-second report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to introduce the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2013/377). I will begin
by announcing that Ms. Aïchatou Mindaoudou took up
her responsibilities as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Côte d’Ivoire and Head of the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI)
last week, on 8 July. She has already been able to meet
with President Ouattara, members of his Government
and other key stakeholders.
As is highlighted in the report before the Council,
Côte d’Ivoire has continued to make progress on the
path to recovery since the end of the violent postelection crisis in April 2011. President Ouattara and his
Government have taken significant steps to stabilize the
security situation, accelerate economic recovery and
initiate key reforms. An elected National Assembly is
in place and working well. The success of the regional
and municipal elections held in April demonstrated
the ability of the national authorities, including the
security forces, to assume responsibility for organizing
and safeguarding the election process.

2

We can say that Côte d’Ivoire is on the right track.
Its leadership has shown remarkable resolve in tackling
the country’s many challenges. The establishment of
the National Security Council and the adoption and
endorsement of a national security strategy are important
steps on the road to security sector reform, while the
start, in 2012, of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of the 65,000 or so former combatants
was another important milestone. Indeed, that process
remains a key priority for President Ouattara, who has
asked his Government to expedite the disarmament and
demobilization of 30,000 combatants by the end of this
year and to complete the process by the end of 2014.
We cannot pretend that this is not an ambitious
goal, and UNOCI will continue to assist the national
authorities in implementing that national programme.
However, Côte d’Ivoire will need the support of the
international community as a whole to ensure that
lasting solutions are found for every former combatant.
There is a real risk, going on lessons learned from the
crisis, that if solutions are not found for them, they may
once again become a threat to human rights and stability
in Côte d’Ivoire and the subregion, since they may
potentially take up arms again if the opportunity arises.
It is therefore very important that the Government
continue to work closely with its international and
regional partners to ensure that such reintegration is
sustainable, and that it is supported by job creation and
a return to normality.
The Government has made genuine efforts to
engage with the political opposition parties, in spite
of the decision those parties made to boycott the local
elections. While discussions with several of them have
been resumed, dialogue with the former ruling party
has been stalled since February. It is vital that it be
resumed without further delay in order to pave the
way for political reconciliation, which will be essential
as we move towards a new electoral cycle in 2015.
At the same time, conflict prevention and resolution
at the local level should be promoted. Considering
that the current mandate of the Dialogue, Truth and
Reconciliation Commission ends in September, it is
important for the Government to ensure that efforts to
promote reconciliation and healing continue across the
country.
Reconciliation must go hand in hand with equitable
justice. Ensuring the accountability of those who have
committed violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law is essential. The human rights

13-39846

S/PV.7004

situation, in which I include incidents of sexual and
gender-based violence, remains worrying. Efforts to
combat impunity must be expedited by ensuring that
those responsible for serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law are brought to justice
whatever their political affiliation, while, obviously,
respecting the rights of those in detention. Impartial
justice is essential to achieve reconciliation and end
decades of impunity for human rights violations.
As the report indicates, the Governments of Côte
d’Ivoire and Liberia have continued their efforts at
every level to address common border challenges, with
the support of UNOCI and the United Nations Mission
in Liberia. At the second quadripartite meeting in
April, both Governments committed to beginning to
institutionalize their cross-border cooperation and to
enhancing their security forces’ presence on both sides
of the border. They also agreed to increase their exchange
of intelligence, to undertake joint actions — including
intensified and coordinated land and river patrols — to
take steps to strengthen the relationship between their
security forces and their populations and to reinforce
their coordination of humanitarian efforts.
Despite such significant progress, threats to Côte
d’Ivoire’s peace and security persist and should not be
underestimated. The political divisions go deep and
networks connected to the former regime, whose aim is
to destabilize the Government, are still there. Further
continuing concerns are the presence of mercenaries,
former combatants and other armed elements, the
uncontrolled circulation of weapons, criminal activity
and violence between communities. Nor should we
forget other threats to stability, which include piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea, drug trafficking and organized
crime; and we cannot rule out the possibility of terrorist
threats.
All of that goes to show that UNOCI’s ongoing
presence in Côte d’Ivoire remains essential, particularly
regarding its core priorities — the protection of civilians,
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of former combatants, and security sector reform.
UNOCI has continued working to strengthen its efforts
to protect civilians, with particular emphasis on the
western part of the country, involving strengthening
its civilian presence on the ground and its contacts
with local authorities. That has, in point of fact, helped
to improve the mission’s capacity to collect relevant
information, identify key protection concerns and take

necessary action, in close coordination with the United
Nations country team.
Further to the decision of the Security Council, 850
troops were repatriated in May following the conclusion
of the local elections, and preparations are under way to
transfer the military hospital in Abidjan to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. UNOCI is continuing to refine plans
for a further reduction of its military strength by 2015,
while exploring with the Government the possibility
of reducing, for example, the protection arrangements
enjoyed by some members of the Government and key
strategic installations. In that regard, UNOCI is keeping
a close watch on developments on the ground to inform
the planning process.
In the report before the Council, the SecretaryGeneral has proposed broad benchmarks to measure
Côte d’Ivoire’s progress towards long-term stability and
to undertake transition planning. However, it is clearly
still too early to predict when UNOCI will start its
transition. We need to take into account, in particular,
the 2015 presidential and legislative elections, after
which the situation can be fully reassessed.
By way of conclusion, let me say that the Council’s
ongoing support continues to be critical to improving
the ability of the United Nations to make a positive
difference in Côte d’Ivoire.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral before the Council (S/2013/377). We thank
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his excellent briefing.
Before making a few comments on some points that
appear critical to my delegation, I would like to warmly
congratulate your country, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July.
Please also allow me to pay tribute to the SecretaryGeneral for his personal and continued commitment
to the issue of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI) — a commitment that is reflected
in the quality of the report before us today. I would
also like to pay tribute to Mr. Bert Koenders, former

13-398463

S/PV.7004

Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Côte D’Ivoire and head of UNOCI, for the excellent
results he achieved in just two years. We hope that he
will achieve the same superior results in our brotherly
country of Mali, where he now serves as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. Finally, my delegation
would like to congratulate Ms. Aichatou Mindaoudou
Souleymane on her appointment as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
UNOCI. We note with satisfaction that Ms. Souleymane
has, in her new capacity, begun to make contact with
the various authorities and Ivorian entities. I assure her
of the full cooperation of the Ivorian authorities.
Returning to the report of the Secretary-General
and as has been relevantly pointed out, considerable
progress has been made at all levels, particularly at the
level of the general objectives concerning security and
stability, including security sector reform (SSR) and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR);
justice and human rights; and political dialogue and
national reconciliation.
In terms of security and stability, as is strongly
emphasized in the report of the Secretary-General,
President Alassane Ouattara and his Government are
paying particular attention to the stabilization of the
security situation throughout the national territory, with
good results, such as the reclassification of the cities of
Abidjan and Yamoussoukro by the United Nations in
May 2013 as areas authorized for the families of the
international staff of the Organization.
However, as was emphasized by Mr. Ladsous,
concerns remain along the border with Liberia, although
the situation has improved significantly following the
strengthening of the quadripartite cooperation among
the security services of Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia,
UNOCI and the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
With regard to the reform of the security sector,
I would like to point out that the coordination of the
implementation of SSR takes place on three levels: the
political and strategic level; the coordination level,
which involves monitoring and evaluation; and the
operational level, which involves implementation.
The National Security Council is at the political
and strategic level. The Council secretariat and the
Advisory Group are at the level of coordination. The
various ministries involved in SSR are implementing

4

structures, with each ministry having a focal point that
reports monthly on its progress in implementing SSR to
the Council secretariat and the Advisory Group, which
are its partners. Each ministry must develop its own
implementation model and programme it. Accordingly,
the Ministries of Defence, Justice, Interior and National
Security, and Foreign Affairs are the most advanced in
the process of implementing SSR.
With regard to the fight against smuggling, specific
measures have been taken to eradicate the smuggling
of natural resources for the benefit of neighbouring
countries and to put an end to the parallel tax system
set up by members of the former Forces nouvelles
and former combatants. Those measures focus on
the redeployment of State administration throughout
the national territory, in particular customs, police,
gendarmerie, the finance and tax services, on the one
hand, and on raising awareness of military personnel
of the danger that trafficking poses to the national
economy and the sanctions they may incur in the event
of proven liability, including their termination, on the
other hand.
Finally, with regard to the case of Amadé Ouérémi,
which is briefly mentioned in paragraph 20 of the
Secretary-General’s report, my delegation would like
to state that after 10 years of fomenting insecurity in
the Mont Peko national park located in western Côte
d’Ivoire, Mr. Ouérémi was apprehended, prosecuted,
charged and placed in custody on 22 May.
The suspect is subject to the following charges:
crimes against civilians, genocide, violation of
individual freedom, assassination, murder, rape,
assault and battery, threat of death, violence and
assault, tribalism and xenophobia, attacks and other
offences against the authority of the State, the settingup of gangs, participation in an insurgency, disturbing
public order, looting, destruction or deterioration of
foodstuffs, goods, merchandise or equipment, group
robbery, extortion, wilful destruction of real or personal
property, coercion, abetting, conspiracy and attempt
to commit all of the aforementioned offences. He is
accused and charged along with nine others.
The proceedings are well under way. In-depth
interrogations, investigations of the individuals
involved and psychiatric assessments have been made.
Accordingly, 50 rape victims and 4,000 victims of
various other offences have already been heard by
the examining magistrate, who has indicted several

13-39846

S/PV.7004

suspects, including Amadé Ouérémi himself, and is
continuing the investigations in order to find other
accomplices.
On disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
the Authority for Disarmament. Demobilization and
Reintegration, created on 8 August 2012, was set up
in October 2012 and began operations in January 2013.
After six months of operation, 7,680 weapons have
been collected and 8,044 former combatants have been
demobilized and reintegrated or are in the process of
reintegration. In recent months, now that the installation
and implementation of systems and procedures is
complete, we have seen accelerated results. With the
opening of three regional offices and four branches, we
expect to see the Authority’s activities take off. We also
expect to open three more regional offices and six other
branches by the end of July.
The Transitional Demobilization and Reintegration
Programme — supported, among others, by the World
Bank and the African Development Bank — has
provided assistance to the Authority for nearly two
months in developing a strategic framework for the
national DDR strategy. This framework was shared
with all partners in April.
The Authority has established a framework
for overall coordination, including national and
international partners, that meets once a month, as well
as four thematic groups. This coordination mechanism
enables the development of sectoral strategies and
action plans. Thus, the thematic groups are finalizing
thematic strategy papers that will be available in late
July. In the same vein, a programmatic document will
be developed with the assistance of UNOCI, the United
Nations Development Programme and the European
Union, which have volunteered to support the Authority
in this exercise. The document will serve as a basis for
the meeting of partners for resource mobilization in
September.
Regarding the database of ex-combatants, UNOCI
has made a computer expert available to the Authority
for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration to
examine the database in order to make it more credible.
Thus, the issue of UNOCI access to the database is no
longer relevant. The ongoing joint exercise has already
helped to detect and correct anomalies in the database.
By mutual agreement, UNOCI and the Authority
have agreed not to proceed with a new registry of
ex-combatants. On the other hand, a joint mechanism to

verify the status of ex-combatants has been developed
and implemented. Furthermore, a system to monitor and
mark weapons in connection with the demobilization
of ex-combatants has been established with the support
of UNOCI, and regular statistics on disarmament,
reintegration and rehabilitation, as well as on weapons,
are provided to UNOCI.
Finally, discussions are under way with UNOCI
and other partners to expedite the reintegration of
ex-combatants. These discussions will be recorded
in the reintegration action plan. In that context, I
welcome the readiness and much appreciated support
of UNOCI in the development and implementation of
the thematic strategies, which will allow the Authority
for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration to
achieve its objectives.
In terms of justice and human rights, at the general
level it should first be noted that the members of the
National Commission on Human Rights have been
appointed. We also note that progress has been made in
the implementation of the national strategy for justice
reform for 2012-2015. The action plan and budget for the
strategy were approved by the Council of Ministers on
6 June. In addition to the national strategy, a strategic
plan is being developed to reform the juvenile justice
system. My delegation notes that numerous efforts and
investments are being made by the State to strengthen
the capacity of the judicial and penal systems.
With respect to the armed forces, the supervisory
authority and the General Staff of the Forces
républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire (FRCI) have established
a technical unit for human rights training. This
unit conducts awareness and training for the FRCI
throughout the national territory. Regulations are in
place to punish gross violations of human rights.
Following the report of the National Commission
of Inquiry into the crimes of the post-election period,
the military tribunal has opened investigations and
proceeded to indictments and even to convictions of
military personnel following a procedure in accordance
with the relevant laws. There are three categories of
personnel subject to the judicial proceedings. Thirtytwo members of the army and gendarmerie and eight
members of the National Police have been charged and
heard on the merits. Twenty-three members of the army
and gendarmerie and eight members of the National
Police have been charged on a committal order. Six
soldiers have been charged on a committal order but not

13-398465

S/PV.7004

yet heard the merits. In addition, a focal point between
the office of UNOCI and the army has been appointed.
Regarding the investigation of the attack on
the Nahibly camp for internally displaced persons,
the examining magistrate in the court of Man has
been engaged to shed light on the facts of the case
and to charge and detain all persons involved. The
investigation is ongoing and developments therein will
be communicated as soon as available.
Regarding other ongoing judicial procedures,
concerning which we have heard a broad spectrum of
commentary, my delegation would draw attention to
the fact that the separation of powers is a fundamental
parameter of good governance and an expression of
the rule of law throughout the world. There can be no
impartial justice if everyone seeks to tell the judicial
system how to conduct its investigations and who to
prosecute.
Based on the foregoing, I would like to emphasize
that the main concern of the Government of Côte
d’Ivoire in its judicial proceedings is to ensure that all
citizens receive a fair trial within a reasonable time
frame. Despite the difficulties in infrastructure and
superstructure of the Ivorian justice system — which
are related mainly to the destruction that occurred in
the post-election crisis — several procedures have been
completed and submitted to the trial courts. Decisions
have been handed down and trials are about to open.
I would therefore like to emphasize that there are no
political indictees or prisoners in Côte d’Ivoire, since it
is a generally accepted rule that a person’s activities
do not affect the juridical nature of the offence with
which that person may be charged. In other words, it
is not because someone holds an important position in
civil and political society that he or she is not subject
to the law.
At this level, the strategy put in place to ensure
equitable justice in Côte d’Ivoire has led the Public
Prosecutor, who is also the head of the Special
Investigations Unit, to give priority attention to the
proceedings of detainees in a sequential approach in
order to ensure them a speedy and fair trial within a
reasonable time frame, in accordance with all the
declarations and principles of human rights enshrined
in the Ivorian Constitution.
However, it is important to note, especially for the
leaders of the former regime, that most of the actions

6

for which they are being prosecuted are of a criminal
nature, thus requiring the court to make use of a twotier investigation process before indictment before
the Court of Appeals. Moreover, an indictment was
recently issued before the Court of Appeals for the
accused, which indicates that the procedures will end
in judgments that are in the course of formulation.
In terms of political dialogue and national
reconciliation, my delegation wishes to reaffirm the
continued commitment of the Ivorian authorities to the
process of political dialogue and national reconciliation.
Everyone knows that Côte d’Ivoire has a long and
deeply-rooted tradition of ongoing dialogue, despite all
that is said and written in the media and other sources
of information. Contacts are patiently and constantly
maintained among all parties, and tangible results will
be seen shortly.
At this point, the President of the Republic continues
to maintain a close dialogue with his people during his
tours to all regions of the country. Thus, having visited
the west in April, on Monday he completed a tour
through the north. While these tours are an opportunity
for communion between the President and the people by
promoting direct interaction, they also reflect the tone
of the equitable redistribution of the country’s wealth,
since numerous socioeconomic and even cultural goods
are provided for the benefit of the regions concerned
during the course of these presidential visits. Thus, in
the case of northern Ferkessédougou, it has promoted
reconciliation between political leaders representing
political parties in power or in the opposition.
It is equally reassuring to note that, apart from
these actions at the highest level of the State, local
authorities, through sensitization and early warning
committees, actively contribute to calming tensions
and communal violence. A national programme for
social cohesion was launched on 10 May to coordinate
all Government initiatives in this area. To set it squarely
within the parameters of the national development
plan, the programme is housed within the Ministry
of Planning and Development, which ensures its
institutional foundations.
With regard to the process of national reconciliation,
there is reason to celebrate significant progress.
Indeed, after field studies that lasted several months,
the Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation Commission
organized a restitution workshop in December 2012
to take preliminary stock of the situation. This was

13-39846

S/PV.7004

followed by a listening seminar to ascertain the views
of Ivorians on the causes of the crisis, after which
the Commission met on 10, 11 and 12 July, during a
symposium held in Yamoussoukro, to determine the
root causes of the crisis.

reform, a well-run DDR process, the achievement of
its national reconciliation objectives, efforts towards
strong, sustainable and inclusive economic growth and
preparation for the conduct of free, fair, transparent and
peaceful elections scheduled for 2015.

The symposium was attended by 120 participants
from all socio-professional strata to share their views
in the context of seven subcommittees on each of the
following themes: land; citizenship, nationality and
democracy; communication and society; justice and
security; gender; education, training and youth; and
poverty. After three days of intense and fruitful work,
the Commission can be credited with having achieved
remarkable results since all the causes of the Ivorian
crisis were exhaustively inventoried by each of the
seven subcommittees, and appropriate solutions were
recommended in each of the aforementioned spheres.
The matrix thus developed will help to formulate
appropriate policies to achieve the objectives of national
reconciliation.

I would also like to recall the fact that the Charter
of the United Nations confers on the Security Council
the responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, which is why UNOCI is helping
Côte d’Ivoire to achieve its aforementioned goals.
In that context, my delegation shares the SecretaryGeneral’s opinion that Côte d’Ivoire’s sustainable
recovery will undoubtedly contribute to strengthening
peace, stability and development in West Africa. It is
therefore important that the Council’s decisions on
UNOCI’s military and police units reflect that fact;
hence my delegation’s reservations about the proposal
to reduce them by two battalions in 2015.

Given these facts and their positive momentum,
we hope fervently that our international partners in
general, and UNOCI in particular, can furnish all the
support the Commission needs to effectively implement
the next phases of its work before submitting its final
report to the President of the Republic in September.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
matter of plans to reduce UNOCI’s military, police and
civilian components by 2015 should be approached with
great care so as not to create a security vacuum on the
ground while the Security Council’s complex mandates
for UNOCI are still being implemented. In that context,
I should reiterate strongly that the Government of Côte
d’Ivoire is aware that it bears primary responsibility
for the country’s sustainable recovery and is thus
determined to spare no effort and to make any sacrifice
necessary to achieve its goals for security sector

We believe that the progress being made on every
ongoing project deserves to be strengthened and
protected, at least until the 2015 elections, after which
UNOCI could comfortably consider an orderly transition
to a peacebuilding regime. Similarly, my delegation
emphasizes the critical need for UNOCI to continue to
work closely with the Côte d’Ivoire authorities in order to
come to an agreement on identifying and evaluating the
country’s criteria for long-term stability. Incidentally, it
is in consideration of Côte d’Ivoire’s requirements for
stability in the long term that the Ivorian authorities
have formally requested that surveillance drones be
deployed along all of our borders, particularly those
with Liberia, and we hope that the Council will give the
request all the attention it deserves.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

13-398467
