UNITED NA TIONS
.

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

TWENTY-NINTH

c,c-\

YEAR

1803’”

MEETING:

25 OCTOBER

1 ‘283

1974

NEW YORK

’
.I
,
.

%

.-

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l803)

.. ... ... .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .. ... .. ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Relationship between the United Nations and South-Africa:
(a) Letter dated 30 September 1974 from the President of the General Assembly
to the President of the Security Council (S/11525);
(b) Letter dated 9 October 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1532) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..a......

1

S/PV. 1803

c

.:

I

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
_. :,-.
.,. ‘;.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in.
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered -in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

:_

,.

_.

:
..,.

EIGHTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRD

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 25 October 1974, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Michel NJINE
(United Republic of Cameroon).

Mauritius.
Morocco.
Nigeria.
Pakistan.
Oatar.
Romania,.
Saudi Arabia, Sierra
Leone, ‘Somalia;
South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia,
Uganda, the United
Arab Emirates,
the United
Republic
of Tanzania,
Upper Volta, Yugoslavia
and Zaire to participate,
without the right to vote,
in the Council’s discussion of the question before
it.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia,
Austria,
Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania,
Peru, Union of Soviet
Socialist
Republics,
United
Kingdom
of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United Republic of
Cameroon and United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Rahal
(Algeria), Mr. Karim (Bangladesh),
Mr. WaldronRamsey
(Barbados),
Mr.
Mondjo
(Congo),
Mr. Alarcon (Cuba), Mr. Smid (Czechoslovakia),
Mr; Adjibadh (Dahomey), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt),
Mr.
Florin
(German
Democratic
Republic),
Mr. Boaten .(Ghana), Mrs. Jeanne Martin
Cisse’
(Guinea), Mr. Jackson (Guyana), Mr. Jaipal (India),
Mr. Harmon
(Liberia), Mr. Maghur (Libyan Arab
Republic), Mr. Rabetafika (Madagascar),
Mr. Traore
(Mali),
Mr.
Ramphul
(Mauritius),
Mr.
Slaoui
(Morocco),
Mr.
Ogbu (Nigeria),
Mr. Akhund
(Pakistan), Mr. Jamal (Qatar), Mr. Datcu (Romania),
Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Palmer (Sierra
Leone), Mr. Hussein (Somalia),
Mr. Botha (South
Africa),
Mr.
Kelani
(Syrian
Arab
Republic),
Mr.
Driss
(Tunisia),
Mr.
Kinene
(Uganda),
Mr. Humaidan
(United Arab Emirates), Mr. Salim
(United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Yaguibou (Upper
Volta), Mr. PetriC (Yugoslavia)
and Mr. Mutuale
(Zaire) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/l803)

of the agenda

Relationship
between the United Nations and
South Africa;
(a) Letter dated 30 September 1974 from the
President of the General Assembly to the
President of the Security Council (S/l 1525);
(b) Letter dated 9 October 1974 from the
Permanent Representative
of Tunisia to the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/11532)
The meeting

was called to order at 3.50 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Relationship
between the United Nations and South
Africa:
(a) Letter dated 30 September 1974 from the President
of the General Assembly addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/11525);
(b) Letter dated 9 October 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1532)

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Furthermore,
I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Kuwait requesting that his delegation
also be invited, under Article 31 of the Charter and
the pertinent provisions of the provisional
rules of
procedure, to participate,
without the right to vote,
in the Council’s discussion. In accordance with the
customary
practice, and with the assent of the
Council, I propose to invite this representative
to
participate, without the right to vote, in the Council’s
discussion of the agenda item before it.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council
previously [1796th-1798th and 1800-1802nd meetings],
under Article 31 of the Charter and in accordance
with the pertinent provisions of the provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Bangladesh, Barbados, the Congo, Cuba, Czechosiovakia, Dahomey,
Egypt, the German Democratic
Republic,
Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, India, Liberia,
the Libyan
Arab Republic,
Madagascar,
Mali,

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Bishara
(Kuwait) took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The first speaker is the representative
of Romania.
1

I invite him to come to the Council table and to
make his statement.

international forum, has assumed the obligations
stemming .from the Charter, the successive Gove.mments in that country have repeatedIy and flagrantly.
.violated those obligations.

4. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation fvDm
I am very grateful to you, Mr. P’resident,
and to the other members of the Security Council
10.. -me minority regime of Pretoria has established
for having given me this opportunity to paiticipatd
a sysiem of racial segregation, oppressi~on. and
in this impor&nt debate. I should like. alsb to add
exploitation unique in modem history, and h:s
the voice of the Romanian delegation to the views
elevated to the status of official poiicy of the State
of all those that have addressed. the warmest. ‘the @ost.degradingqhenomenon OfQUr day, apqfhei&
congr&laiions to you on your- assumption ‘of this
which has quite rightly been described by the
h&$ly. responsible post. Our satisfaction at se.eing United Nations as a crime against humanity. sou-th
you presiding over our deliberations is ail the greater -Africa- has thus openly proclaimed its opposition to
because you are the distinguished representative -of
the Charter. The General Assembly and the Secu@y
an African country, the United Republic of Camerdon,
Council have adopted dozens of resolutions- drawlag
with which Romania is developing relations of close the attention of the South African Govemme,nT co‘
friendship and co-tip&ration.
the fact that its policy and.its actions are incompatfiIe
with the obligations- entailed by the Charter. TEe
,.5. We ‘can undoubtedly co&der that through the
United Nations has also asked the South- &f&an.
General Assembly’s request to the Security Council
Government to comply with the provisions QF {lie.
that it examine the relationship between the United
Charter and pu$ au end to its poIicy of racial
Nations and South Africa the international community
disctimination and apartheid. But alI~these.resoIutiaas
has once @ain given -exei-es@@ to..:its Skvere
have been cynicalIy disregarded and violated by tie
condemnat?on --of the -.policy $f the‘-iacist %&&ity
ticisi rtgime of Pretoria.
r&me of Pretoria and to’ its concern at the ill effects
of this policy on international peace; security and
11. The negative attitude of South Africa towards
co-operation. ~
the Charter and United Nations resolutions is also
visible in its policy of flagrant violation of the
6, The Romanian delegation has asked to ,&,eallowed
sacred right of the Namibian- people to sdfto participate in this debate in the conviction. that
determination and independence. In defiance of
no State can remain. indifferent when the fundamental
.resolutions of the Security Council and the General
principles and provisions of the- Charter. of the United
Assembly, South Africa continues illegally to occlrpy
Nations are flouted so flagrantly and-when the most Namibia, and to promote a policy o! annexation
e1emenzu-y human rights are denied and brutally
~without respect to that Territory and to extend to it
_
violated.
the policy of apartheid. By its- attitude, South Africa
is- continuing to impede the implementation of- th$
7. My cou&y has been a sponsor of many res~iutions
mqndate entrusted by the General Assembly to th.e
adopted by the Genkral Assembly. condemning. the
United Nations Council for Namibia designed to
poIicy of South Africa and has vigorously supported
bring about independence for that Territory.
respect, for the inalienable righti of peoples to forge
their own destinies in accordance with their national
12. In this regard the United Nations has repeatedly
Will.
condemned the policy of South Africa of dividiq
into bantustans, undermining nation.a?U&T
8. Romania has always given and .will continue’ .Namibia
and destroying the territorial integrity. of Mmibia
to give its whole-hearted support and multilateral
for annexationist purposes. South Af&a.‘s reply tQ
assistance to -the peoples of southern Africa in
appeals, to Mthdraw its armed forces and its whule
eliminating racial oppression and apar&&. It is also
administration from Namibia has been an obstinate
.in this spirit that we have asked for -an opportunity :-an@
arrogant declaration of its decision to persist
to express our views within the-.fram#ork of the
in
its
actions in vioiation of the Charter.
present debate. We consider that the $.ecurity Council
and the United Nations in general should at this
13. Nor has there been any response in Pretotia.
historic tiine adopt the firmest and most effective
to the measures taken by the United Nation-s
measures, having recourse to the means provided
for in the Charter, in order to prevail upon South concerning the policy. of the racist @ime of Siz@tb
Africa to put anend immediately to-its policy-of racial Africa and its acts of brutal repression of the sttll gl$
discrimination and aparfheid
and to the illegal of the African’people, such as the odious Sharpev% 1s
massacre and similar crimes commjttcd again% t&j
occupation-of Namibia.
Namibian population. There has been a cemp~e~~
.9. Thitiugbout its history the United Nations has disregard also of the repeated demands of the U&Ed
never had tb face such a serious situation, a sitgation -Nations. for the freeing of all persons df3aine:lihy t&g
cre%ted.by the attitude of a Member State. Although
South African rbgime who have been. the victims of
South Africa, because it does belong _tg.. this the. policy of racial segregation and aparfheid.
Ftwzch):

2
. .

14. With regard to the long list of vloIations of the
Charter and United Nations resolutions commifted’by
the Government of South Africa, I should like to
refer very briefly to a few aspects which relate to the
conduct of South Africa in its international relations.

l~~~licyof the PretoTia &g&e. The facts mentioned
and the arguments put forward in this d.ebate bring
out ever more clearly the justice, of a cause which
is gaining ground with irresist~$$lestrength. This is
the struggle to’ abolish once an@ for all colonialism
and the policy of racial discrimin&tion @id~uparth%?id,
to eliminate force, dotnination and ‘dilctut from
intemtitional life. Socialist Romania, and the whole
Romanian people, resoiutely support this sacred cause
. j/.
ofallpeoples.
..I -._ _.. ._

15. As we know, under Article 2 of the’ Charter,
Member States assume the explicit obligation, to
refrain -from giving assistance to any State against
which -the United Nations is taking preventive or
enforcement action. In violation of resolutions of the
Security Council adopted on the basis of Chapter VII
of the Charter the South ‘African racist regime is
continuing to maintain diplomatic relations with
Southern Rhodesia, and persistently fails to apply
the sanctions imposed against that country.
Furthermore, it is a. well-established fact that the
South African Government is giving the illegal regime
of Ian Smith substantial military support in its
repression of the national liberation struggle of the
Zimbabwe people. These are irrefutable facts which
prove that the Pretoria regime has outlawed itself
from the international community.

19. In view of the serious and persistent violations
of the principles of the ‘Charter and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights by the racist regime of
South Africa; we consider that it is the duty of the
Security Council to act on the basis of the Charter in
order to adopt the most energetic and effective
measures possible.
20. In the spirit of the militant solidarity of
Socialist Romania with the just cause-of the African
peoples and with the national liberation struggle of
the. peoples -’of -southern- -Africa, the _Romanian
delegation firmly supports the legitimate demands
made by the African, States, and the Organization
of African Unity,. for the expulsion from the United
Nations %f the minority racist regime of Pretoria.
I believe that it is clear-and the General Assembly
has confirmed this recently by an almost unanimous
vote-that this regime, which.represents only the white
minority, is illegally occupying the seat which should
belong to the legitimate representatives of the people
of South Africa as a whole.

16.. Socialist Romania has always resolutely
condemned the policy of apartheid
and racial
discrimination of the South African regime. At the
same time, my country has firmly and unreservedly
advocated respect for the inalienable right of peoples
to forge their own destiny in accordance with their
national will. We have also participated actively in
multilateral support to the struggle for independence
and the abolition of the policy of racial discrimination
and apartheid. This policy was clearly reaffirmed by
the President of the Socialist Republic of Romania,
Mr. Nicolae Ceau$escu, in many talks with .African
heads of State and representatives. of national
liberation movements of Africa, both in Bucharest
and in the course of visits to African countries.
The message addressed by President Nicolae
Ceausescu to the International Conference of Experts
for the Support of Victims of Colonialism- and
Apartheid in Southern Africa stafes:

21. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
Tht next speaker is the representative of Mali.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement..
22. Mr.

TRAGRI? (Mali) (interpretation
from
As it takes a place at- this Council table,
my delegation wishes first to extend its very sincere
thanks tc. the members of the Council, who have been
good enough to authorize us to participate in the
Council’s debate on the question of the relationship
between the United Nations and South Africa.

French):

“R0mani.a resolutely condemns the policy of
and the racial practices of the minority
regimes of South Africa and Rhodesia, and firmly
advocates the elimination of the. shameful colonial
yoke.”

apartheid

23. I should like %lso.to tell you how- pleased we
are to see this meeting of the Council-to which Africa
rightly attaches particular significance and in which it
is particularly’ interested-presided over by one of
Africa’s eminent sons,’ a person who, while showing
great modesty,-has made an impression as a wise and
respected diplomat. You represent a country, the
United Republic of Cameroon, .which has done so
much for the cause of ‘African unity and which
maintains excellent relations with my country. May
your term as President be crowned with success.

17. The Romanian Government, which is tirelessly
working to strengthen the capacity to act of the
United Nations and to enhance its role in intemational life, supports the adoption of measures designed
to guarantee respect for the Charter and for the
principles which should govern relations between
States.
18. Our delegation has listened with the closest
attention to the impressive number of delegations
which have ,preceded us to this table, and which
have provided an ample indictment of the racist

24. The violence unleashed by the mad ambitions
of Hitlerism to organ& the world in accordance with
such absurd laws as racial superiority and the
3
j
._

..

so-called need for Lebensruum had just been quelled
when, some 30 years ago, the Charter of the United
Nations was drafted by men with the dream of
building a world free from the horrors of hatred
and war. Representing
for the most part peoples
who had suffered greatly from the war, those
authors of the Charter bequeathed to us a precious
juridical instrument which, despite its short-comings,
is designed to tear down racial, philosophical
and
religious barriers so that all the men on earth without
any exception can, in,-freedom
and liberated from
prejudice,
co-operate
to achieve their common
destiny, in justice and equity.

Malan, Strijdom
and Verwoerd. What followed is
known to everyone. In my opinion, it would be almost
an insult to the members of this Council to give a
detailed description of this odious and inhuman system
of apartheid. I shall simply say that the only
difference between nazism and apartheid is one of
name. In 1940, when millions of men fighting against
nazism and fascism were falling on the battlefield for.
freedom, Reverend J. D. Vorster, a brother of the
present head of the Pretoria regime said: “Hitler’s
Mein Kum& shows us the road leading to greatness,
the road that South Africa must take.” Two years
later, in 1942, his brother founded a pro-Nazi
organization,
Odessa Brandwag, and, in his turn, had
the following to say during a meeting of that new
Nazi phalanx:

25. Thus, despite certain grave errors and the
survival of some imperial rights, the international
community with its membership gradually increasing,
took the road of rapprochement
and understanding
among peoples .and nations. Year after year the
international
community,
aware of its responsibilities
towards history and the Charter,
has gone on
denouncing
and fighting evils like colonialism
and
racism.

“We are for Christian-socialism,
an ally of
national-socialism.
It matters little whether they say
that we are against democracy and for dictatorship.”
And it was that dictatorship
which came crashing
down on the unfortunate
black people of South
Africa; it was that contempt for democracy,
that
unreasoning taste for brutality, that insult to mankind
which prompted Verwoerd to say in 1963: “We want
to keep South Africa white. Keeping it white can
mean only one thing: white domination.‘*

26. The African
countries,
although
they had
suffered terribly from the serious misdeeds of savage
colonization,
did everything, in accordance with the
principles of the Charter, to make those oppressing
their brothers in southern Africa listen to the voice
of reason. Hence, it is not surprising that, in their
wisdom, the African heads of State and Government,
in 1969, after the adoption of the Lusaka Manifesto,’
appointed one of their number to come here and warn
the international community of the dangers to which it
was exposing itself if the application
of policies of
oppression,
exploitation
and racial discrimination
continued. The Lusaka Manifesto reflected not only
the deep aspirations of the African peoples but also
the concerns of all men fighting for a better world, the
very world that the Charter obliges us to build for
our salvation.

29. That, then, is the true situation
in South
Africa. It is cruel, inhuman, degrading and intolerable
for its victim and for all of us. Also, and above all,
it bears the seeds, today more than ever, of serious
concern and danger.
30. The proponents
of apurrheid are inevitably
moving towards an armed confrontation,
towards war.
War has already been declared on the non-white
populations of South Africa, where the two liberation
movements, the African National Congress of South
Africa and the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania,
have long been conducting their struggle, and there
is war already on the borders of neighbouring States;
in the very near future war may very well approach
the threshold of all those countries which oppose
apartheid, if this scourge is not destroyed in’time.

27. My delegation
cannot speak of the grave
problem of South Africa and apartheid
without in
the first place stressing the basic error, an error
entailing so many serious consequences, committed
by the founders of our Organization in admitting the
representatives of the white racists of South Africa,
who, beginning in 1909, had made racial segregation
a political philosophy
and a form of government.
The, exclusion of non-whites from the South African
Parliament, the subsequent refusal to allow non-whites
to strike, the herding of ,those persons into reservations, by force, have been nothing more or less than
the application
of the deplorable
theory of racial
superiority.

31.

The

United

Nations

quite

correctly
called
and it perceived
the danger on the many occasions when it declared
that apartheid was a threat to international
peace
and security. However that may be, South Africa.
has been arming feverishly and on a massive scale
with the co-operation of those which have included
South Africa within their system of defence, the
States members of NATO
[North Atlantic Treury
Orgunizution],
some
of whom
have
special
responsibilities
in the Council.

apartheid a crime against mankind,

28. That theory became a real system in 1948 with
the coming to power of the National Party, led by

32. One need only dwell for a moment on some of
the laws and regulations
enacted’ and applied in
South Africa against the opponents of upurrheid,

’ Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 106, document A/7754.

4

an impressive list of which may be found in one of
the reports submitted
this year by the Special
Committee on apartheid,2 to realize how far apartheid
is a challenge to human values. These rules and
regulations are intended to turn the “beloved country”
which Alan Paton wrote about into an immense
ghetto. They are an expression of hatred at the
service of destruction.

present deliberations
must ensure the rapid and
pffective implementation
of resolution 3207 (XXIX),
in accordance with the relevant provisions of Article 6
of the Charter. By so doing, the Security Council
will be acting in line with the universal action taken
against apartheid by the international
Organization,
by the specialized agencies and by world public
opinion.

33. The system of apartheid is thus in every respect
in flagrant
contradiction
to the purposes
and
principles of the Charter and the Universal Declaration
of Human
Rights. Accordingly,
the Government
practising it cannot claim to be part of the Organization.
Today one readily perceives the hypocrisy in the
utterances of the South African representative,
Jan
Smuts, at the San Francisco Conference in 1945,
when he spoke about the need to include in the
Preamble to the Charter certain specific provisions
on the safeguarding of human rights. The Pretoria
regime by its own doings has put itself outside the
pale of the international
community in respect of the
governing principles of that community.

37. We believe that the argument that expelling the
Pretoria regime would set a dangerous precedent,
has no real validity. What was indeed a dangerous
precedent in the opinion of my delegation, was allowing
the South African Fascist regime to become part of
the Organization.
We believe that it is up to the
Security Council to rectify an error which was
committed
in the emotional
aftermath of victory.
No Member of the Organization
can be allowed any
longer to ignore a fact which has long been so
obvious in the United Nations, and that is, that the
South African regime is in no way qualified to sit in
our midst, and it must be driven from our ranks
in the interests of the Organization itself.

34. It must also be recognized that in addition to
its constant violations of the principles of the Charter,
the South African regime is the only one which
has been in open conflict with the international
Organization,
first, because of its occupation by force
of Namibia,
a Territory
falling directly under the
jurisdiction
of the United
Nations,
and secondly,
because of the powerful support which it is openly
giving to the illegal white racist regime in Southern
Rhodesia.

38. Expulsion, then, is the only appropriate sanction
to apply against the white racist regime in South
Africa. As the contents of Articles 5 and 6 of the
Charter indicate, the authors of the Charter realized
that the Organization,
in its long march towards
peace and progress, would at one time or another
have to adopt grave but just decisions on the suspension
or expulsion of Member States which persistently
violated the commitments
they had freely entered into.
39. Today, more than ever before, the United
Nations, because of the unspeakable and intolerable
behaviour of one of its Members, is at a cross-roads
and must make a choice which will be decisive for
its future: to enforce the Charter and to see that
justice is done, or to turn its back on its responsibilities
and become an accomplice of a regime which is the
shame of all mankind.

35. Certain Members have repeatedly told us that
rebukes and warnings will suffice to bring the
proponents of apartheid to their senses. But we would
merely point out to them that the racist Government
in Pretoria has never paid any heed to the many
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council calling for a peaceful settlement of
the problem of apartheid, nor has it ever responded
to the solemn appeals which have been made to it
by the Presidents of the General Assembly since
1970. It is this scorn which the racists in Pretoria
have constantly shown for our Organization
which
impelled the General Assembly to act as it felt it
had a duty to act by calling on the Security Council
in resolution
3207 (XXIX)
of 30 September
to
reconsider relations between the United Nations and
South Africa.

40. Ever since the adoption of the historic resolution 3207 (XXIX), the hopes of 17 million non-whites
in South Africa, of all African States, and of all the
opponents of apartheid,
have been placed on the
Security Council. We wish to place our trust in the
Council. We do not believe that any of its members
will continue to ignore the untold suffering of an
entire people, or the real and increasing danger to
international
peace and security because of the
persistence of the inhuman policy of apartheid.

36. In accordance
with the relevant provisions
of Article 24 of the Charter, the Security Council,
in the discharge of its primary responsibility
in the
maintenance
of peace, acts on behalf of Member
States “in order to ensure prompt and effective action
by the United Nations”.
Thus, the decisions which
the Council will be adopting at the conclusion of its
7Tbid., Twenry-ninrh

41. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of the United
Republic of Tanzania, whom I invite to take a place
at the Council table and to make a statement.
42. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania): At
the very outset let me take this opportunity to extend
to the brother delegation of Iraq our very sincere

Session, Supplement No. 22R, part two.

5

and

cozdolences o~~~?~~~titnely.death.of the.dislinguished
FPreign Minister & th8 cogntry. We request that
deIega@a t@ be gos$jensug& to convey onr feelings
to the Government attd -people of Iraq as- well as. to
the bereaved .f$mIly,.

“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights.,
in the dignity and worth of the human person, in
the equal rights of men. aad wo.men and of nations.
large and small”.

43. Mi. President, it is not simple. courtesy or, an
They ate telling words from an exhausted world
exercise in dipIomatic,nicety when f say how gratifying
lamenting the disasters. the Second World War had
it is to the Tanzanian delegation to take part in the
discus&n .on this important -item under your
caused, yet they are also words of faith and trust
pre’sIde@zy.Ygu represent a country with. close and
in man. They summarize in part the very causes of
brotherly ties with.my own country. You represent a .. violencesand wars and also the reason for the existence
of the Charter and the Oganization. To underscore
head. of State heId:in high esteem in our continent
the fundamental philosophy contained in those words,
both for.his statesm_ans_hip
and for his commitment to
Article, 1of.the Charter, which embodies the purposes
the. cause of- African freedom and international
unders@n.ding. GWB
your’ personal qualities of
and principles of the Charter, and Articles 55 and
56 provide those very ideals in explicitly binding
competenc~e, dedication and. fairness the Security
terms.
Cutmcll can. be assured of an effective President.
Im$%?!~-the, digiiifie-d and efficient- manfter in which
yoy5haye cqndqcted. the; deIib_erations of the Council
46. To join- and belong to the United Nations is to
is eloquent. testimony that our total faith and make a solemn reaffirmation of faith in fundamental
human tights, in the dignity and,worth of the- human
confidence in. yo.u is_.Qroperly placed. _.
person, in. the equal rights of men and women and
44. While the Security Council is considering the of nations large and small, and to undertake to
issUe of the telati-ons- between the United Nations. make every effort towards the realization of those
and&uth Africa, there is yet another aspect of your
rights.
presidency which merits special mention. Members of
the Ufl&d-:Nations- vividly recollect the- visit ‘of ydur
47. As a founder Member of the Organization,
esteemed Presi@nt, Mr. Ahidjo to Turtle Bay and his South Africa not only agreed to be bound by al1
memorable address to the- General Assembly in
those principles of the Charter but-and this is
1969.’ President ‘Ahidjo came to New York with a interesting to note-it was one of the participants
specific mission, As the current chairman of the at the San Francisco Conference that pressed for the
Assembly of Heads Qf State and Government of the inclusion of a declaration of human rights in the
Organizaticm of African Unity., he had come to
Charter. The then head of the Government of South
p@sent Africa’s Case ofl the question of- southern
Africa, Field Marshal -Smuts, insisted:
.
Africai Those:of u$who. were fortunate enough to be
present -still.-rememb.er the d-egree of elequence and
-“I would suggest that the Charter should contain
sitlcerity with which he presented the histofic Lusaka
at its very outset and in its preamble a declaration
Ma.nifesto; Acclaimed by almost the entire United
of human rights and of. the common faith which
Mations m.embers.hi,. as a. document of reasun, the
has sustained the Allied peoples. in their bitter and
Manifesto, a$ ‘we if l$itnow; fell ofi toially-deaf ears
prolonged struggle for the vindication of those
in so far as the authorities of Pretoria were concerned.
rights and that faith. This war .. . has. been a war
It is therefore only fitting that it should fall to you,
of ideologies, of conflicting philosophies of life and
a worthy. represenutive of an eminent African
coticting faiths .. . We have fought for justice and
decency and for the fundame.niaI freedoms and
st&!esman, to preside uver the Council when free
‘Africa h-as t&en the: initiative of pursuing, the only
rights- of man, which are basic- to all human
alternative course. it$t to us subsequent to South
advancement and progress and peace.“*
Africa’s categorical and. persistent reje.ction of the
road af reason.. There could be no better candidate
Indeed, the victory over nazism was considered a
to&ad:the CDruncil?sonslaught against South Africa’s
triumph for justice and decency and, the fundamenta1
delinquency- and recalcitrancefreedoms and rights of men which are basic to all
human advancement and progress and peace; It. was
45. The- opening words of .the Charter, whereon
therefore proper that the basic purposes and principles
the Organization- is based-and whicli is the only
of the Charter should be the achievement, of Shose
exi.$ting hope for the furure of humanity-are the folgoals.
lowing:
48. It was not then considered, as is” now asserted,
“determined to save su.cceeding..generations from
to be outside the concern, of the Members wh%
.the. scotirge of- war, which twice in our lifetime
happened to the fundamental freedoms and tights of
63s brought untold :szorrow.to mankind?’
’ Ibid., TwentySfourlhSession,

4 Documents of the United Nations
tional Organization, vol. I, p. 425.

Plekary Meetings, 1780thmeeting.
6

Conference

on Interna-

ma-nin one of those States, Nor were those matters
relga1ed to being purely tie internal affairs of
a--St@. On the contrary, those questions-ques1ions
s~f~~dame~~aIfreedoms, quesrionsofhuman digpity*VC: Beemiea to. be so central to the whole pursuit.
of peace t&r- they had to b’eei and indeed were,
incworated in the binding provisions of the Charter
itself’ a_nd tat&r elaborated and enshrined in the
Uniuerbai I&[&ration of Human -Rights. In resolution
&er resolution the United Nations has confirmed the
view that the problem of human rights is too
impormnt ro. the Success of the Organization to be
shoved asid as be-ing purely an internal affair of a
Member State. For to relegate it to being a purely
domestic af’fair is to shake the very foundation of the
Organizatiun-namely, joint action to achieve .its’
objectives. And, by signing the Charter, South
Afr&a agreed to be bound by this principiti of joint
action.
_. .
49. gou@i AfiSca, in spite .of its pubic acceptance
of its obli@ti.ons under, the Charter, has treated the
Charter and the United Nations with utter conrempt,
and has done- ss.petsisteetljr and without the slightest
atI:ntion to t$e admonilion of the rest of the
Members and the opinion of mankind as a whoie. It is
-not a case of unintentional failure to observe the
Charter. Ail of us represented here have in one way
or another violated the provisions of the Charter at
one time or another. But we ail try to abide by the’
Charter. It is one thing to try, to fail, and to try
again. It is an entirely different matter to make a
dellBerate policy of the denial of human rights and
to pursue- that policy.

ofTAsian origin th& vote and made it very d&cult
fdr Coloureds to vo@ The following year that
Parliament enacted t&z Proh-&ition.af Mixed Marriages
Act. This law made mar-r&g&. between whites and
blacks illegal. .A person” who contracted .such a
marriage outside South Africa would not have the
validity .of. that niatiiage recpgnized’ in South Africa.
I need not remind the--representatives here that this
was in direct contravention of article 16, paragraph 1
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
states:
_

“Men and women of full age, without any
limitation due to race, nationality or religion, have
the right to mar&&to
found a family”.

That infamous act was iater followed by the so-called
Immorality Act and the immorality Amendment. Act.
The effects of those acts have been disastrous in
-terms, of humati relationship ifi South Africa today.
They have provided more reason for oppressing the
.-black- people of Soutti ‘Africa and p’eoples -of other
races in that country, as evidenced by the following
report:
‘.‘Whoie families suffkred when a male or female
broke this sex law. There h&e also been cases of
cotipies who have been living together for years
and .had grown-up children who found their
bedrooms-invaded by the police at the dead of the
night ... . men have committed suicide after being
charged under the act .;; Particularly tragic was
the case of a white painter .. . who asked the
authorities to reclassify him as Coioured, as he
-_did not want to be parted from his Coloured wife
and their small chiIdren.”

!Xlio; This attitide manifested itself in the socioeconpmic and political structure of South Africa even
52. This was not a quotation from a United Nations
bef&e the amival of the Charter. But it is- ironic
docume.tit. Since the representative .of the uparzheid
and absurd that the entrenchment of this creed into ... r4gime yesterday demonstrated. a pathoIbgical
the goiitlcal and constitutional instruments .of the obsession -for -United Nations documents, I have
State should folIow immediately the birth of the United
endeavoured in my statement to refrain as far as
Nations which South Afi-ica itself helped to create ,possibie from making any reference to those
and in the authorship of whose Charter South Africa
documents. The statement I have quoted appears in a
was instrumental. For it is reported tliat just before
book written by a noted South African journalist and
the birth of the United Nations the then ruling party
writer, Mr. Jan Botha, in his book, Verwoerd is
had almost discarded the creed of apartheid, and it
Dead, which was published in Cape Town, in South
was in 1948, soon after the creation of the United
Africa, the-very land of apartheid.
Nations, that the creed Vcasrevived and embedded
in the political manifesto of the Government of
53. In othei words, instead of protecting the family
South Africa. We can therefore say that South Africa
as article 16, paragraph 3, of the Declaration requires,
repudiated the Charter as soon as it has signed it.
the South African Government attacks the families
And ever since then the apartheid rCgime has pursued
of those who are not whites. But as if all this was
and intensified the policies of apartheid in unprecenot enough;. discrimination continues even in the
dented contempt of the Charter.
enforcement of those infamous acts. Here again Jet
me borrow Mr. Botha’s words. He says:
51: In 1948, the National Party of South Africa
waged its campaign on the basis of aparrheidi Thsls, .“During the following year Up :to June 1966
it began laying ground for the theoretical justification
seven Bantu women were convicted while their
of racism and oppression. In that year the South
co-accused-seven white men-were discharged.”
-.
African ParIiament passed two laws, the Asiatic
Laws Amendment Act and the Electoral Laws
54. To back these notorious schemes and the other
Amendment Act, which respectively denied the people
measures which the South African Government has
‘.
7

,_

embarked upon, there is a system of registration on
the basis of race. The Population
Registration
Act
provides for the registration
of every individual
according to race and obliges the Coloured and black
population
to carry passes everywhere they go. It
is this infamous tool, together with the Group Areas
Act, which the South African Government
uses to
continue herding the black people into the ghettoes
which that Government
has established for specific
population groups. Even a South African Parliamentarian, by the name of Eric Winchester, had this to
say in the racist South African Parliament on 23 May
1973 about these ghettoes and their effects on the
populations which are herded in them:

57. With the same design of keeping the Africans
in a position of permanent
subservience,
certain
categories of jobs are not available to the non-white
population
in South Africa. The so-called Job
Reservation
Act prohibits employers from making
available and employees from holding certain jobs
if they are not white. Thus this notorious
Act’
contravenes
the Universal
Declaration
of Human
Rights, Article 23, paragraph 1 of which states as
follows:

“The attitude in the [black] townships which we
have created is frightening. The slums and ghettoes
we have created are breeding bitterness which is
a threat to our security. Frustration
is leading
to bitterness, bitterness to hate and hatred to crime
and the breaking down of law and order. In our
mania to separate, we have created scars in every
city and in the minds of the people ”

58. There are many instances of discrimination
and.
violation of the principles of our Charter and of the
Universal Declaration which I could quote. I shall not
tire the Council by commenting
on all of them.
However,
I shall refer to the machinery
of
oppression which the Pretoria regime has set up in
order to enforce its diabolical
schemes in South
Africa. In their fanatic desire to enforce discrimination
and white supremacy, the authorities in Pretoria have
adopted strong measures of repression comparabIe
only to the acts of madness practised by Hitler.
Detention without trial and restriction to particular
areas are the order of the day. They have banned
all organized parties and groups which do not support
their evil system. Torture of political prisoners has
become a daily routine. The shooting of people who
are opposed to apartheid
is commended
and the
principle
of the Declaration
regarding
peaceful
assembly and the expression of ideas is completely
negated.

“Everyone has the right to work, to free choice
of employment,
to just and favourable conditions
of work and to protection against unemployment.”

55. The creation of these ghettoes is not the only
result of this act. Recently, the country has been
divided into sections for the Africans, white and
Coloured. The black population
has invariably been
given the most unproductive,
the most unhealthy and
the smallest part in the relationship
to population.
The whites invariably have been given the largest
part and the most productive, and all the boundaries
have been made in such a way that all the mineral
wealth is in the white areas. The whites, who
constitute
17.5 per cent of the population,
get
87 per cent of the land while the black people get
only 13 per cent. The creation of the so-called
homelands has resulted in unemployment,
malnutrition, more arbitrary arrests and detentions and a
general debilitation
of the African population.

59. Thus we have seen in South Africa the
introduction
of Draconian measures such as the socalled Suppression of Communism
Act, the Terrorism
Act and other similar measures calculated to stifle
the activities of the people of South Africa who are
opposed to the inhuman policies of apartheid. The
so-called Minister of Justice is given powers in those
Acts to deprive any person who is listed as a
Communist
of his livelihood,
and to exclude him
from all social contacts. In addition, it must be noted
that in South Africa there is no due process of
law, which in itself is a violation of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.

56. In the field of education,
the South African
Government
has pursued a policy calculated to keep
the non-whites in a permanent subservient position
within the South African society. As far back as 1953,
the South African Parliament
passed the so-called
Bantu Education Act. In a debate in Parliament,
Mr. Verwoerd, then the so-called Minister for Native
Affairs, had this to say on the type of education
that he envisaged for the so-called Bantus in South
Africa-and
this is the type of education which the
representative of the apartheid regime had the audacity
to boast about. yesterday:

60. The report by Mr. R. A. Falk, an observer at
the trial of Tuhadeleni
and others, a trial of the
patriots of Namibia in South Africa, is evidence of
this disrespect for the rule of law. That report,
published by the International
Commission of Jurists,
shows how such trials are in fact not trials but
political
tools designed to entrench the apartheid
authorities in South Africa. Mr. FaIk concluded his
report with the following words:

“When I have control of native education, I will
reform it so that natives will be taught from childhood
to realize that equality with Europeans is not for
them. . . . People who believe in equality are not
desirable teachers for natives.”
It is on that supremacist and racist foundation
South African education is based.

that

“The trials with their fanfare, then,
understood as efforts by the Government
8

must be
of South

Africa to consolidate
dictatorial powers”.

‘still

further

its claims

of

truth, voices of reason, voices of justice, are calling
attention to the dangers posed by apartheid in all its
manifestations.
This world Organization
can ignore
those voices only at our collective peril.

61. The system in’ ‘South Africa is not different
from that system which was fought against in the
Secund World War. It was the supremacist system
which Hitler wanted to impose on the world which
caused that war. Hitler had described his plans in his
book, Mein Kampf, as follows:

65. The problem of apartheid and racial discrimination professed, preached and practised by a Member
of the Organization
is a critical test of the very
sincerity of each and every single Member, and of the
seriousness of the Charter. If the world derived, as
it did, great hope from the adoption of the Charter
by the world community
of nations and from the
birth of the United Nations,
it was because the
Charter and ‘the United Nations constitute a solemn
promise to mankind that nations will make every
effort to stamp out not only wars and international
conflicts but also the evils that deny man dignity
and freedom, evils which are admittedly
the causes
of all wars and human suffering.

“A people that fails to preserve the racial purity
of its blood thereby destroys the unity of the soul
of the nation in all its manifestations.”
It was in pursuance of such a supremacist conception
that the world was plunged into catastrophe. It was
among other things to prevent the emergence of such
a supremacist doctrine, with its attendant dangers,
that the United Nations was established. Yet today
we are faced with an identicai supremacist ideology
practised in South Africa.
62. On 16 August 1963, Verwoerd,
then
Minister of South Africa, said this regarding
supremacy:

66. The undertaking we made to men, women and
children the world over must not, unless we condemn
ourselves as hypocritical,
be an idle promise devoid
of conscious determination
and conscientious efforts
to fulfil it. If we said, as we did, through the Charter
that we were determined
not only to observe
individually
the provisions of the Charter but also to
take joint action in co-operation for the achievement
of the purposes set out therein, we could not but
be expected to demonstrate
the seriousness of our
word. Failure to do so would make us appear irresponsible, to say the least.

Prime
white

“Let me be very clear about this. When I talk
of the nation of South Africa, I talk of the white
people of South Africa. . . . I see the National Party
today-and
I say it openly-not
as an Afrikaner
or English or Afrikaner-English
party in the future
whatever it might have been in the past. I see it
as a party that stands for the preservation of the
white man, of the white government
in South
Africa.”
This supremacist
ideology
South Africa today.

is the motive

force

67. The existence among our membership
of not
simply a delinquent culprit but a sworn enemy of
human dignity who brazenly slaps the Organization in
the face is not only an insult to the United Nations
but also an indictment
of the whote of the rest of
the membership
for permitting
the betrayal of the
hope which the Charter inspired in our peoples,
lifting humanity from the agonizing consequences of
Nazi tyranny, for our pledges and pronouncements
are displayed in black and white in the Charter and
read by our peoples throughout
the world. Our
actions are easily measured by them against our
words, and we are accountable for the contradictions
which we display and the slackness we allow ourselves
in taking the appropriate action when it is demanded
of us that we do so.

in

63. John Vorster, the present Prime Minister of the
apartheid regime, is quoted as saying the following
in his young days-and 1 must stress that this, again,
is not a quotation from a United Nations document
but a quotation from Mr. Vorster:
“We stand for Christian nationalism,
which is
an ally of National Socialism, you can call the antidemocratic principle ‘dictatorship’
if you wish. In
Italy it is called fascism, in Germany,
German
national socialism and in South Africa Christian
nationalism.”

68. At this meeting the Security Council is called
upon to pause and consi et seriously whether the
deliberate,
repugnant police
d”e s of South Africa in
serious violation of the Charter are consistent with
the membership
of this conscious defaulter in the
United Nations. While we are sitting in this chamber,
the whole of mankind,
let alone the ,suffering and
humiliated
non-white populations in South Africa, is
watching anxiously to see whether or not we were serious with our pledges, whether we have not forgotten
the human degradation which we resolved no longer
to tolerate among us; indeed, whether we still hold

No wonder that a State in the hands of Mr. John
Vorster should today be continuing
this policy of
supremacy and discrimination.
64. When voices of reason in Europe
called
attention to the true nature of nazism and what
Hitler represented for the future of mankind,
the
world ignored those voices at the price of a tragic
war to restore freedom. Today the situation in South
Africa is a reincarnation
of-nazism. Again, voices of
9
..._

the Charter arid. the. United Nations as important
instruments and symbols of hope for all. The moment
of the test of integrity, the integrity of our words
and actions and of our Organization, has now arrived.
We cannot afford to fail the test. Mankind, I submit,
will never forgive us.
69. Throughout the history of the Organization there
has not been any segment of the membership, not
one single Member, that has at any time, even
obliquely, sought to justify or rationalize the policies
propounded and practised by the Pretoria regime. The
reason is obvious. For while many of the Member
States have short-comings in the policies relating to
the rights of individuals, only South Africa has as a
State doctrine the principle that human beings are not
equal and are not to be treated as equal. Membership ’
in an Organization presupposes adherence to and
observance of the fundamental principles upon which
the Organization is founded and the goals for which
it aims. The Charter is based on the cardinal principle
that human beings. are equal and that they. must
enjoy all the fundamentai freedoms that are the natural
and inalienable rights of man. The Pretoria regime
refutes in theory and denies in practice this
fundamental. principle.. Thus, where in all countries
human beings can seek recourse. to national .and.
governmental institutions. to right the wrongs done to
them, it is only in South Africa that the national
and government institutions are utilized to wrong
and suppress the people. Hence, it is this fundamental
issue, that has made all the Members denounce the
Pretoria ibgime. And it is this aspect which has given
South Africa the very distinction of being the single
country whose policies -have featured1 on every
agenda for analysis and for efforts to redress the
evils visited upon the people of South Africa.
The Security Quncil needs no retelling of the
crimes that the racist regime in South Africa has
committed in, contravention of the Charter. These,
as I have already indicated, are a matter of common
knowledge and are-fully documented. Nor does it need
to be reminded how often the Council’s decisions on
South Africa with its apartheid and racist policies
have been ignored..with contempt and with impunity.
The General Assembly has ad rmmeum adopted
resolution after resolution, just to be rebuffed with
further intensifcation of those very violations which
that regime is called upon to desist from. And for
the last four sessions the General Assembly rejected
the credentials.of the.racist regime and made it known
that- it was a serious, warning to that regime. But
the warnings, Iike most warnings, do not .seemto have
impressed. the agartheid
regime. The specialized
agencies and other intema2ionaI forums, like the
Grganization of African Unity, have spared no effort
in their endeavours to correct the Fascist mentality
of that regime, but these again, have equally fallen
on the barren rock of bigotry.

70.

71. The sum total of all ~&se. $3 that &uth. a&Z!
has been given sufficient admonition t.o$o.nform @th
the accepted international- tlorms. and standards of
conduct cequired of a Men&r: of, Ihe @-ganization.,
Nevertheless, the apartheid ttgif!% has: grown in. iIs
arrogance and defiance. of the ~o.rld cc~mp~~&!The General Assembly th~erefore has correctly de:cide&
that the time has come to! reconsider the relatioI!s. C6
the United Nations with South Africa, Indee~&~the
Organization of African Unity, whichtook the initiativefor that decision, has already: come. to:lth_e,conclusion..
that the membership of South, Africa, in. the- United.
Nations is an anomalous contradiction of the;Organization. The Charter itself, inArticle.6, pro&les.
in clear terms:
“A Member of the Un.ited NXions which ha&
persistently violated the Principles contained:in:the
present Charter may be expelled from the:
Organization by the General. (&sembly. upon. ihe!
recommendation of the Security~Councili”
South Africa has not only persistently. viol.ated: the
principles contained in the. Charter4 but prides.,its&
on those violations. It has rejected the Charter ‘and:
does not qualify to remain in the- Organization.
Indeed, by submitting. this queslion. to. the $ecurity.
Council, the General Assembly has indicated that it.&
high time the United Nations puriied itselfby rid.din&
itself of the blemish and stigma. 0f associ@ng
itself with racial bigotry institutio1nalized. The: U?iiRd
Nations cannot coexist with racial. bigotry su
institutionalized.
72. Proceeding from this fact it is.@ be noted. tha1
often it has been stated that among the- Member~af
the Organization the difference lies-botin,whethEr We ”
universally : abhor aparthefd but. in the approach
towards eliminating that cancer: in 6ur. &~ly- oh@%
We would sincerely and most ho.nestlj$ke. to;g&eYE~
this. However, there are. Members. among us wI&?ip
by professing the. theme of “difference in approach”,.
have co-operated with South Africa, c.ollaboraEd.
with South Africa and, contrary ta.their prono.unDl$
ments, encouraged the Pretoria regimeinits rnisguid&!!
and evil policies. Is it truly realistic- to believe? that
it is possible to.deal with. a maiigtiant tumoux?without
radical surgery?
73. Fratemization with South- Afr!ica. entrenehe$?&he
evils of uparrheid. Half-hearted measures- cannfl: tie
an adequate substitute for the surge-ry,sb indispensable
to remove the cancerous eIemen2 in the. Qrganizatti
The United Nations cannot- coexists wiih a~pti&?@
South, Africa. Any member qf the,.SeeurLty ~uI@!l.
which disregards thisupinion af: this.cn’ticajt:~~o~:
wil1, ‘in so doing, cunfirm, tie. disre,ar!$; tith. whlC$
it treats mankind.
74. To pretend that the principle of u.nlYeaal@
demands that South Africa should remain in the
United Nations is to distort the very sense of that

.:, ._

principle. For it would be to assert tzat universality
is an empty word. If.that were valid, would there be
any sense in including Articles 4, 56 and, especially,
A&&Z 6 of the Charter? Would it not be to deny the
Charter of any. conte-nt,. if not to ridicule the very
principle &universality? We will only render discredit
to the signatories of the Charter to argue in this
manner.
75. Those who think that South Africa will see
reason by t-he repetition of resolutions, resolutions
which are not followed by action, are mistaken,
even if innocently so. The presence of South Africa
in a respectable Organization like this only gives it
a cloak of respectability and a cover for its condemned,
repulsive and nefarious policy of apartheid and racial
discrimination, South Africa’s presence in the
Organizatiun gives the impression that it subscribes
to the purposes. and principles of the Charter. That
will be for the United Nations the biggest cover-up
of all the- cover-ups in its: history. The exhortations
contained in the numerous resolutions of the United
Nations have already proved ineffective. It is therefore
only by dissociating itself from South Africa that the
United Nations can demonstrate to the world how
mutually exclusive are the United Nations and
uparzheid South Africa.
76. The time has come: this is the hour. The hand
of history is waiting, anxiously waiting, to record a,
momentous decision of our time. Will it record the
words and decisions of courageous men, who call
for the start of and set the pace for our race to
universal justice, a race which indeed we have to win
and must win? Will it record decisions of men of
destiny, thedestiny ofuniversal justice under sovereign
equality. for all men and all peoples? Or will it record
the words of prevarication and of States afraid of
their own responsibilities and indifferent to the
suffering of innocent men in South Africa?
77. This is- the time when the Security Council and
in particular its permanent members with their powers
of veto must be aware of their responsibilities and
reconcile them with the hopes and expectations of
mankind. There should be no escaping- this
responsibility. The Council has the opportunity to
write the tlrst chapter in the book of human justice,
thereby closing, if one may be allowed to hope, the
last chapter of the book of injustice in that part of
the world. For we know that no people can. become
immune to suffering and persecution because they
have been persecuted and have suffered so long.
We know that no people can become immune to
..human degrad.ation simply because they-have suffered
degradation so-iong. And history teaches us that they
will struggle and continue to struggle until they have
overcome the oppression irrespective of the decision
we make in the Council. It is only fitting and wise,
however, that the Council should associate itself
fully with such a legitimate struggle.

78. We want to make it quite clear therefore that
if we do not take the decision that we should take,
then the Council will be writing another chapter of
injustice. Even before the momentous decision of the
General Assembly to reject the, credentials of the
South African regime, that regj.me’s intransigence
was a matter of continuous record. You heard
yesterday the representative of the apartheid regime
make his flippant -excuses for- apartheid.
There
was no apology, there were no regrets, only another
unashamed defence of the very policies that stand
discredited and are perpetually condemned in the
Organization. If, therefore, we do not take the
correct decision now, that intransigence will, through
that failure to take action, be abetted and encouraged
by those of you who sit as members of the Council
and fail to take action. And history will not absolve
you.
79. Let me also say this: those who claim to be the
guardians of bur Charter should indeed be the last
people to take any action that would undermine it.
Is this too much to expect of them? Those who eat
and pride themselves on eating at the table of
apartheid must recognize that their pleasure comes
from the sweat of upurtheid slavery. They do not
therefore escape the guilt for apartheid, for they help
to give sustenance and nourishment to the policies
of apartheid.
80. My African colleagues who have preceded me
have presented more than eloquently Africa’s stand
on this vital issue. I need only refer, for example,
to the brilliant statement made by a brother and
colleague, the representative
of Mauritius,
Mr. Ramphul [!797th meeting]. Yet, and this is an
important fact, no amount of cataloguing can
adequately document the iniquities that are daily
being perpetrated against the innocent people of
South Africa. At the twenty-eighth session of the
General Assembly we had this to say:
“each day that apartheid
is allowed to reign
supreme in South Africa constitutes 24 hours of
scandal and disgrace for civilized humanity and the
Organization”.s
This situation has not changed, and in fact would be
made worse if the Security Council failed in this
hour of decision.
81. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fro& French):
The next speaker is the representative of Qatar.
I invite him to take a ‘place at the Council table and
to make-his statement. -_
82. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar): Mr. President, at the outset
of my remarks I should like to associate myself
with my colleagues who have extended to you their
s OfJiiul
Records
uf the Gene&l
Assembly,
Twenty-eighth
Session, Plennty
Meetings;
2133rd meeting, para. 62.

warm congratulations
on the occasion of your
assumption of the highly important post of President
of the Council. Your presence in this post is a tribute
to the people of Africa and the third world and
constitutes a recognition
of your high abilities and
wisdom in conducting the deliberations of the Council.
I wish also to thank you for allowing me to state
the views of my delegation on a subject which is
a cause of great concern to the Government
and
people of the State of Qatar.

and has subjected the Territory and its people to the
worst form of exploitation.
Furthermore,
the vast
degree of military and economic co-operation between
the evil regime of South Africa and the illegal
regime of Southern Rhodesia is in violation of the
sanctions imposed against the latter regime and is an
additional indication
that the South African regime
has no regard for the United Nations.
87. It is indeed a cause for wonder that the
Organization, which considers apartheid to be a crime,
should allow a regime which glorifies and lives by
this crime to be represented in it. Article 6 of the
Charter states:

83. My delegation strongly welcomes the decision of
the General Assembly, taken on 30 September 1974,
which calls upon the Security Council to review the
relationship
between the United Nations and South
Africa. We are all aware that the white racist minority
regime of South Africa has consistently violated the
resolutions of the Council and the Assembly ever
since the founding of the United
Nations.
That
regime has further conducted itself in a manner most
offensive to all decent human beings and has flagrantly
violated the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal
Declaration
of Human Rights. It is a
regime whose arrogance
and firm belief in its
superiority have deprived millions of our brothers in
mankind,
the black majority
of South Africa, of
their very humanity.

“A Member of the United Nations which has
persistently violated the priciples contained in the
present
Charter
may be expelled
from the
Organization
by the General Assembly upon the
recommendation
of the Security Council.”
My delegation is firmly convinced that the South
African regime has acted and continues to act in
contravention
of the Charter and urges that this
Article be invoked for the purpose of expelling South
Africa from the Organization.
88. My delegation, which supports the principle of
universality,
believes that the expulsion of South
Africa would not in any manner violate this principle.
On the contrary, such an act affirm it. If only 17 per cent
of the population of South Africa enjoy political rights
by. virtue of their belonging to the white race, while
the black majority are denied their most elementary
rights, how can such a minority’s
claim to represent
the entire population be acceptable to anyone?

84. Aparrheid is modem-day
slavery. There are no
words eloquent enough to describe the spiritual,
mental and physical suffering of the black people of
South Africa or the degree of oppression to which they
have been subjected. We have all agonized over this
situation. We have lamented this situation. We have
adopted resolutions and recommendations.
But the
South African regime, instead of heeding the sombre
voice of world opinion, has intensified its policies
of repression. Murders, assassinations, kidnappings
and jailings of opponents of its evil policies are daily
occurrences. The reports of the Special Committee
on Apartheid6 give factual information on the policies
of oppression and on the arbitrary and inhuman
laws designed to suppress every voice of opposition.
I am certain that members of the Council are well
aware of the contents of these reports and I shall
therefore refrain from discussing them in detail.

89. We believe that it is the solemn duty of theSecurity Council to act decisively to punish a regime
that has already been expelled and excluded from the
World Health Organization,
the International
Labour
Organization,
the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization
and a host of
international
organizations and conferences.
90. It is now more evident than ever that we should
take concrete
steps towards
strengthening
the
effectiveness of the United Nations. One such step
would entail the co-operation of all, particularly
the
big Powers, in ensuring that the resolutions of the
Organization are implemented.
The contempt that the
regimes in South Africa, Southern Rhodesia and
Israel have shown for the repeated resohttions of the
United Nations severely impairs its effectiveness,
detracts from its prestige and discourages those
struggling to liberate themselves from the. colonial
yoke. The settler regimes of South Africa, Southern
Rhodesia and Israel have built themselves up on the
pain and suffering of the indigenous population.
In
fact, the Zionist regime of Israel went ‘so far as to
declare the continuous presence of the indigenous

85. The repeated warnings of the United Nations to
South Africa have gone unheeded. In the meantime,
the black population, which constitutes 83 per cent of
the total, has had no reprieve. We have a responsibility
to this people. Its hopes are pinned upon us. And
if we take no action, we shall only be strengthening
the hand of the racist regime.
86. In addition to its repression of the indigenous
black people of South Africa, the white minority
regime is continuing its illegal occupation of Namibia
in violation of the resolutions of the United Nations
6 Ibid.,
Supplement

Twenty-ninth
No. 22A,

part

Session,
two.

Supplement

No.

22

and

12

I’,

Palestinian Arabs to the undesirable and proceeded
to expel them from their homeland.
The unholy
alliance between Israel and South Africa or, perhaps
more aptly, between Zionism and apartheid is now
firmly sealed. Both are elitist. Both are exclusivist
and both are subjected to attacks by an enraged
world opinion.
So it is not surprising that South
Africa and Israel, which have recently elevated their
diplomatic representation
to the ambassadorial level,
find in each other a natural and trusted ally as well
as a comrade in isolation from the world community.
The high level of their co-operation
in ail fields,
particularly
the military field, is in line with their
unified goal, that of oppressing the indigenous population .

.

principles
of the Charter and
Declaration of Human Rights.

of the

Universal

96. By the same token, I would be remiss if I did
not commend your predecessor, Mr. Richard of the
United Kingdom, who held the office of President of
the Council for the month of September. I extend to
him
my
Government’s
and my
delegation’s
congratulations
on a job well done.
97. We had asked to be the last of the non-members
of the Security Council to speak in this debate
-although
I now understand
that we shall not
be-in order to remind this body that my Government’s
concern about the issues of apartheid even predates
the consideration
of those issues by the United
Nations.
Our concern stemmed
both from our
humanitarian
ideals and from our deep awareness
that a policy that was the offspring of racial conflict
in any part of the African continent not only would
lead to internal disorder but would very definitely
endanger the peace and stability of the whole continent.
Most of our leaders of Africa can well testify that
President Tolbert, like his predecessor, has been most
vocal in his commitment
to fight for the total
liberation of his brothers from oppression and every
form of racial domination.

91. The goal of world peace and security cannot be
attained as long as apartheid, colonialism,
occupation
by force and annexation continue to be tolerated. The
interdependence
of the world community has recently
been highlighted
by a series of important
events.
This interdependence
can be constructive
and
beneficial to ail only if it is based upon the Charter
of the United Nations and the noble aims and purposes
of the Organization.
92. In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
expulsion of the evil racist regime of South Africa
would enhance the prestige of the Organization,
would serve as a warning to those who persist in
defying its resolutions and would give support and
encouragement to the millions of South African blacks
who aspire to regain their elementary
rights and
their dignity as human beings.

98. My Government’s
position on the question of
apartheid,
in particular, has been consistently clear
and positive. This position can be traced back to
long before the year 1952, when the United Nations
became seized of this problem.
Thus, more than
20-odd years later, Liberia remains committed among
those who are ready to be counted in raising their
voices against the iniquitous
and diabolical policies
of apartheid
of the Government
of South Africa.
This crime touches the hearts of decent men and
women throughout the world and fills them with deep
sadness. It seems crystal clear that the Security Council
members, who must be the judges of this period of
world history, must act in the best interest of the
world community,
and in particular of the peoples
of Africa, whose brothers are being shattered and
unnecessarily denied respect for human dignity and
the fundamental freedoms given to them by God.

93. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Liberia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
94. Mr. HARMON
(Liberia): As this is the first time
I have spoken under your presidency, Sir, and most
especially as the Security Council is now seized of
one of the gravest problems facing Africa and the
world community,
nothing gives my country and me
more pleasure and satisfaction than to be able to
extend to you the warmest congratulations
of a sister
country,
and my own congratulations,
on your
assumption of the high office of President of the
Council, and to extend to you also our prayers and
best wishes that you will preside over and lead this
month’s meetings of the Council with credit to your
great country and people, the people of Africa and
the people of the world.

99. The very agonizing question of race conflict in
South Africa, resulting from the wicked and atrocious
policies of apartheid
of the Government
of South
Africa, has reached a climax and has thereby brought
into focus the need for all peace-loving countries to
exert concerted efforts to give evidence of their
Governments’
adherence to the avowed policies
guaranteed under the United Nations Charter. Their
failure to do that would be a denial of the ideal of
human equality, human worth and human dignity,
the foundation-stones
of civilization.

95. This also brings into focus the fact that,
correspondingly,
another worthy and illustrious son
of Africa is now presiding over the General Assembly
while you, Sir, preside over the Security Council,
when the Council has been requested to review the
relationship
between the United Nations and South
Africa in the light of South Africa’s violation of the

100. As a consequence
of my Government’s
consistent position on apartheid and because of the
importance we attach to that question, my Government
13

has authorized me to repeat, for emphasis, some of the
relevant portions of a statement made about 13 years
ago by Liberia’s representative, Mr. Barnes-who
unfortunately cannot be here because he is recovering
from his recent illness. Speaking on the question
of apartheid, he said:

Foreign Minister of South Africa managed to c.ast
a disapproving eye at almost all the nations
represented in the Assembly and endeavoured to
demonstrate that the benefits of South Afric-an
repression far exceed the blessings of equ.ality,
freedom and independence which is the happy lot
of the people of my country and elsewhere in A&a
and other parts of the word, In my view, th.at type
of defence surrounds the Minister7s statement and
the policies he defends with an aura of para.noia.

“In a moment I would like briefly to -recall the
development of this grave issue of apartheid in
the United Nations;’ but before I do so, I should
like to set the framework for my discussion.

“This incredible situation, where South Africa
insists that it alone is right and the rest of the
world is wrong has just produced a vote of censure
against South Africa. This censure should be such a
drastic shock to South Africa that its Government
must begin to heed cumulative Unit~ed Nations
resolutions and the entire force of world public
opinion which demands an end’ to apartheid, and
doming on top of South Africa’s break with the
British Commonwealth, has now virtuahy isolated
the South African Government from the rest of-the
world c.ommunity.

“Within that framework I should like to turn
to the Ch%rter and reread with you a- few of the
principles contained therein. These words cannot be
spoken too often, nor can we reflect on them too
frequently; first, from the second paragraph of the
Preamble: ‘To reaflirm faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity and worth of the human
person, in the equal rights of men and women and
of nations large and small’; secondly, from Article 1, paragraph 3: ‘To achieve international cooperation in solving international problems of an
economic, social, cultural, or humanitarian
character, and in promoting and encouraging respect
for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for
all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or
religion*; and more specifically, Articles 55 and
56, which I have no need to quote.

“There are certainly few, if any, precedents in
‘modem history where a Government has so
persistently pursued a wholly immoral, impractidal
policy in the face .of total condemnation. by the
rest of the world-including membership in interna&
tional organizations. This frustrating anomaly has
quite naturally led to strong movements within the
United Nations for the employment of political
and economic sanctions against the, Republic of
South Africa, and even for its expulsion from. the
United Nations.

“It was within this framework established for
the purpose of developing a just and secure world
order in which all men could live and grow in
an environment free of inequality, of hate, of fear
and of poverty that the General Assembly in 1952
undertook consideration of the question of
apartheid.

“These are, of course, exceedingly strong
measures-sanctions have rarely been invoked by
the United Nations, and no Member has yet
been expelled. But one can understand the
powerful emotional and practical. pressures behind
the movement for such drastic measures.

“Since that time, the General Assembly has
passed mat-y resolutions affirming apartheid to be
racial discrimination inconsistent with the Charter
and with the obligations of Members under
Article 56. Even so, the Government of South
Africa has persistently failed to comply with the
repeated requests and demands of the United
Nations and to revise its racial policies and
observe its obligations under the Charter.

“For South Africa’s attitude and.,behaviour- is
perhaps the most contemptuous rebuff that the
United Nations has experienced. It is particularly
difficult for us, African States, to witness this most
virulent and flagrant example of racial discrimination practised against our own b$others on our
own continent.

“Quite the c.ontrary, the Government of South
Africa has intensified its policies of apartheid
and stepped up its systematic repression of the
Africans, who constitute more than two thirds of
the population of the. country. Indeed, the
representative of South Africa has recently had
the effrontery to lecture the General Assembly
itself about the presumed necessities and virtues
of his Government’s apartheid policies, which
no other State supports.

“In South Africa racial discrimination is not just
an emotional or social attitude that good people
and good Governments deplore; it’is the offiicia1
policy of the South African Gover(nnent and. the
ruling white citizenry.
“What is this uparzheid pohcy? It i;s a doctrine
of racial ‘superiority, domination, arid~cxpToitatiQx~~
It holds that the black African is mentally inferior.
The then Uni.on Government’s Bureau for
Educational and Social Research undertook certain

“I might note that in extolling the virtues of
apartheid in the Assembly on 11 October last,’ the
’ ibid., Sixteenth Session, Plenary Meetings.

1033rd

meetig.

.

14

--.

,
I

surveys in an effort ta @wie~th3 daim. Tests were
&@carried~out by the Interdepartmental Committee
on Native Education of the. Union to prove what
.iS.a puQPoseful but unfounded assumption. They
%‘ere trot’ only limited in scope but taken without
t?eg@d to: the- environmental situation of those
tested orfo the nutritional differences between the
ATriCzn~atid’European children so tested.

caded

“In a,.survey
out by Mr. -Gunnar Myrdal,
: an eminent S‘wedish sociologist, by comparison of
the capacities of the Negro. and white nouulation
of the United States, m his work entilled’ An
Am~rtilan Dilemma, volume 1, 1944, he reached the
conclusion that findings regarding innate mental
abilities annot be drawn from comparisons between
children whose home environment and state of
nutrition differ as widely as do -those of the
African- and European children tested in South
ATrica.
“Of course, I should state. at once that Africans
and; for @at matter, other so-called Coloured
., ps.ol$eS-of the woild, -reject. out of hand; as false,
mischievous. and unfounded the doctrine of racial
superiority. ,In fact, in its true setting, its objectives
are based’oq fe.ar and the determination to continue
the dom1natlo.n and exploitation of them.
“We have been told time and time again by the
representatives of South Africa that the aim of
: a artheid was to help the ‘Bantu’. All reason
c ‘ctates an opposite, conclusion. For briefly, what
does the policy do: it puts ever greater limitations
on educational opportunities; it perpetuates dreadful
economic inequality and a -system of enforced
p.Overty.; it. restricts opportunities for decent
haustng; it: affords precious little freedom of
association; pre.cious little freedom of speech and
pce,ciou%little. freedom to participate in the political
affairs ofthegtate ofwhich these oppressed peoples
are#citizens..

“Our purpose has been fourfold: first, to alleviate
the abysmal conditions under which our brothers
on the African continent live; secondly, to help to
bring about a change in the attitude of the white
South Africans; thirdly, to focus world attention
on this most unhappy spectacle of human behaviour
so that the world will long remember with dismay
and disgust the things they have- seen through our
eyes; and, fourthlyi to help the United Nations
translate its high principles into living realities in
South Africa and throughout the world.0’9
101. The problem with which we are dealing at
present is not only vita1 ‘but one which goes to the
very root and foundation of human life and must
influence for good or ill the destiny and fate of the
United Nations among our people and all decent men
and women everywhere.
102. Our intervention at this time is not made either
as a matter of politics or out of selfish motives.
As was mentioned by the South African representative
yesterday, it is made only to try to influence the
resolution of a matter which Iies near the hearts not
only of the peoples of Africa but of the peoples of
our one world. Apartheid, racial discrimination, or
whatever name it is given or called by, can no longer
be tolerated. Africans as a rule hate no one and
would love everyone who allowed it. However, they
will not be put off or delayed for the simple reason
that they will no longer suffer the indignities to which
they have been subjected for far too long.
103. Apartheid has ever and anon been condemned
by the United Nations and other international bodies.
In 1961, the Conference of Heads of African and
Malagasy States met in Monrovia, and in May of that
year unanimously. adopted the following resolution
regarding the South African situation:
“Condemns unreservedly the theory and practice
of apartheid by the Government of the Union of
South Africa;

“We can: only conclude that this policy restricts
the,development ofthe human personality, destroys
initiative, erodes self-confidence: and impoverishes
the human. spirit. Moreover; there is no one
present who does not re.member-thedreadful incident
at Sharpeville- which made a ,prophet of the United
Nations C$Xmnission on the Racial Situation in the
Union of- South Africa, which stated in its first
reports that the policy of apartheid sowed the
.se&ds of internal &order and foreshadowed even
greater. confiagrations. No one ca.ndoubt that there
wlilbe an inflammatory tinderbox on the continent
of Africa as long as we, the free- inhabitants. of
t&it continenti are confronted with the painful
picture &our. brothers shackled in human bondage
by repressive: Iegisiation.

“Calls on ail .African and Malagasy States to
apply immediately poiitial and economic sanctions,
collectively and individually, against the Govem-merit of the Union of South Africa, not only to
demonstrate our resentment of the ruthless
degradation of the non-white there, but also
ultimately to compel the Government of the Union
of South Africa to abandon the iniquitous practice
of apartheid;
“Calls on all African and Malagasy States to
take all necessary steps to give ail material and
moral support to the Africans and Asians of South
Africa in their struggle to regain the stature of man;
* This statement was made at the 272nd meeting, of the Special
Political Committee, the official records of which are published
in summary form (see Official Record3 of the General Assembly,
Sixteenth

15

Session).

‘ AfJirms that all the participating
African States
strongly support the reiterated
decision of the
Trusteeship
Council of the United Nations that
the Government of the Union of South Africa must
acknowledge the authority of the Council as guardian
of the Mandate over the Territory of South West
Africa.”

Council
African
credible

find effective means to bring the South
Government
to its senses and to provide
support for its own resolutions.

107. My delegation is of the opinion that the basis
of our action in bringing relief to this situation
which has plagued the United Nations for more than
two decades must now end at this meeting and be
resolved by you, the members of the Council, so that
history can record that at this time the appropriate
action was taken by a Security Council charged with
the responsibility
of ensuring international
peace and
security.

104. Liberia and a number of African Governments
proceeded to break off diplomatic
and economic
relations with the South African Government following
that declaration.
More than that, Liberia
and
Ethiopia
undertook
to bring a case before the
International
Court of Justice against South Africa
for the violation
of its Mandate
responsibilities
concerning
South West Africa, including
racial
discrimination
against the native population,
but
despite that trend of events and actions the Govemment of South Africa has continued
even to
accelerate its apartheid policy.

108. In conclusion,
I am moved to re-emphasize
that in Africa and in the United Nations we have been
extraordinarily
patient,
and we must now. take
appropriate
steps that will uphold the dignity and
meaning of the United Nations itself. The United
Nations is not a neutral body but rather, as has
often been said, the embodiment
of our civilization
and the reflection of us all. Should we fail in the
discharge of our duties, this generation of man stands
to be condemned before all future generations for all
its weaknesses of will, for the narrowness of its
vision and for the limitations
of.its intellect.

105. As a passing reference, let me at this point,
following those issues-from an historical point of view,
ask who among the members of the Council or the
members
of the General
Assembly
could. have
prophesied in 1952, when the question of apartheid
in South Africa was first brought under consideration,
that today, when a final decision on events is to
be made in connexion with South Africa’s relationship
with and its expulsion
from this Grganization,
that the two top positions
would be held by
illustrious sons of Africa? That is what change does.
The greatest thing about change is change itself. The
Government of South Africa should not, nor would it
wish to, live in isolation. There is at present a wind
of change that prevails in our one world. If the
country of South Africa or any other country does
not want to live in isolation, it should take steps to
put its house in- order and show some positive
approach and willingness to accept change. No nation
of today can survive as an island unto itself, nor can
any country, regardless of how great or powerful it
may be, afford to defy world opinion and be oblivious
‘to change. We wish to warn South Africa to take
heed and not simply continue to say that expelling
it from the United Nations would not solve anything,
that it would merely make it harder for the Govemment to play a positive role in the development
of
its country. The time for platitudes is past; it is time
for positive action and full recognition of the principles
of human dignity.

109. The whole world is eagerly watching to see what
will be the outcome of these Council meetings. Press
reports are constantly arriving, giving a day-to-day
commentary
on the positions of Member
States.
Whatever the ultimate position may be, let it truly
reflect the fact that an historic decision was made
affecting the future and dignity of so many oppressed
people who have been denied their God-given rights.
110. With your permission,
on behalf of my
Government I should now like to pay a special tribute
to the Secretary-General,
whose untiring efforts and
dedicated service in the cause of peace and world
understanding deserve our highest commendation.
111. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpretarion
from French):
The last speaker is the representative of Kuwait, whom
I invite to take a place at the Council table. and to
make a statement.
112. Mr. BISHARA
(Kuwait): May I congratulate
you, Mr. President,
on your assumption
of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
wish you the best of success in guiding
the
deliberations of this Council. I am grateful to you and
to the other members of the Council for acceding
to my request to address the Council on an item of.
overriding human and poiitical importance.

106. It therefore seems clear to my delegation that
we have certainly reached the point where some
forceful measures must be seriously considered and
immediate action must be taken as the first step in
trying to force the Government
of South africa into
fully realizing that it cannot avoid the inevitable,
which is change, and we cannot go on from year to
year adopting.resoIutions
requesting the South African
Government to modify its policies which, as a Member
State, it continues to flaunt. It is imperative that the

113. South Africa has been the bastion of apartheid
since the success of the white minority in achieving
supremacy over the bIack and the Coloured indigenous
majority. Apartheid was introduced into the area by
the whites as an instrument designed to perpetuate
unchallenged
the dominance
they enjoy in the
16

economic, political,
cultural and military fields. In
other words, it ‘is an attempt by the minority
to
elevate itself to the attractive luxury of multifaceted
power, while relegating the non-white majority to
abominable conditions of subordination,
backwardness
and degradation. The motivations behind the authors
of apartheid
are primarily
and chiefly economic.
The objectives are the maintenance of an uninterrupted
flow of cheap human labour whose submissiveness
is ensured through harsh, repressive and ,brutal
‘measures of intimidation
and terror. The theory of
establishing a human reservoir for the sake of creating
a small enclave of affluence for the white inhabitants
‘in the midst of the black majority was uppermost
in the minds of the architects and the progenitors
of apartheid. To achieve this end laws that deny the
majority
their rights of equality in all aspects of
life have been promulgated.
The white minority has
been trying to keep the black majority docile and
submissive by depriving them of basic human rights
such- as education and isolating them from civilized
society and rewarding living conditions.
In short,
South Africa has erected a barbed-wire
system
around the majority with a view to preventing the
penetration
of civilization
and suppressing all calls
for equality and the assertion of rights.

which represents 17 per cent’ of the population
of
South Africa and which consistently usurps the rights
of the majority who should rightfully be represented
in international
bodies.
115. Two types of measures have hitherto not been
tried. The first is the imposition
of complete and
total sanctions on South Africa. Experience
with
the imposition
of sanctions on Rhodesia has shown
that they are often observed by certain countries in
the breach rather than in the application-so
much
so that the economy of Rhodesia is advancing with
perceptible progress, contrary to what we had been
advised to accept. The second type of measure is, as
I indicated earlier, the expulsion of South Africa from
this Organization.
There is no place in this body for
a country whose official policy is predicated
on
degrading man, debasing the ideals of the Charter and
devastating the principles of equality enshrined in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The situation
in South Africa is, no doubt, a threat to international
peace and security. The continuation
of the policy
of apartheid
therein is a blemish on the face of
humanity and a disgrace to mankind. The eradication
of this policy is not the responsibility
of a single
Government
or of a certain people but rather rests
squarely on the shoulders of the Security Council.
It is indispensable
that the Council should initiate
collective and punitive measures to free the black
majority from the tentacles of servitude.

114. The United Nations long ago declared apartheid
a crime against humanity.
One wonders why the
perpetrators of such a crime are allowed to remain
in an international
community
which constantly
proclaims its indignation
over the policy of South
Africa and is always ready to condemn the theory
and practice of apartheid with all its ramifications.
My delegation is disinclined to believe that there is
room for compatibility
between the presence of South
Africa in the United Nations and the continuous
condemnation
of its policies by our international
Organization.
South Africa’s record in challenging the
United Nations and flouting its resolutions justifies
its immediate expulsion. The world will not condone
the action of a small minority in vitiating its will and
therefore would like to see South Africa’s racist
regime expelled from the United Nations. For the
world has, a long time ago, declared South Africa
persona non grata. South Africa’s allies and friends
invoke all sorts of legal arguments to maintain its
presence within our Organization.
We know that the
economic and political interests of some prevail over
their moral obligations.
We know that, political
considerations often prevail over moral responsibility.
But we are equally aware that the United Nations
will lag far behind in its quest to achieve its goals if
such considerations
are accepted as guidelines for
norms of conduct. For, as long as interests have
priority over other considerations
the realization of
the aims and purposes of the Charter will be beyond
our reach. As long as apartheid and other anachronisms
exist our endeavours to attain the noble goals of the
Charter will be a wild-goose chase. Universality
of
representation in the United Nations does not in any
way countenance the presence of a minority regime

116. Listening
to the sordid statement
of the
representative
of Mr. Vorster yesterday, I realized
that South Africa is still far from being able to take a
leaf from the book of Portugal. He alleged that the
discriminatory
laws in South Africa were introduced
to avoid friction and to promote and protect the
interests and the development of every group, whether
white or non-white. But it is well known that these
very laws and their present application
triggered
friction, animosity and hatred with all the attendant
results of suppression and oppression. He pleaded
innocence
while he admitted
the application
of
measures initiated for the preservation of the whites’
superiority.
South Africa a long time ago lost its
pretense of innocence. However, the statement of
Mr. Vorster’s representative
reaffirmed our belief
that only through a combination
of the forces of
the suppressed majority and the enlightened world can
aparthied
be eliminated.
He contented
that his
Government
conquered no people and threatened
nobody. One is tempted to ask whether the relegation
of 83 per cent of the population
to the limbo of
misery by brute force is not a human conquest; or
whether
the continuous
threats
against
the
neighbouring African States and the military encroachment on their Territories
is not an attempt
to
reverse the wind of change so as to make it blow
in favour of Pretoria.
117. The General Assembly overwhelmingly
rejected
the credentials of the representative
of the white
17

minority regime in South Africa. ,The voice of the
majority was resoundingly against the presence of the
Pretoria regime in the United Nations. There is a
clear mandate from the General Assembly for the
Security Council to act upon, and the hopes of the
predominant
majority
are reposed in the Council,
which is called upon to respect and live up to those
hopes and expectations.
The failure of the Council
to take the necessary measures will have a grave
bearing on the situation inside South Africa. The
majority of the people, betrayed by the supreme
organ .of the United Nations entrusted with maintaining
peace and order, will resort to sanguinary violence
and bloodshed that has no bounds. For the indigenous
people of South Africa who have placed their
faith in this Organization
cannot accept its inaction,
which prolongs their misery and suffering; when there
is no light at the end of the tunnel, people are
spurred by their frustration to violence and armed
conflict. This is the lesson of history since the
inception of life.

bloodshed
and more destruction,
for oppression
spawns revolt, with all its implications.
My Government consistently supports liberation movements in
their fight for a just cause. In April last we were
happy to receive in Kuwait the representatives
of
the,. liberation
movement
from South Africa, and
we were gratified at the results of the talks. We
believe that the abolition of the heinous policy of
apartheid is an international
responsibility,
as this
crime constitutes an affront to humanity
and an
insult to mankind. Only forceful action can assist in
eradicating apartheid. A tepid compromise is doomed,
as have already been the voluminous
resolutions
on South Africa. Many years ago Aim6 Ctsaire, an
outstanding pan-Africanist,
wrote:

118. The continuation
world public opinion
Charter will certainly

I submit that this applies to apartheid.

of apartheid in defiance of
and in contravention
of the
invite more resistance, more

“There can be no question for us of displacing
colonialism
or making servitude an internal affair.
What we must do is to destroy it, to extirpate
it, in the proper sense of the word, to tear up its
roots, and that is why true decolonization
will be
revolutionary
or nothing.”
.

The meeting

rose at 6.15 p.m.

,’

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00400

74-82001~June

1983-2,200
