S/PV.7910

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7910th meeting

Friday, 31 March 2017, noon
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2017/206)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-08547 (E)
*1708547*

S/PV.7910

MONUSCO

The meeting was called to order at 12.05 p.m.
Expression of sympathy on the deaths of two
United Nations Experts in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
The President: On behalf of the members of
the Security Council, I should like to reiterate our
condemnation, in the strongest terms, of the deaths of
Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan, from the Group of
Experts, who were senselessly killed while conducting
their work in the Kasaï Central region of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The members of the Security
Council express their deepest sympathy to the families
of the victims and to the Governments of Chile, Sweden
and the United States, as well as to the Group of Experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the
United Nations Secretariat.
Michael and Zaida lost their lives seeking to bring
peace to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
its people.
I now invite Council members to rise to observe a
minute of silence in their memory and in the memory of
all the victims of violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2017/206)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Republic of Tanzania to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Augustine Phillip Mahiga, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, East Africa, Regional and International
Cooperation of the United Republic of Tanzania.
2/13

31/03/2017

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/268, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France, Italy, Japan, Sweden, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/206, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2348 (2017).
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2348
(2017), which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). The resolution we
have just adopted is the outcome of negotiations that
were not always easy, but it is a text of significance
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the
United Nations.
I would like to highlight three reasons why this
positive text is important.
First, the Security Council today has sent a message
of unanimity and unity in our support for MONUSCO
and for stability and democracy in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which as we know is facing
significant challenges.
Secondly, with the adoption of the resolution,
MONUSCO — which has a defining role to play — now
17-08547

31/03/2017

MONUSCO

has an adapted mandate focused on two major strategic
priorities: the protection of civilians and support for the
implementation of the 31 December agreement and the
electoral process. This is a critical point, as the goal of
the negotiations that have just concluded was to adapt
MONUSCO to the political and security issues that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has to address, in
particular this year.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo finds
itself an unprecedented institutional situation. The
mandate of all its electoral institutions has expired. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo has entered a phase of
transition on the basis of the political agreement signed
on 31 December 2016 until the elections scheduled for
the end of this year. The agreement, which was reached
thanks to the outstanding efforts of the Conférence
épiscopale nationale du Congo, constitutes the only
credible road map for an end to the crisis, but delays in
its implementation are very worrying. It is essential for
the stability and future of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo that the agreement be implemented as soon
as possible and that the elections be held.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is also
facing a worrying security situation with the persistence
of armed groups in the east of the country and the
appearance of new outbreaks of violence, particularly
in Kasaï, where many Congolese have died over the
past year and where two United Nations experts — as
you recalled, Mr. President — recently died in tragic
circumstances. On behalf of France, I wish here to
reiterate our sorrowful condolences and deep sympathy
to the families of the two victims and their countries.
Civilian populations must be protected from such
violence, whose perpetrators must be identified and
brought to justice.
The third reason why this resolution is particularly
important is because it adapts the composition of
MONUSCO in a consistent and thoughtful way so that it
can better respond to the challenges facing the country.
The troop ceiling has been adjusted to better reflect the
reality of deployment on the ground, but it is mainly the
composition of the force that has been revised through
the replacement of certain troops by specialized units
able to intervene quickly and in a mobile way in the
specific context of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. From the very outset, this mandate makes
MONUSCO more reactive, more mobile and more
focused on the essential, guiding priorities that I have
just enumerated.

S/PV.7910

For the future, let us be clear. The task is heavy but
MONUSCO has reinvigorated means at its disposal. In
that spirit, I should like on behalf of France to reiterate
our confidence in the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Maman Sidikou.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): First,
I want to express, on behalf of the United States, the
sadness and heaviness we all feel at the loss of Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalan. I know my friends in the
Swedish delegation feel the same way, but it is very
telling that when we focus so much on these types
of things and what we are trying to do, we have to
remember the people on the front line who are trying
so hard to protect people on the ground. These are real
people with real families who make real sacrifices. It is
a sobering reminder that we can never forget that when
we have people on the ground trying to keep peace, we
have to do all we can to make sure that we are keeping
them as safe.
I want to thank Ambassador Delattre for his time
and effort and for the negotiations and the care with
which all of this was done. I certainly want to tell
the Security Council how pleased I am that we that
we moved forward, because the whole mission was
keeping the Congolese people in mind, and when we
look at these peacekeeping missions what we need to
focus on is not the number of people we have on the
ground but the quality of the work that is happening on
the ground. What we are seeing is an area where we can
have thousands and thousands of troops, but if they are
not really working to keep the Congolese safe, none of
that matters.
I was therefore very pleased that we cut the troop
ceiling, but we made sure that the troops are actually
going to be more effective where they are deployed.
As François said about the specialized units, the key
is to make sure that the elections are safe, that we are
keeping people safe and that we are actually looking
at the political problems on the ground. The idea that
we are really pushing towards long-term stability and
good governance is something we should all be very
proud of.
Always prioritizing the protection of civilians is the
one thing that I think is most important. We are very
grateful to the contributing troops that come into the
area, but we can never forget that the whole goal is to
keep the Congolese safe. In order to do that, we have to
hold the troops that are actually doing this accountable,

17-085473/13

S/PV.7910

MONUSCO

and what I believe was one of the best things that came
out of this exercise was the strategic review that we will
get back in September, because what we cannot do is
walk away from this and say our job is done. What we
need to do is keep looking and making sure that what
we did is actually working and effective and meeting
the goals we have set.
That is why I thought it was very important
and appreciated hearing France affirm the specific
indicators that we are going to be watching. We actually
have measurables now so we can look back and see
where the troop failures are happening, because we owe
it to people like Michael and Zaida on the ground to let
them know what is expected and what we need to have
happen so that they can be protected. I think that now
having measurables whereby we can do that and hold
those troops accountable to do the best job they can is
going to be important.
With that, I also think that moving this focus away
from all of the other things related to the mandate and
towards the people and making sure it is effective and
successful is going to be good for all of us, because at
the end of the day we have to honor Michael and Zaida.
I think that the way we honour them is by making the
Mission stronger and more effective. I believe that the
entire Security Council did that today, and I am very
proud to be a part of it and to see what we have done
and how we have done it. I look forward to continuing
to work on this issue so that we can make sure that we
eventually get them to a peaceful and stable place.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to express our deep sorrow and
condolences to the Governments of the United States
and Sweden and the families of the two experts who
recently lost their lives in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I was honoured to work closely with Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalan in my capacity as Chairman
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. They were a true inspiration.
They were brave and dedicated to their work, despite
the risks and difficulties that surrounded their mission.
The heinous event that claimed their lives reminds
us of the difficulties and tragedies confronting many
victims of violence in the Congo. We must therefore
work with greater determination and commitment to
ending the violence and establishing permanent peace
in the country. This painful event also reminds us of
4/13

31/03/2017

the sacrifices made by United Nations personnel in
the field, be they military, police officers or civilians.
These sacrifices deserve all our gratitude and respect.
Egypt welcomes the adoption today of resolution
2348 (2017). It stresses the importance of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), which
plays a vital role in supporting stability and establishing
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That
is the same message of the communiqué issued today
by the African Union Peace and Security Council. We
welcome the fact that supporting the 31 December
2016 political greement is one of the strategic goals
of MONUSCO’s mandate, which is also charged with
providing support and assistance for the elections
process, given the importance of the agreement to
maintainng security and stability in the country. Egypt
calls for intensifying efforts to overcome the current
deadlock concerning the special arrangement talks. We
look forward to the resumption of the mediation efforts
by the Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo, as
well those of the African Union.
The many challenges confronting the Democratic
Republic of the Congo at the political and security
levels and the increasing activities of armed groups
and the spread the violence serve to underscore the
need to provide human and financial resources to
MONUSCO, including supporting and enhancing the
role of the Congolese army so that it can confront those
challenges. We agree that we need to take advantage
of peacekeeping operations and increase their efficient
use of resources, as well as when it comes to other
United Nations activities. We welcome the commitment
of the Secretary-General in that regard. Moreover, we
believe that reconsidering the number and resources
of peacekeeping forces should not be based solely on
realizing savings. We need to carry out a comprehensive
study of the situation and the needs on the ground and to
evaluate the nature of the resources required to enable
any mission to implement its mandate, so that they do
not face shortcomings that could have an adverse effect
on their performance.
Egypt is proud of its role as a MONUSCU troopcontributor, as well as in other United Nations missions.
We consulted with other MONUSCO contributors with
regard to the contents of today’s resolution. Troopcontributing countries(TCCs) are one of the main
pillars of the United Nattions peacekeeping system.
Through their troops, TCCs make great sacrifices in the
17-08547

31/03/2017

MONUSCO

service of peace and security. Any efforts to enhance
the efficiency of troops and overcome shortcomings in
their performance must therefore take place through
a triangular partnership among TCCs, the Secretariat
and the Security Council.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): At the outset, let me join
previous speakers in expressing condolences to the
families of the two brave and dedicated members of
the Group of Experts — Michael Sharp and Zaida
Catalan — killed in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The parties responsible for their deaths must be
held accountable.
Japan welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2348 (2017). I would like to thank France for
taking the lead in preparing the resolution. Japanese is
pleased to have co-sponsored it. Our common goal is
to stabilize the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and achieve a progressive exit of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). Let
me underscore two points in that regard.
First, through this resolution the security Council
reaffirms its strong support for the implementation of
the 31st December 2016 political agreement, mediated
by by the Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo.
Japan calls on President Kabila and all Congolese
political actors to swiftly implement the agreement
and accelerate preparations for elections, to be held
by the end of this year. That is the only viable way
to consolidate and sustain peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Secondly, Japan values the fact that the Security
Council has reaffirmed its commitment to making
the Mission more efficient by authorizing a clearer
and more prioritized mandate for MONUSCO in line
with the Secretary-General’s efforts. Japan reaffirms
its full support for MONUSCO and for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Maman
Sidikou.
Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of my Government, I should like to express my
condolences to the families and the two members of the
Group of Experts killed in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We also extend our sympathy and solidarity
to the United States, Sweden and Chile. We share their
pain and sadness.

S/PV.7910

We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2348 (2017), which sends a very strong strong signal
of the Security Council’s unity on such an important
issue. Allow me to thank the French delegation for its
efforts on the text, which is an outcome commensurate
with the challenges we face today.
The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) ia a tangible sign
of the willingness of the United Nations to continue
supporting the people and the Government of that
country. This year marks a major milestone in the
country’s history, and this peacekeeping force must
ensure the protection of civilians and support the
implementation of the Saint-Sylvestre agreement and
the electoral process, which are two complimentary
elements of the strategy for maintaining peace in
the country.
The commitment of troop-contributing countries
remains crucial. We hope that it will be possible to find
increasingly specialized resources that can provide
greater effectiveness and mobility to the Mission. We
should of course also appreciate the efforts of troopcontributing countries in extremely difficult conditions.
The issue of the effectiveness of peacekeeping missions
is very important, and we must increasingly improve
their performance. We remain willing to work to
that end.
In that regard, Italy agrees with the analysis and
proposals made by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2017/206) to the Security Council. We hope that the
mandate in today’s resolution regarding the possibility
of cooperation among various missions can prove to be
a sufficiently flexible tool to bolster the effectiveness
of MONUSCO.
We stress the importance of swiftly carrying out
the specific arrangements set out in the Saint-Sylvestre
agreement, which was signed thanks to the mediation of
the Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo, which
I commend. I should like to conclude with a call for
political compromise in order to hold peaceful, credible
and inclusive elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is deeply troubled and disturbed at the death of two
United Nations officials. I should like to extend our
condolences to the families of Mr. Michael Sharp and
Ms. Zaida Catalan and to the countries concerned. The

17-085475/13

S/PV.7910

MONUSCO

safety and security of United Nations personnel must be
effectively guaranteed. Any attack on United Nations
personnel is intolerable.
China voted in favour of resolution 2348 (2017),
which the Security Council just adopted. China has
always paid close attention to the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We appreciate the
efforts made by that country’s Government to facilitate
the peace process, safeguard national stability and
promote economic development. We encourage the
parties to actively implement the political agreement
and resolve their differences through dialogue
and consultation.
China has always supported African countries in
addressing African issues in African ways and has
supported regional and subregional organizations in
Africa in playing an active role in resolving regional
problems. We hope that the countries of the Great Lakes
region will strengthen their cooperation and jointly
implement the Framework for Peace, Security and
Cooperation for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes Region, and achieve common
regional security and development. The international
community should act, on the basis of respecting the
country’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity, and continue to provide constructive
assistance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
China supports the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) in its implementation of its
mandate and in the constructive role it plays to assist
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in advancing the political process, combating
armed groups and facilitating humanitarian access.
United Nations peacekeeping operations need to
adjust their mandates and scope in a timely manner in
accordance with changing circumstances and the will
of the State concerned. We hope that, in accordance
with resolution 2348 (2017), the Secretariat will
continue to engage in dialogue with the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on the
implementation of the mandate of MONUSCO, as well
as on its financing, while fully taking into account
the views of that Government, and stepping up the
reform of the peacekeeping system so as to enhance the
operational effectiveness of the Mission and bolstering
its ability to cope with complex situations.
6/13

31/03/2017

China has always supported the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and has over the
years provided , within our abilities, assistance to its
nation-building efforts. China has sent more than 200
peacekeepers to MONUSCO. China stands ready to
work with the international community and continue
to play a constructive role towards the realization of
lasting peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine supported and
co-sponsored resolution 2348 (2017) because, in our
view, it will pave the way for further stabilization in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Today, the Security
Council adopted a document that is intended for the
first time to privatize tasks of MONUSCO primarily
for the protection of civilians and support for the
implementation of the agreement of 31 December 2016.
We hope that that approach will help the Mission to
address existing challenges in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in a more efficient and effective manner.
The years 1970, 1977, 1984, 2006 and 2011 marked
the previous elections held in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We hope that in 2017 the people of that
country will again have a chance to choose their Head
of State and determine their future in a free and fair
manner. It may take a year for the long-awaited peace
and stability to appear on the horizon. We therefore call
on all national stakeholders to spare no effort in swiftly
implementing the agreement of the 31 December 2016
without any preconditions.
I cannot but join others in expressing our deep
condolences to the families of Michael Sharp and
Zaida Catalan of the United Nations group of experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as
to the United States and Sweden. The world and the
United Nations lost two brave and decent people who,
while risking their own lives, tried to bring peace and
stability to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
No effort should be spared to hold accountable those
responsible for that outrage.
Finally, since this is the last day of the United
Kingdom presidency, I would like to sincerely
congratulate you, Sir, for a very successful and
productive month characterized by a masterful
British touch.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We join others in conveying our condolences
and sympathies following the deaths of the two
17-08547

31/03/2017

MONUSCO

young and courageous experts, Michael Sharp and
Zaida Catalan.
Russia voted in favour of resolution 2348
(2017), extending the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). We believe that,
during this difficult time in the country’s political
history, it is important for the Mission to continue to
carry out its work in stabilizing the eastern areas of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and facilitating
the implementation of the political agreement of
31 December 2016. We believe that all of that will
be carried out by the Mission in full respect for
Congolese sovereignty.
At the same time, we are not pleased with the
approach taken in deciding to reduce the size of
MONUSCO. In that regard, the Russian delegation
initially proposed identifying tasks that could be
discontinued without prejudice to the performance of
the mandate or that could be delegated to the country
team, only thereafter reducing the number of Blue
Helmets deployed. We regret that financial and sheerly
numerical considerations prevailed.
We are also concerned about the plan to have two
parallel cycles of reporting to the Security Council on
the activities of a single peacekeeping operation, as
set out in the resolution. We believe that the solution
that was forced through by the informal leads on that
issue could negatively affect the implementation of
peacekeepers’ mandate and result in problems with
regard to the organization of the Security Council’s
work. We trust that our colleagues will follow their own
stated understanding whereby the Secretary-General’s
submission of updates on the implementation of the
internal Congolese agreement will not automatically
mean holding Security Council consultations.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2348 (2017), renewing the
mandate of United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), including the Force Intervention
Brigade. We understand that it has indeed been a
difficult negotiation process, and not everyone has
secured what they wanted. In the end, we are pleased
that the Security Council was able to achieve consensus
through compromise. We believe that maintaining that
spirit of unity within the Council on this and other
matters is absolutely important. France should be

S/PV.7910

commended for ensuring that that is what transpired
during negotiations on the draft resolution, of which we
are very appreciative.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is at an
important political juncture. The agreement reached
by the Congolese political actors on 31 December 2016,
with the mediation efforts of the Conférence épiscopale
nationale du Congo, has without any doubt averted a
major political crisis. The immediate implementation
of the agreement is indeed the key to preserving the
stability of the country and paving the way for a
peaceful political process.
It is indeed appropriate that the Security Council has
called on all stakeholders in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to redouble their efforts towards a speedy
conclusion of the ongoing talks on the implementation
modalities in line with the 31 December 2016 agreement
and proceed without further delay to preparations for
the presidential and legislative elections due to take
place before the end of 2017. Mobilizing the necessary
resources for the electoral processes in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to ensure long-term security
and stability in the country and the region in general is
indeed critical. It is also important that the countries of
the region, the African Union and the United Nations
act in unison and put their full weight behind those
efforts to ensure a smooth transition process and the
holding of elections as envisaged in the agreement. In
that regard, we would like to refer to the communiqué
adopted by the Peace and Security Council (PSC) of
the African Union two days ago on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which underscored
the latter point.
The deteriorating security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is taking a heavy
toll on the civilian population. We are particularly
concerned about the activities of armed groups in
the eastern part of the country and the resurgence of
negative forces. Those have enormous implications
with regard to peace and security not only for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo but also for the
Great Lakes region. That needs to be addressed
seriously within the PSC framework agreement. The
role of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes region and his continuous regional and
international engagement in the promotion of peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region, including through the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for

17-085477/13

S/PV.7910

MONUSCO

the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
in consultation with countries of the region and the
guarantors, remain very important.
In the light of the current political and security
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
continued support of MONUSCO in maintaining peace
and security in the country and ensuring conditions
conducive to a smooth political process cannot be
overstated. The adoption of today’s resolution is
therefore very important, and we hope that the Mission
will carry out its mandate, strategic priorities and tasks,
as outlined in the resolution, with greater efficiency
and effectiveness.
We commend the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and pay tribute
to the military and civilian personnel of MONUSCO,
who are doing everything they can to implement the
mandate of the Mission in a difficult and challenging
environment. It is imperative that the Mission be
given the means and capabilities necessary to carry
out its tasks, including addressing the threat of the
negative forces.
Finally, we are deeply saddened by and shocked
and really angry at the brutality that ended the lives
of Michael and Zaida, two members of the Group of
Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but
it is not enough to lament what befell them. No stone
should be left unturned in the search for the murderers
to ensure that they are held accountable. We convey our
deepest condolences to their families, their colleagues,
as well as to the United States and Sweden, for the loss
of their nationals.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I want to thank you,
Mr. President, and everyone else, all our colleagues,
for expressing and sharing their deepest condolences
to the families and friends of Michael Sharp and Zaida
Catalan. I fully share the sense of loss, of sorrow and
despair at this very difficult moment.
Zaida was a Swedish-Chilean national who
dedicated her life to peace and justice. She combined
professionalism with compassion and she risked her
own life to save others. As a member of the United
Nations Group of Experts, Zaida worked tirelessly
to contribute to the understanding of the causes of
conflict and insecurity in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We will honour her memory by continuing
to support the work of the Group of Experts and the
whole United Nations family in that country.
8/13

31/03/2017

The circumstances surrounding this attack must
now be thoroughly investigated. The four Congolese
citizens who remain unaccounted for must be found.
Sweden fully supports the investigation by the United
Nations and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to ensure that the facts are established and that those
responsible are held to account.
We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2348 (2017) today. In the current fragile situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the agreement
by the Council on a clearly prioritized mandate for
this vital United Nations Mission is crucial. We thank
France for its able leadership during the negotiations.
The resolution contains two clear priorities. First, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has received
a robust efficient and updated mandate to protect
civilians and, secondly, the resolution provides support
to the political process by making it a key priority for
the operation. There is now a need to reduce the current
unacceptable levels of violence and to fully implement
political agreement as a basis for moving towards free,
democratic and peaceful elections, which is essential.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a long-standing item on the Council’s agenda.
The future of the country is ultimately in the hands
of the leadership and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, we hope that today’s
action by the Council can help contribute to moving the
country one step closer to the stability and prosperity
that its people deserve.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
thoughts of the Senegalese delegation are with Zaida
Catalan and Michael Sharp. We would like to convey
our sincere condolences to their families and the
Swedish Government and the American Government.
Our thoughts are also with the four Congolese nationals
whose whereabouts are still unknown. We must find
the murderers of Zaida and Michael and bring them
to justice.
Resolution 2348 (2017), which we have just adopted
by consensus and which renews the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
marks without a doubt a critical phase in the United
Nations presence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and, we hope, towards lasting peace and stability
in a great African country and a friend of Senegal.
17-08547

31/03/2017

MONUSCO

My delegation was guided, throughout the process of
negotiating and drafting the resolution, by the desire
to see strengthened coordination on the ground among
the various partners of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to ensure the greatest possible impact for the
activities of the United Nations and the African Union,
of course, as well as the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region of Africa.
Today’s resolution reaffirms the Council’s support
for the implementation of the San Silvestro agreement.
It reaffirms, among other things, our support for
MONUSCO and improves its agility. We hope that,
with better equipment, MONUSCO will be able to
contribute more effectively to the protection of civilians
and, at the same time, in coordination and cooperation
with the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo, to combat and neutralize the negative forces.
I take this opportunity to express Senegal’s support
for all United Nations staff who have worked tirelessly
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. First and
foremost, I would like to thank Mr. Maman Sidikou,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, who is a dear
friend of ours. It is in that spirit that Senegal, a troopcontributing country, is awaiting the strategic review of
MONUSCO and wishes every success to the mediation
efforts of the Conférence épiscopale nationale du
Congo aimed at ensuring a credible and successful
peace process.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, allow me to add our voice to the
expressions of solidarity and condolences that have
been expressed you, Mr. President, and by Council
members, to the family members and the countries of
origin of United Nations experts, Michael Sharp and
Zaida Catalan, who, together with their Congolese
interpreter, Betu Tshintela, tragically lost their lives
while seeking to carry out their tasks in a dedicated,
thoughtful and responsible way. We convey our sincere
condolences to their families.
Uruguay commends the Security Council for
its unanimous adoption of resolution 2348 (2017),
extending the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). The majority
of Uruguay’s peacekeepers are deployed in this

S/PV.7910

peacekeeping operation. For that reason, the text we
that we have just adopted is of particular importance
to my country.
The current situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is complex, and the contingents deployed
there, as well as the defenceless civilians, are faced
with difficult circumstances that have shown no sign of
improving. In that connection, Uruguay would like to
express its robust support for the recommendations of the
Secretary-General contained in his report S/2017/206,
wherein he requests that the number of deployed staff
not be reduced and that the number of formed police
units be increased. We would like to underscore that
the reduction in MONUSCO personnel provided for
in this resolution clearly does not correspond with the
situation on the ground.
Uruguay believes it essential that United Nations
resources be used in the most efficient way. However,
in this particular case, we are skimping on resources
in a peacekeeping operation whose circumstances
still show no signs of improving. It is therefore vital,
as far as Uruguay is concerned, that the reduction in
the number of troops deployed not affect the essential
protection-of-civilians tasks that are currently carried
out by MONUSCO. It is worth highlighting that the
Security Council has already recently made cuts to
peacekeeping operations and has concluded some
sanctions regimens, but it has done so in places where
the situation on the ground has shown progress.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned, we congratulate
the penholder and all delegations for their constructive
approach, as well as for the spirit of compromise that was
evident in the negotiations surrounding this resolution.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
The United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2348 (2017) and is pleased
to sponsor this important text. We are grateful to all
involved and will particularly highlight the roles played
by France as penholder and by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Maman Sidikou.
This is a crucial resolution that has come at a crucial
time for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
political agreement of 31 December 2016 brought hope
to the people of the country for the first-ever peaceful
transition of power. Sadly, that hope is beginning
to fade. We continue to see worrying delays in the
implementation of that agreement — in turning words

17-085479/13

S/PV.7910

MONUSCO

into action. We continue to see increasing tensions and
insecurity throughout the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We also continue to see a clear link between the
escalation of local conflicts and national politics. It is
essential therefore that the Council remain focused on
developments in the country during this fragile period
and that it be prepared to respond to developments.
Vulnerable civilians, who have already endured far
too much, continue to bear the brunt of this instability
and uncertainty. The resolution sends a clear message in
response. In particular, we welcome the fact that it does
the following three things. It gives clear priority to the
essential tasks of protecting civilians and supporting
the implementation of the political agreement; it
reaffirms the importance of human rights, including
monitoring and reporting on human rights in the context
of the elections; and it retains the robust mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to tackle armed groups in order to protect civilians,
including through the Intervention Brigade.
We all know that mandates are only as good as
the brave men and women delivering them. So this
resolution also puts in place measures to increase the
effectiveness and the efficiency of MONUSCO. It
places an emphasis on the importance of performance
and calls for a full strategic review of the Mission.
It also includes a reduction in the number of troops.
This is not about doing more with less, but about
using MONUSCO’s vast resources in a better, more
focused way.
Finally, the killing of the two members of the group
of experts is a tragic reminder of just how challenging
and complex the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo still is. The United Kingdom would like
to underline our gratitude to all those who serve in
MONUSCO and in the group of experts, and to send
our heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of
Michael and Zaida. We pledge to uphold their legacy by
carrying on the essential work they were doing when
they were so tragically killed.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): Sir, as your presidency
of the Council comes to an end, I wish to express the
10/13

31/03/2017

full esteem and appreciation of my delegation for the
skilful manner in which you have steered the Security
Council’s debates during the month of March. I would
also like to thank you for giving me the opportunity
to take the floor before the Council at this meeting
regarding the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
My delegation is duty-bound to welcome
the presence of His Excellency, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and East African Cooperation of the
United Republic of Tanzania. I highly appreciate
his participation in this meeting. I thank him for his
personal support to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which he has provided on behalf of his country
and on behalf of the States of the Southern African
Development Community.
Finally, I want to convey to the Council the gratitude
of the Congolese people for the efforts undertaken
over the past few years by the United Nations, which
continues to seek to restore peace and stability in
my country.
Before continuing, allow me to share the sorrow of
my Government and to convey to the Governments of
the United States of America and of Sweden, as well
as to the United Nations, in particular the SecretaryGeneral, the Security Council and the group of experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, its feelings of
profound sadness following the death of the two United
Nations experts in the province of Kasaï Central. My
Government, which conveys its profound condolences
to their families and to their loved ones, deeply regrets
the deaths of these experts, who for many years were
committed to the cause of my country and who died
while trying to help it to restore peace. My country
is committed to pursuing the investigations already
launched to shed light on the tragic circumstances
of their death and to identify the perpetrators of that
heinous act, as well as to exact the necessary punishment
against them.
My delegation takes note of resolution 2348
(2017) just adopted. We thank you, Sir, once more for
your commitment to the cause of our country. That
commitment is reflected in the firm willingness of the
United Nations to spare no effort in putting an end to the
situation prevailing in the east of my country, which, as
is known, has caused millions of deaths and remains at
the heart of the many abuses from which the population
17-08547

31/03/2017

MONUSCO

in that part of the country continues to suffer. It is in
that spirit that my delegation welcomes with satisfaction
the renewal of the mandate of MONUSCO, as well as
the arrangements made to improve its effectiveness, in
particular for the Force Intervention Brigade.
My delegation hopes — as was also highlighted
by the Vice Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of my country, Mr. Léonard She Okitundu,
before the Council — that the implementation of this
mandate will reflect the expectations of the Congolese
people and will be conducted effectively so as to allow
us to achieve the goals assigned thereto, and to allow
for the swift restoration of peace in my country.
However, my delegation is somewhat concerned
by the failure to take into account among the
strategic priorities of the new MONUSCO mandate,
certain important sectors — such as disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation
and
reintegration,
as well as security and justice sector reform. The
implementation of those sectors has been deferred
until after the elections. With respect to disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration, our
concern is based on the belief that this process should
go hand in hand with eradicating armed groups. We
think that by intensifying operations to eradicate
armed groups, this process could have provided greater
encouragement to combatants in the two groups to lay
down their weapons and to receive the guidance that
would facilitate their reintegration into society.
Along similar lines, in this important phase the
success ofsecurity and justice sector reform could have
been promoted by the restoration of the rule of law in
troubled areas and the vital support of MONUSCO.
However, the Government will do its utmost to safeguard
the gains achieved together in that sector by ensuring
their implementation. Moreover, my Government
reassures the Council of its determination to complete
the investigations launched by the high court to shed
light on the recent events in Kasaï Central.
Before closing this chapter, my delegation would
be grateful to the translation services to make the
corrections necessary to bring the French version of the
text of the resolution in line with the English-language
original, in particular as concerns paragraph 10.
My Government takes note of the downsizing of
the MONUSCO contingent by 3,600 Blue Helmets,
and will continue its strategic dialogue with the United
Nations and international and regional partners in

S/PV.7910

order to determine the schedule leading to the orderly
and definitive withdrawal of MONUSCO from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Allow me to come back to two points that we
think are important and that we think deserve greater
attention. I will begin with the Conférence épiscopale
nationale du Congo (CENCO). As we know, CENCO
received a mandate from His Excellency, Mr. Joseph
Kabila Kabange, President of the Republic, to carry
out good offices with the political class and the civil
society of our country to reach a consensus with a view
to peaceful elections. Its mandate came to an end three
days ago, as the CENCO reported the results of its
mission to the President.
With regard to objectives of the CENCO mission,
as the Council has surely learned, in spite of the
efforts of many the parties were unable to agree on
two main points of discord and thus did not sign the
specific arrangements, which would have culminated
in an agreement on 31 December 2016. The two points
of discord are related to the methods by which the
Prime Minister is appointed, as well as to the origin
and appointment by consensus of an individual to
chair the national council for the monitoring of the
agreement, following the death of Mr. Tshisekedi.
In spite of the points of discord, CENCO has made
suggestions to which the Head of State has pledged his
full commitment.
For the President, the current deadlock should
not be viewed as a failure; talks will continue with a
view to taking the most appropriate steps at the earliest
opportunity to implement the 13 December 2016
agreement. The Head of State has thus acknowledged
that the Prime Minister should be a member of the
opposition, which is not a signatory of the 18 October
2016 agreement, and in particular of the Rassemblement,
and has called on the parties to select by consensus a
chairperson of the Council of Elders. Because he is
in charge of ensuring that the country’s institutions
function effectively, the President will address the
nation in both houses of Parliament, in accordance with
article 77 of the Constitution.
The second point of discord is related to the
combatants of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army in opposition in our country. My delegation
cannot understand the reasons for the Council’s
procrastination on that issue. The Council was given
detailed information about the situation involving those

17-0854711/13

S/PV.7910

MONUSCO

combatants, for which MONUSCO alone is responsible
because it brought them into our country. That is why
my Government, drawing on past experience, continues
to ask the Security Council to take the steps necessary
to remove those combatants from our country, return
them to their home or find a suitable third country to
host them.
The Council is well aware that, at that time, the
international community had asked my country’s
Government to open a humanitarian corridor to allow
Rwandans fleeing their country during the genocide
into our territory. Today, resolving the controversial
matter involving the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda (FDLR) — a situation that the international
community created and for which it should assume
responsibility — is a burden borne by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As the Council knows, that
situation is not only responsible for instability in the
east of my country, but it has also claimed the lives
of more than 6 million of our fellow citizens. In the
quest for a solution to the issue of the South Sudanese
combatants, resolution 2348 (2017) should have put the
United Nations at the forefront of that endeavour, rather
than the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Before I conclude my statement, I would like to point
out that the countries of the region that bear witness to
the recurring conflict in the east of my country do not
understand why, after so many years in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO has been unable to
put an end to the conflict situation. Those countries not
only work together; they have also brought that concern
to the attention of the United Nations. This time, they
would like MONUSCO’s mandate to yield results and
restore peace to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and, as recommended by the framework agreement,
allow them to live harmoniously in peace and to begin
development projects that foster regional integration.
I would like to end on that note and, on behalf of
my Government, warmly thank all MONUSCO troopcontributing countries — in particular the Intervention
Brigade — for the many sacrifices they make daily to
allow peace to be restored in my country. Once again,
on behalf of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I
would like to profusely thank all of the members of the
Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania.
12/13

31/03/2017

Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): At
the outset, I would like to join the members of the
Security Council in extending profound condolences
following the loss of life of the two experts of the
United Nations, who paid the ultimate price in their
professions, while working in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We sincerely hope that there will be an
adequate investigation and that justice will be done for
the victims of such senseless killing.
As the current Chairperson of the Ministerial
Committee for the Southern African Development
Community Organ on Politics, Defence and Security
Cooperation, I have the honour to deliver these remarks
on behalf of the 15 members of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), which includes the
Democratic Republic of Congo, under consideration in
today’s meeting of the Council. As troop contributors
of the Intervention Brigade of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), SADC members
have a keen interest in the renewal of the MONUSCO
mandate. We thank the Council for its unanimous
adoption of resolution 2348 (2017).
I thank the Ambassador of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland for giving me this
opportunity, during the final hours of the presidency
of the United Kingdom, to make some remarks on
the resolution for the renewal of the MONUSCO
mandate. I also thank and congratulate all 15 members
of the Council led by France — the penholder — for
negotiating in good faith and in a constructive manner
a difficult text, which has finally been agreed upon
and has been adopted. I pay particular tribute to the
three African non-permanent members of the Council,
namely Egypt, Ethiopia and Senegal, as well as the
sponsors of the resolution, for their spirited engagement
in the negotiating process.
SADC wishes to reaffirm its solidarity and
partnership with the United Nations, the Security
Council and Secretary-General Mr. António Guterres,
in particular, in seeking a lasting solution to the
protracted security and political challenges in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has lasted for
over a decade. The creation of the Force Intervention
Brigade by the Council in partnership with SADC
four years ago was a unique innovation to the United
Nations doctrine of peacekeeping and peace support
in dealing with an extraordinary and complex security
and political situation that has evolved and existed in
17-08547

31/03/2017

MONUSCO

S/PV.7910

the Democratic Republic of the Congo for many years.
Over the past four years, the Intervention Brigade has
demonstrated its usefulness in undertaking difficult
security operations in the process and has contributed
to enhancing the overall credibility of MONUSCO.

concerns to once again delay or renege on the political
commitment arrived at on 31 December. In that
regard, we believe that MONUSCO will have a special
responsibility for securing a political space that will
enable the holding of free, fair and peaceful elections.

As an integral part embedded in MONUSCO, the
Intervention Brigade can be good and effective only
if the rest of the MONUSCO mission is equally good
and effective. For that reason, despite its temporary
configuration, the Intervention Brigade deserves to
be recognized and appreciated. SADC trusts that the
current renewed mandate by the Council has adequately
taken into account the symbiotic relationship of the two
dimensions of MONUSCO. As the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2017/206) has underscored, there are new
security threats in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
that have emerged beyond the Kivus. New asymmetrical
strategies and tactics by the multitude of negative forces
have also emerged. The tactics, including terrorism,
low-intensity, guerrilla-type insurgency, fetish violence
and the ideology of genocide continue to rear their ugly
heads in the region. Such developments are changing
the nature of combat operations and require additional
assets to make MONUSCO more effective in dealing
with those negative forces.

The logistics of organizing elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are indeed daunting.
SADC is urging the international community to support
the Independent National Electoral Commission
in registering voters and organizing countrywide
elections. It is equally urgent to ensure that all of us
engaged in this partnership put pressure on all the
political actors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with a view to overcoming the current political impasse
in implementing the 31 December agreement brokered
by the Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo.

Similarly, issues such as politically motivated
agendas, gross human rights violations and the
protection of civilians from community-based violence
are posing additional challenges to the rest of the
integrated MONUSCO mission, made up of soldiers,
police and civilians. We believe that has been factored
into MONUSCO’s renewed mandate. We fully agree
with the views articulated by Council members
this afternoon about the fact that we need to make
MONUSCO more efficient and effective, not so much
in its numbers but in its performance.
Despite these new security and protection
challenges, the Security Council, SADC, the African
Union, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the countries of the International
Organization of la Francophonie should take advantage
of the current political situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to find a lasting solution to its
problems. This time the Government and other political
actors in Kinshasa should not be allowed to use security

To that end, in the next two weeks SADC will field
another ministerial mission to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to confer and consult with the political
stakeholders in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are not willing to see the agreement falter again, as
we have before. As the efforts to rekindle the political
process continue, collective action should be taken
together with the experts available in the United Nations
system to address issues related to disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation,
reintegration
and
resettlement, which my colleague from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo referred to and which must
be dealt with if we are to see sustainable peace and
stability there.
Lastly, I believe that the current opportunities in
the security and political sectors in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the innovations that have
been introduced into the MONUSCO mandate, may
finally pave the way for an exit strategy for the United
Nations peacekeeping and peace-support missions in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, something that
has evaded us for more than two decades.
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania for his
statement.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

17-0854713/13
