S/PV.8998

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8998th meeting

Thursday, 17 March 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abushahab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Nanga
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-29114 (E)
*2229114*

S/PV.8998

Threats to international peace and security

enforced disappearances of civilians, local authorities
and civil society activists in Russian-controlled areas.
We call for their immediate release.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Poland and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; Mr. Raouf Mazou, Assistant
High Commissioner for Operations of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; and
Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General of
the World Health Organization.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: Daily attacks continue to batter
Ukrainian cities. Many are reportedly indiscriminate,
resulting in civilian casualties and damage to civilian
infrastructure. Between 24 February and 15 March,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) recorded 1,900 civilian
casualties. The total consists of 726 people killed,
including 52 children, and 1,174 injured, including 63
children. The actual number is likely much higher. Most
of the casualties were caused by the use in populated
areas of explosive weapons with a wide impact area.
Hundreds of residential buildings have been damaged
or destroyed, as have hospitals and schools.
OHCHR continues to monitor reports of civilian
casualties in the whole country, including in territory
controlled by the self-proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk
Peoples’ Republics. Members of OHCHR staff in
Donetsk are closely following developments regarding
the 14 March incident in which 20 civilians were
reportedly killed by a Tochka-U missile that may have
contained cluster munitions. All such instances must
be properly investigated. It is the responsibility of all
sides to fully abide by their obligations to protect the
lives of all civilians everywhere. OHCHR is gravely
concerned about reports of arbitrary arrests and
2/22

17/03/2022

This week, there were positive signals reported with
regard to the ongoing direct talks between Ukrainian
and Russian representatives. We welcome all such
engagements. However, we note that those signals have
so far not translated into the cessation of hostilities that
is so desperately needed. The situation in the southeastern port city of Mariupol is particularly alarming.
Many of the Mariupol residents who have not been
able to safely evacuate lack food, water, electricity and
medical care. Uncollected corpses lie on city streets.
Yesterday’s strike on the Mariupol theatre, which
reportedly served as a bomb shelter for displaced
civilians, adds to the list of attacks against civilian
structures. While early reports indicate that the worst
may have been avoided, ongoing fighting is hampering
the rescue work and assessment of the situation.
The devastation and suffering in Mariupol and
Kharkiv raises grave fears about the fate of millions of
residents of Kyiv and other cities facing intensifying
attacks. International humanitarian law is crystal clear:
civilians are entitled to protection against the dangers
arising from military operations; direct attacks against
civilians are prohibited. Yet the magnitude of civilian
casualties and the destruction of civilian infrastructure
in Ukraine cannot be denied. That demands a thorough
investigation and accountability.
The priority for the United Nations and its
partners is to reach the people trapped by the ongoing
shelling, including in eastern Ukraine. To that end, we
continue to scale-up our operations on the ground, as
circumstances permit. The needs of the population are
growing by the day. The United Nations calls for safe
passage for civilians from, and humanitarian supplies
into, encircled areas.
We are grateful to neighbouring Governments for
their generosity in receiving refugees and enabling the
provision of assistance to Ukraine. The United Nations
is requesting all donors to fast-track funding against
pledges made towards the Ukraine flash appeal. The
appeal, which seeks $1.1 billion to help 12 million
people in need, is 36 per cent funded.
The United Nations Development Programme
projects that 90 per cent of the Ukrainian population
could be facing poverty and extreme economic
vulnerability should the war continue, setting the
22-29114

Threats to international peace and security

17/03/2022

country and the region back decades and leaving deep
social and economic scars. As the Secretary-General
highlighted, dangerous ripple effects of the conflict
are already being felt across the globe. Russia and
Ukraine represent more than half of the world’s supply
of sunflower oil and 30 per cent of the world’s wheat.
Food, fuel and fertilizer prices are skyrocketing. Supply
chains are being disrupted. All of that is hitting the
poorest the hardest and potentially creating instability
around the globe.
On 14 March, the Secretary-General announced the
establishment of a Global Crisis Response Group on
Food, Energy and Finance to lead an effort with Member
States to deal with the complex fallout of the war. The
Deputy Secretary-General will lead an inter-agency
steering committee with partners to oversee that effort.
The Secretary-General welcomes all ongoing
diplomatic contacts. He remains actively engaged with
leaders who are trying to bring about an end to the war.
There will be no winners to this senseless conflict.
On the other hand, the tremendous loss it is causing
is heartbreakingly clear. It will become increasingly
worse the longer the fighting continues.
The Secretary-General urges intensified and
coordinated political efforts for an immediate cessation
of hostilities. There must be a meaningful, sustained
political process to enable a peaceful settlement. The
lives of millions of Ukrainians and the peace and
security of the entire region, and possibly beyond,
depend on it.
The President (spoke
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Mazou.
Mr. Mazou: It has been fewer than three weeks
since High Commissioner Grandi addressed the
Security Council (see S/PV.8983). Within that short
timespan, the number of refugees from Ukraine in
neighbouring countries has risen exponentially, from
the then 520,000 to more than 3.1 million today, in
what has become the fastest-growing refugee crisis in
Europe since the Second World War.
With close to 2 million refugees from Ukraine,
in a matter of a few weeks, Poland has become one
of the largest refugee-hosting countries in the world.
Some 490,000 people have fled to Romania, 350,000 to
Moldova, 280,000 to Hungary and 228,000 to Slovakia.
Hundreds of thousands have now reached other

S/PV. 8998

European countries. A sizable number of people have
also moved to the Russian Federation and, to a lesser
extent, Belarus.
We are humbled by the remarkable resilience of the
refugees, many of whom left their homes with next to
nothing, and by the extraordinary hospitality of host
authorities and host communities. That solidarity
illustrates the very foundation of the international
refugee protection architecture and the spirit of the
Global Compact on Refugees. The acts of compassion,
humanity and kindness we now witness daily bring
hope and brighten an otherwise very grim reality.
We strongly commend the Governments of
receiving countries for keeping their borders open to
all those fleeing Ukraine, including third-country
nationals, who must continue to be received without
discrimination. The robust response that those countries
have mounted from scratch in an extremely short period
of time is truly impressive. We are heartened by the
bilateral and other support extended to the principal
refugee-hosting countries, the funding committed to
us so far in support of the $1.1 billion flash appeal for
the response inside Ukraine and the $550.6 million to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR)-led regional refugee response
plan, both launched on 1 March.
The outpouring of support from the private sector
and individuals, who have jointly provided some two
thirds of the funds raised for the response so far, must
be lauded. All international support to the response is
coordinated under the Refugee Coordination Model,
led by UNHCR, which has been established in Poland,
Moldova, Hungary, Romania and Slovakia, as well as in
other countries in the region.
The sum of collective expertise and support will
be critical in helping the refugee population and
supporting host countries with shelter, emergency
relief items and cash assistance, as well as mental
health and psychosocial support. UNHCR has scaled
up its response by deploying more than 200 experts and
established a field presence in all countries. UNHCR
staff on the ground undertakes regular protection
monitoring at the main border crossing points, reception
centres and other locations where refugees transit
or gather. However, with the current pace of refugee
outflows, the capacity of neighbouring countries is
being tested and stretched. We can and must do more to
support, and we must do it now.

22-291143/22

S/PV.8998

Threats to international peace and security

As the situation evolves, UNHCR, in coordination
with host Governments and partners, will assess the
needs, as necessary, and is currently adjusting the
regional refugee response plan. While some refugees
transit through Ukraine’s neighbouring countries, many
also join families that have been settled for quite some
time in those countries. That is particularly the case
in Poland, where, with the passage of time and everreducing resources, the number of refugees needing
integration will increase. They and the State that hosts
them will need support to ensure their inclusion in all
sectors of public life, health and education and access
to labour and other services.
With European Union (EU) host countries receiving
support from the rest of the Union, we are particularly
concerned about the situation in Moldova, where more
than 350,000 people have arrived. The refugee crisis
comes on top of pre-existing challenges. It is therefore
crucial that sufficient resources be made available
quickly to support the Government’s response.
As critical as it is, funding is only one of the many
forms of support urgently needed. We commend the
recent launch of the EU Solidarity Platform, designed to
ease the pressure on Ukraine’s neighbouring countries,
through transfers of vulnerable refugees to other EU
member States. We are grateful to those member States
that have already made concrete pledges to transfer
refugees from Moldova, and we encourage others to
join that initiative, which constitutes a remarkable and
innovative example of responsibility-sharing, in line
with the key tenets of the Global Compact on Refugees.
In addition, for the first time in its history, the EU
activated the Temporary Protection Directive, which
enables refugees, asylum-seekers and stateless persons
arriving from Ukraine to quickly regularize their
legal status, thereby alleviating pressure on asylum
systems. It will also enable refugees to find work,
access services and benefit from social protection.
Such temporary protection has also been announced
by the Governments of the United States, Canada,
Switzerland, Brazil and others.
I wish to further highlight that 90 per cent of the
refugees fleeing Ukraine are women and children,
indicating the heightened risk of gender-based violence
and other forms of exploitation and abuse, including
trafficking. As the Secretary-General said, for
predators and human traffickers, war is not a tragedy;
it is an opportunity. We are deeply concerned about
4/22

17/03/2022

media reports of incidents of gender-based violence and
trafficking, and we support the efforts of Governments
to scale up prevention and risk-mitigation measures,
including through the stay safe campaign, aimed at
awareness-raising and the provision of information
to refugees.
As part of UNHCR’s leading role in coordinating
the United Nations refugee response, we have also
deployed experts and protection from sexual exploitation
and abuse coordinators to support the Government’s
response in several refugee-hosting countries.
Since the early days of the crisis, UNHCR committed
to staying and delivering in Ukraine — and that is
what it has done. Allow me to take this opportunity to
express our deepest gratitude and admiration for our
colleagues who have remained in Ukraine, but also to
the whole humanitarian community.
We believe that at least 2 million people have been
forced to flee within Ukraine. Close to 13 million people
have been affected in the areas hit hardest by the war in
Ukraine. Many people remain trapped in areas where
the conflict is escalating and, with essential services
disrupted, are unable to meet even the most basic of their
needs. In many locations, such as Mariupol, residents
face a critical and potentially fatal shortage of food,
water and medicines. People living with disabilities or
serious medical conditions are particularly impacted.
UNHCR is closely tracking negotiations for their safe
passage and is preparing to send humanitarian supplies
as soon as conditions allow.
To facilitate the provision of life-saving assistance
to the populations most in need in Ukraine, we have
adjusted our operational presence, relocating offices
and warehouses to the western and central parts of the
country. Together with partners, we have been able
to deliver critical supplies for displaced and conflictaffected populations, including core relief items and
shelter materials.
We are working closely with local authorities
to establish and expand reception capacity in the
main locations where internally displaced people are
arriving. We coordinate the provision of key protection
services such as legal aid, social accompaniment,
psychosocial support, child protection and genderbased violence case management. Where conditions
allow, we distribute multi-purpose cash to help people
make the choices best suitable to their needs. Flexible
forms of assistance are crucial, as are innovative
22-29114

17/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

approaches. Despite all efforts, we are unable to
respond to the sheer scale of the rapidly growing needs
of the Ukrainian people and systematically deliver
much-needed life-saving assistance.
We cannot overemphasize the urgent call repeatedly
made by the Secretary-General, Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Emergency Relief Coordinator
Griffiths that civilians and civilian infrastructure must
be protected. International humanitarian law must be
upheld and safe passage for civilians — in any direction
they choose — must be enabled. Safe humanitarian
access to those in need and the unhindered delivery
of aid, including through a functioning humanitarian
notification system, remains of paramount importance.
In conclusion, allow me to paraphrase High
Commissioner Grandi, who is in Tajikistan today
after having left Afghanistan yesterday. On numerous
occasions, he has stressed that, as we respond to the
crisis in Ukraine, we cannot abandon or forget the
other recent and protracted humanitarian crises in
many regions of Africa, Latin America, Asia and the
Middle East.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Mazou
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ghebreyesus.
Mr. Ghebreyesus: I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to address the Council today.
The war in Ukraine is having devastating
consequences
for
the
health
of
Ukraine’s
people — consequences that will reverberate for years
or decades to come. There is severe disruption to health
services and access to basic commodities as a result of
the widespread destruction of infrastructure, including
health facilities. The World Health Organization (WHO)
has verified 43 attacks on health care facilities, with 12
people killed and 34 injured, including health workers.
In any conflict, attacks on health care are a violation
of international humanitarian law. They deprive people
of urgently needed care and break already strained
health systems.
The disruption to services and supplies in Ukraine
is posing an extreme risk to people with cardiovascular
disease, cancer, diabetes, HIV and tuberculosis, which
are among the leading causes of mortality in Ukraine.
Displacement, poor shelter and overcrowded living
conditions caused by the conflict are likely to increase

S/PV. 8998

the risk of diseases such as measles, pneumonia
and polio.
Services for mental health and psychosocial support
are urgently needed to help people cope with the effects
of the war. There are more than 35,000 mental health
patients in Ukrainian psychiatric hospitals and longterm care facilities, which are facing severe shortages
of medicines, food, heating, blankets and more.
The war is also exacerbating the impact of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in Ukraine.
With just one-third of the adult population fully
vaccinated, that increases the risk of large numbers of
people developing severe disease. Critical shortages
of oxygen will have an impact on the ability to treat
patients with COVID-19 and many other conditions.
At least eight facilities for producing and storing liquid
oxygen have now closed. We are seeking ways to access
oxygen from neighbouring countries and to deliver it
safely to where it is needed.
The WHO is on the ground, working with the
Ministry of Health and partners to support health
workers and the health system to provide care to meet
immediate health needs. So far, we have sent about
100 metric tons of medical supplies, including oxygen,
insulin, surgical supplies, anaesthetics and blood
transfusion kits — enough for 4,500 trauma patients
and 450,000 primary health-care patients for one
month. Other equipment, including oxygen generators,
electrical generators and defibrillators, have also been
delivered and we are preparing to send a further 108
metric tons.
We have now established supply lines from our
warehouse in Lviv to many cities in Ukraine, but accessrelated challenges remain. We need unfettered access.
We have critical supplies ready for United Nations joint
convoys to enter difficult areas, but so far we have not
been successful. Today, for example, the United Nations
convoy to Sumy, which included a WHO truck carrying
critical medical supplies, was unable to enter. Loads
ready for Mariupol remain in staging areas and cannot
proceed. Access to those and other areas is now critical.
To support Ukraine’s health system, the WHO is
coordinating the deployment of 20 emergency medical
teams, consisting of experts from many countries, to
deliver care across a range of disciplines in Ukraine
and neighbouring countries, which have been generous
in welcoming refugees but are struggling to meet their
needs, as my colleagues mentioned earlier. Those needs

22-291145/22

S/PV.8998

Threats to international peace and security

are immense and include continuity of care for basic
illnesses, as well as more complex issues like cancer
and renal dialysis, maternal and child health, HIV and
tuberculosis, sexual and reproductive health and mental
health. Refugees and many of those who remain in
Ukraine are already very vulnerable, especially women
and girls. Protecting them from abuse and exploitation of
all kinds must be a top priority for hosting Governments
and for all international organizations.
Today I have three urgent requests.
First, we urge the Security Council to work for an
immediate ceasefire and a political solution. Prolonged
conflict is in nobody’s interests and will only prolong
the suffering of the most vulnerable. The life-saving
medicine we need right now is peace.
Secondly, we urge all donors to support the response
to humanitarian needs in Ukraine and neighbouring
countries, which are immense and escalating every
day. Thanks to donors that front-loaded the WHO
Contingency Fund for Emergencies, we were able to
respond immediately, deploying more than $10 million
to address immediate health needs. These funds were
supplemented by additional funding from the United
Nations Central Emergency Response Fund. However,
to sustain the response, we call on donors to fully
fund the United Nations emergency appeal. As the
Under-Secretary-General said, only 36 per cent has
so far been funded. We thank those donors that have
already pledged funding to meet the needs of the people
in Ukraine.
And thirdly, although Ukraine is rightly the focus
of the world’s attention, I urge Council members not to
lose sight of the many other crises in which people are
suffering. In Afghanistan, more than half the population
is in need, with widespread malnutrition and a surge in
measles, among many other challenges. In Ethiopia, the
blockade of 6 million people in Tigray for almost 500
days has created a catastrophic food and health crisis.
In the Syrian Arab Republic, more than 12 million
people are in need of health assistance, almost half of
them children. And in Yemen, roughly two-thirds of
the population — more than 20 million people — is
estimated to be in need of health assistance.
In every case, the only solution is peace. I repeat — in
every case, the only solution is peace. And our world
needs peace more than ever. As if the coronavirus
disease were not enough, to have a devastating war like
this is dangerous for the world.
6/22

The President (spoke in
Dr. Ghebreyesus for his briefing.

17/03/2022

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank the briefers for their briefings today.
Just three weeks ago, Russia launched its
unprovoked, unjustified, unconscionable full-scale
invasion into Ukraine and assault on democracy. Now,
over 3 million refugees have fled the country, creating
a devastating humanitarian crisis felt around the world.
These refugees are mostly women and children. They
stuffed their lives into backpacks and left their homes
and everything they knew behind. Today, many of them
know that their apartment buildings and streets have
been bombed to rubble.
And the horrors continue for those who remain in
Ukraine. We have just heard from the Director-General
of the World Health Organization that 43 hospitals have
been attacked by Russia — 43 hospitals and health
facilities. Associated Press reporters on the ground
showed the world a mass grave in Mariupol — a narrow
trench filled with the bodies of children. Yesterday,
Russian forces dropped a powerful bomb that hit a
Mariupol theatre where hundreds of civilians were
hiding. The Russian word for “children” was written
outside the theatre, both front and back, in large white
letters that could have been seen from the sky. Yet
Russian forces bombed it anyway. Local officials have
told families to leave their dead relatives lying outside
on the streets — exposed to the world — because it is
simply too dangerous with the bombs and shelling to
hold funerals.
I have just met with Ukrainian civil society leaders.
They reported that people standing in a bread line,
trying to get food to feed their families, were shot
dead by Russian soldiers. They reported terror — the
terror that Russia is inflicting across Ukraine on the
Ukrainian people.
Russia will be held accountable for its atrocities.
There is only one way — one way — to end this madness.
President Putin must stop the killing, withdraw his
forces and leave Ukraine once and for all.
Yesterday I listened to President Zelenskyy’s
speech to the United States Congress and I was so
moved by his words, his bravery and his calls for help
and for peace. Immediately afterward, President Biden
22-29114

17/03/2022

S/PV. 8998

Threats to international peace and security

announced another $800 million in security assistance
to help Ukraine defend itself. That is more than
$1 billion in the past week alone.

infrastructure; ruined homes, schools and hospitals;
lives blown away by bombardments; and children’s
dreams up in smoke.

We are not doing this by ourselves. Our allies and
partners are fully committed to surging assistance
to the Ukrainians. And we are grateful to all of our
allies and partners who have opened their borders and
their hearts and welcomed Ukrainian refugees. We
are also going to continue to provide humanitarian
relief to support people within Ukraine and those who
have been forced to flee, including the $186 million in
additional assistance that Secretary Blinken announced
on Tuesday.

There is no need to describe this devastating
situation. Yet what we just heard from top United
Nations representatives — not from the so-called
Western hysteria — is soul-wrenching and coincides
with the shocking media reports on the horrors of
the war and the misery unleashed upon Ukraine for
no reason.

Here at the United Nations, we believe that the
best way to address the humanitarian crisis is through
a resolution of the General Assembly. The resolution
of the General Assembly will reflect the views of the
overwhelming majority of United Nations Member
States and Ukraine itself.
The International Court of Justice issued a profound
and important order yesterday to the Russian Federation,
and we call on Russia to comply immediately. Russia
has clearly violated international law by violating the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. Russia’s
brutal tactics have killed civilians, medics and some of
the journalists who have been showing us all the truth
of this war. Russia has attacked so much of what we
hold sacred and everything — everything — the United
Nations stands for. Russia’s actions must be condemned
in no uncertain terms.
As President Biden said, Ukraine will never be a
victory for Putin. No matter what advances he makes,
no matter whom he kills or what cities he destroys,
Ukraine will never be a victory for him. The United
States stands with Ukraine and the Ukrainian people,
and we will do everything — everything — in our
power to end this tragic, unnecessary war.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Rosemary DiCarlo
for her clarity and the very valuable information she
provides every time she comes to brief the Council. I
thank Mr. Mazou and Director-General Ghebreyesus
for their sobering information.
Three weeks into this unprovoked, unjustified,
illegal and deadly aggression by Russia, the terrible
facts are hardly surprising since they were anticipated
nearly to the detail: massive casualties among civilians;
mass graves; widespread destruction of civilian

I will perhaps just recall the summarizing words of
the Secretary-General when he said two days ago:
“Ukraine is
being decimated.”

on

fire.

The

country

is

I ask colleagues to guess by whom.
There are more than 3 million refugees in only
three weeks — more than the entire population of my
country; some 2 million people displaced internally;
and some 12 million people affected in the areas hardest
hit by the war.
UNICEF has evidenced that since the start of the
war, forced by this brutal aggression, every second
a child has crossed the border of Ukraine. Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Patten warns
that abuse and the risk of sexual and gender-based
violence, as well as trafficking, continue to mount amid
wide-scale displacement.
Several appeals for humanitarian corridors to
evacuate civilians went unheeded. Many people
remain trapped in areas of conflict and, with essential
services disrupted, are unable to meet their basic needs,
including for food, water and medicines.
For the estimated hundreds of thousands who
remain, there is simply nowhere to go. They can be
killed, even for queueing for bread, as happened. That
is the angry and true face of the Russian aggression.
The Director-General of the World Health
Organization, whose briefing we just heard, confirmed
that there have been 43 attacks on Ukrainian healthcare facilities, infrastructure and workers since the
beginning of the invasion — in other words, two every
day. Unfortunately, there are nearly a dozen conflicts
in the world today. Out of 89 attacks on health systems
around the world so far this year, 43 were in Ukraine
alone. Attacking health-care facilities and workers is
therefore becoming a tactic of war in Ukraine.

22-291147/22

S/PV.8998

Threats to international peace and security

Nothing is being spared. First, there was the
maternity ward in Mariupol. Then there was a mosque.
Yesterday Russians bombed the Drama Theatre in
Mariupol, a shelter for nearly 1,000 citizens who were
not able to flee the city. As was mentioned, the word
“children” in large Russian script was painted on the
ground outside the theatre. Everything must be bombed.
Despite that gruelling picture, the main news is
not just what I said. The main news is that Ukraine is
holding out, Ukraine is resisting, Ukraine in winning
and Russia is deep in the mud on the ground, morally,
legally and internationally.
We now know that for Russia to win this war of
choice, it has to do to the entire Ukraine what it did to
Grozny; it has to do to all Ukraine’s cities what it did to
Aleppo; and it has to do to everything there what it did
to Mariupol. Even after that, we will again be told here
that it is not its fault.
(spoke in French)
It’s Voltaire’s fault.
(spoke in English)
Yesterday Ukraine won the first legal victory at the
International Court of Justice. The International Court
of Justice, the guardian of international law, ruled that
there was no evidence to support Russian claims that
Ukraine was committing genocide in the Luhansk and
Donetsk regions. The Court called for the immediate
suspension of any kind of military operations by Russia
and entities, organizations or persons under its control.
The question is: Will Russia respect the Court’s order,
or will it unplug and cancel itself completely and
entirely from international law?
Beyond the human toll, the deliberate infrastructure
and residential destruction and the large-scale
humanitarian crisis, there is another major crisis: the
economic impact of the aggression. The United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) has warned that
every day of delayed peace will accelerate a freefall
into poverty in Ukraine. UNDP projected yesterday that
90 per cent of the Ukrainian population could be facing
poverty and extreme economic vulnerability, should
the war deepen. In the event of a continuing, protracted
war in Ukraine, almost one third of the population will
fall below the poverty line and a further 62 per cent
will be at extreme risk of falling into poverty within the
next 12 months. Again, UNDP warned that 18 years of
socioeconomic achievement could be lost. That would
8/22

17/03/2022

set the country and the entire region back decades,
leaving deep social and economic scars for generations
to come.
Who in this Chamber or outside it then believes
a single word from Russia about the Sustainable
Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, because those terrible effects will be felt
not only in Ukraine, but also in the entire world?
Russia has proposed a text for the humanitarian
draft resolution S/2022/231. We think that it is wrong.
It is worse — it is a mockery of proportions, a move
worthy of the Guinness record for hypocrisy.
Russia cannot shoot first and then come disguised
as a doctor. The only way to minimize humanitarian
consequences for the Ukrainian population is simple:
Russia has to stop the war, withdraw its troops and go
home. No one should become confused by a text just
because it is called a humanitarian text when the only
aim is to provide cover for the war. We therefore urge
colleagues not to fall for the emperor’s new clothes.
The Russian aggression is naked out there.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
join other speakers in thanking our briefers today.
As we heard, it is three weeks since we met in this
Chamber to make one final effort to avert a Russian
invasion of Ukraine (see S/PV.8974). It is three weeks
since we were interrupted by the news that President
Putin had abandoned diplomacy and chosen war. These
have been three devastatingly long weeks for the people
of Ukraine, for the 3 million people who have fled and
for those who have stayed.
As we heard from the United Nations, Russian
forces are laying siege to populated cities and towns
and indiscriminately shelling residential areas with
high-impact weaponry, including cluster munitions. A
total of 43 health-care facilities, including a maternity
hospital, have been attacked, killing the most vulnerable
and depriving civilians of access to medical assistance.
President Putin’s war is causing suffering well
beyond Ukraine’s borders. Thousands of students,
many from nations around this table, have been
caught up in the violence. The war is spiking food and
energy prices, bringing further pain to countries in the
developing world already suffering from the impact of
the coronavirus disease, famine, conflict and climate
change. Millions of refugees have been taken in by
countries across Europe.
22-29114

17/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Three weeks since the start of Russia’s invasion,
one point should be clear in our minds. This is an
unprovoked war of aggression, waged by Russia. Russia
is responsible for the suffering that it has inflicted on
Ukraine and beyond. Russia alone can end this war.
One hundred and forty-one States Members of the
United Nations have unequivocally condemned Russia’s
illegal invasion. The International Court of Justice
has issued a legally binding order, requiring Russia to
suspend military action in Ukraine immediately.
This week, perversely, Russia submitted draft
resolution S/2022/231, which, among other things,
calls for the protection of civilians, including women
and children. This is cynical game playing in the face
of human suffering.
Just yesterday, in Mariupol, Russian forces
reportedly targeted civilians taking cover from the
onslaught, despite the word “children” written on the
ground where they sheltered. If Russia really wanted
to protect women and children, it would withdraw its
troops from Ukraine and end this illegal invasion today.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, the Assistant High Commissioner
for Operations of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the Director-General
of the World Health Organization for their briefings.
Their presentations demonstrate, with the
impartiality and rigour that characterize the work of
the United Nations, the reality of the war waged by
Russia over the past three weeks. That reality is the
death of innocent civilians, as well as journalists and
medical personnel. It is the chaos created throughout
the country and well beyond, with heightened food
insecurity around the world. It is the millions of
shattered lives of all those who are forced to flee their
homes and who find no respite in hospitals or schools.
With its European partners, France will continue to
mobilize to welcome those refugees. It will continue to
support the Ukrainians and has released €100 million
for that purpose.
France calls on Russia to immediately stop its
bloody war and to comply with the order of the
International Court of Justice, issued yesterday.
France condemns in the strongest terms the siege
of several Ukrainian cities and the indiscriminate
bombing of civilian populations. We call on Russia to

S/PV. 8998

comply with international humanitarian law, to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure and to allow the
delivery of aid. Attacks on hospitals are war crimes.
France also condemns actions that have targeted
journalists and recall the obligation of armed forces
to protect them. We are particularly concerned about
reports of the use of cluster bombs by Russia.
France reiterates its condemnation of the Belarusian
regime’s support for this deadly war. We also condemn
Russia’s use of mercenaries, particularly Syrian ones.
That cannot absolve Russia of its responsibility in
that regard. Russia will be held accountable for its
crimes. In that respect, we welcome the opening of
an investigation by the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.
Finally, France denounces the cynicism of Russia,
which claims in New York to be concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Ukraine, when Russia
is entirely responsible for it. No one is fooled by the
Russian draft resolution. It should not be supported,
for to support it is to give Russia a blank cheque to
continue the war.
Despite the destruction and suffering, the war in
Ukraine has revealed another reality — the Ukrainian
people are showing admirable resistance. We salute
their courage and that of the Ukrainian authorities.
The international community is united in its
condemnation of this aggression. Many countries,
including France, immediately took measures aimed at
the Russian authorities and the economic circles close
to power in order to deprive them of resources and
prevent them from continuing this war. Those sanctions
have already proved effective and will continue to be
reinforced so as to increase the cost of the war until the
Russian authorities renounce violence.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I also would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Assistant
High Commissioner Mazou and Director-General
Tedros Ghebreyesus for their very sobering briefings.
Their messages are very grim. We commend all
humanitarian organizations working to alleviate the
human-made catastrophe being visited upon Ukraine.
The cause of that catastrophe is clear. Three
short weeks ago, as we sat in this very Chamber,
while the Secretary-General pleaded for peace, the
Russian Federation invaded Ukraine. Since then, we
have witnessed wanton devastation in a sovereign

22-291149/22

S/PV.8998

Threats to international peace and security

independent nation, with no regard for human life.
To date, more than 3 million people have had to flee
Ukraine, becoming refugees in neighbouring countries.
We heard today that 90 per cent of those forced
out of their homes and into uncertainty are women
and children.
Families have been torn apart. At least 2 million
people are internally displaced, increasingly vulnerable
and in need of immediate support. Ordinary people are
being traumatized by a cruel and reckless war. Women
and girls face heightened risk of being subjected to
sexual and gender-based violence, including rape and
trafficking. Their right to protection is being ignored.
The destruction of the basic services all of us here
at this table take for granted — food, water, sanitary
systems, health and education — is having a devastating
effect in Ukraine. We know that civilian casualties are
in the thousands. Irish journalist Pierre Zakrzewski
was tragically killed alongside Ukrainian journalist
Oleksandra Kuvshynova. They were both working to
shine a light on Ukraine’s plight. Our thoughts are
with their families and every grieving and suffering
Ukrainian family. Courageous journalists are showing
the horrific impact of Russian aggression. I salute the
free media putting their lives on the line to show us
the truth.
The humanitarian impact of this war is being felt
around the world. It will affect the food security of
countries heavily reliant on Ukrainian agricultural
products, including in Africa, Asia and the Middle
East. It will cause severe harm far beyond the borders
of Ukraine.
I find it a damning indictment that the Council
has to plead with the Russian Federation not to deprive
civilian populations of food and water, not to deny them
the basic infrastructure they need for daily existence,
for survival. It is a damning indictment that we in the
Council have not been able to speak with a united voice
to save innocent lives in this war.
The images from a besieged Mariupol are shocking.
We see once again that urban warfare takes the heaviest
toll on civilians. We deplore the targeting of healthcare facilities, doctors taken hostage, life-saving care
interfered with by military forces. Last week’s attack
by Russian forces on a maternity hospital in Mariupol
plumbed new depths, resulting in the death of a mother
and her newborn baby — a baby that never had a chance.
We have to ask — how many more?
10/22

17/03/2022

The residents of Mariupol are now melting snow
or siphoning water from heating systems in order to
quench their thirst. They are cutting down trees for
firewood for cooking and to stay warm in the freezing
night temperatures. The city’s supermarkets have been
emptied because the basic necessities of life cannot
be safely brought into the city. It is chilling to think
that the suffering forced on Mariupol may be visited
on other Ukrainian cities. There can be no justification
for this brutal aggression. It should never have been
perpetrated. It must be stopped.
Ireland calls on the Russian Federation to comply
with its obligations to protect civilian health-care
facilities and medical and humanitarian personnel.
It must facilitate the safe passage and unhindered
delivery of humanitarian assistance, including medical
and food supplies. Whatever is agreed or not agreed,
on humanitarian corridors or other measures, civilians
and civilian infrastructure must be protected under
international humanitarian law. That applies both to
those who choose to leave and those who choose to
remain. Surely the most basic respect for human life
must mean something to the aggressor, even now.
Let us be clear: the provision of humanitarian
assistance is not dependent on a ceasefire; it is
dependent on those bombing cities doing the right thing
in accordance with their obligations.
Attacks directed against civilians and civilian
objects, indiscriminate attacks and disproportionate
attacks are all prohibited under international
humanitarian law. Ireland remains gravely concerned
by the humanitarian harm arising from the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas in Ukraine.
There have been reports of the use of cluster munitions
and thermobaric weapons by Russian military forces.
Those weapons cause mass casualties. They pose
great risk for civilians when deployed in urban areas,
including long after the fighting has ceased. Their use is
unconscionable. Equally, any use of white phosphorus
against civilians or civilian infrastructure is abhorrent
and contrary to international law.
Russia’s war in Ukraine is not only morally wrong;
it is illegal. Yesterday, in granting Ukraine’s request for
provisional measures against the Russian Federation,
the International Court of Justice was clear and
emphatic: Russia must immediately suspend military
operations in Ukraine.
22-29114

17/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

In the light of the Court’s decision, which is binding
on the Russian Federation and which it cannot ignore,
Ireland once again calls on the Russian Federation to
comply with its obligations under international law
and immediately end its aggression, unconditionally
withdraw its forces from the entire territory of Ukraine
and refrain from further threat or use of force of any
kind against Ukraine or any other Member State.
For three long weeks diplomacy has proved
unavailing, for three long weeks the world has watched
this war with horror; yet we believe that there is still a
chance for peace. We urge the Russian Federation to
do the right thing and commit to the diplomatic path in
good faith. It is never too late to do the right thing.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I join others in thanking the
briefers for their sobering presentations.
Three weeks ago, Russia launched its military
aggression and invaded Ukraine. Since the start of
the war, almost every second a Ukrainian child has
become a refugee. More than 3 million civilians have
crossed the border into neighbouring countries seeking
protection, and more than 2 million people are displaced
inside Ukraine. They are fleeing from the horrors of
Russia’s unjust and illegal war against Ukraine; from
the destructive power of one of the world’s biggest war
machines; from Russia’s shelling of homes, schools
and hospitals; and from Russia’s indiscriminate use
of explosive weapons and its deplorable use of cluster
bombs, weapons that destroy cities, killing civilians
even as they are fleeing or hiding. The human suffering
is unacceptable.
We encourage countries to keep their borders open
to all those seeking safety outside Ukraine, without
discrimination, and we commend the generosity of the
neighbouring countries and their solidarity with those
fleeing the war.
Many of those fleeing are in a vulnerable situation,
as we heard from Dr. Ghebreyesus. They are at risk
of sexual and gender-based violence, trafficking and
other forms of exploitation — traumatized children and
adults in need of mental and psychosocial support. We
encourage humanitarian organizations to give priority
to those issues in their response.
Civilians must be protected at all times, and
humanitarian and medical workers must also be
protected and allowed safe, rapid and unhindered
access to people in need. The protection of civilians and

S/PV. 8998

humanitarian access are not a matter of choice. They are
legal obligations under international humanitarian law,
obligations that must be respected. Those responsible
for violations must be held accountable.
Russia’s war is causing despair and suffering
with global implications. Russia is responsible for the
increased food prices and higher risk of food insecurity
that many countries now face. Russia’s war against
Ukraine will further exacerbate humanitarian crises,
death and disaster for people across continents.
Russia, and Russia alone, bears sole responsibility
for the war and humanitarian crisis. Russia must stop
its military aggression against Ukraine. Russia must
comply with the order by the International Court of
Justice to immediately suspend its military operations
in Ukraine. If Russia cares about the humanitarian
suffering that this war is causing, then Russia should
stop its senseless and illegal war.
The Russian draft resolution has no credibility; it
will not stop the war and the suffering. We echo the
call of the Secretary-General to the effect that political
dialogue, negotiation and mediation are the only way
forward. We need to see genuine talks that translate
into concrete results on the ground, and they must be
inclusive. We need to see women included meaningfully
in all talks, negotiations and mediation efforts. For the
sake of humanity, this war must stop.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo; Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Assistant High Commissioner for Operations Raouf
Mazou; and World Health Organization DirectorGeneral Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus for their
respective briefings on the security and humanitarian
situation in Ukraine.
India remains deeply concerned at the ongoing
situation, which has progressively deteriorated since
the beginning of the hostilities. The conflict has
resulted in the deaths of civilians; the displacement of
thousands of people internally; and the outflow of more
than 3 million refugees to neighbouring countries. The
humanitarian situation has worsened, particularly in
the conflict zones.
It is urgent, therefore, to address the humanitarian
needs of the affected population. In that regard, we
support the initiatives of the United Nations and its

22-2911411/22

S/PV.8998

Threats to international peace and security

agencies, which have mobilized whatever is possible in
the shortest possible time frame.
We hope that the international community will
continue to respond positively to the humanitarian
needs of the people of Ukraine, including through
extending generous support to the Secretary-General’s
flash appeal and the regional refugee response plan
on Ukraine.
Keeping in view the dire humanitarian situation
unfolding in Ukraine, India has already sent more than
90 tonnes of humanitarian supplies to Ukraine and
its neighbours as part of the nine separate tranches
of humanitarian assistance delivered thus far. Those
supplies have included medicines and other essential
relief materials. We are in the process of identifying
other such requirements and sending further supplies
in the coming days.
India has ensured the safe return of about 22,500
Indians from Ukraine. We have also assisted nationals
from 18 other countries in that process. We are
deeply appreciative of the facilitation rendered by the
authorities of Ukraine and its neighbouring countries
in ensuring their safe return.
Allow me to underscore that it is important that
humanitarian action always be guided by the principles
of humanitarian assistance, that is, humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence. Those measures should
not be politicized.
We reiterate our call for an immediate cessation
of hostilities across Ukraine. Our Prime Minister
has reiterated this on several occasions, called for an
immediate ceasefire and emphasized that there is no
option but the path of dialogue and diplomacy.
We stand ready to continue to engage on these
objectives in the Security Council, as well as with the
parties, in the coming days. We continue to underline
the need to respect the United Nations Charter,
international law and the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): I thank the President
for convening this meeting and also thank the briefers
for the updated information they have shared on the
prevailing situation in Ukraine. I also welcome the
participation in this meeting of the representatives of
Poland and Ukraine.
12/22

17/03/2022

Ghana reiterates once more the call on the Russian
Federation for an unconditional and immediate ceasefire
and for the withdrawal of all its invading troops
from within the internationally recognized borders
of Ukraine. The cessation of hostilities is critical to
saving lives and preventing further devastation to the
Ukrainian people. It remains fundamental to addressing
the worsening humanitarian conditions.
We remain deeply concerned about the
military escalations and the disproportionate use of
unconventional munitions in bombarding the cities
and civilian populated areas of Ukraine, and we are
disheartened by the trauma that the situation has
caused, especially to the elderly, women and children.
The parties to the conflict must urgently commit to a
humanitarian pause to enable the evacuation and safe
passage of civilians and facilitate the delivery of food,
medicine and other essential services to those in critical
need and those who have been caught up in cities under
siege. We also deplore the attacks on medical facilities
and call for the protection of humanitarian workers
and medical personnel. We urge the parties to comply
with their commitments under international law and
international humanitarian law, in particular the
provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War.
We continue to urge the parties to accept the path
of diplomacy and dialogue in resolving their security
concerns. We believe that the good offices of the
Secretary-General should be leveraged to facilitate a
peaceful resolution of the conflict.
In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that the interest
and safety of the Ukrainian people should be prioritized
and must be at the forefront of the actions of the Security
Council and all other international actors.
Mr. Nanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. DiCarlo, Dr. Tedros Adhanom
Ghebreyesus, and Mr. Raouf Mazou for their briefings
on the humanitarian situation in Ukraine.
The intensification of the fighting and the resulting
mass exodus of civilians, the deterioration of the
living conditions and health conditions of those who
have decided to stay, and the risks of disease owing to
the disruption of basic public services are all matters
of concern. We again urge all parties to respect the
provisions of international humanitarian law and
ensure respect for and protection of the population,
22-29114

17/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

including African nationals, as well as civilian
infrastructure, medical personnel and humanitarian
workers. We reiterate the urgency of opening safe
humanitarian corridors and call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities. Saving lives must transcend all
political considerations.
The parties to the conflict must seize every
opportunity that diplomacy offers to reach a negotiated
settlement through dialogue and avoid a stalemate.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya) I thank the briefers for
their briefings this afternoon.
Kenya is gravely concerned that three weeks on,
the armed conflict in Ukraine has continued unabated.
The continuing reports of loss of life, displacement and
separation of loved ones including through millions
of refugees in just three weeks are deeply disturbing.
Kenya extends its condolences to the families who have
lost loved ones to the conflict and stands in solidarity
with all the affected.
We commend Ukraine’s neighbours for opening
their borders to refugees of multiple nationalities and
we urge them to continue to ensure that the protections
sought are offered without discrimination of any kind,
and particularly on the basis of race or religion.
Kenya condemns the targeting and destruction
of civilian objects and infrastructure, particularly
residential homes, hospitals and shelters. The
parties are obligated to comply with international
humanitarian law. We remind the Security Council that
civilians, including foreign nationals in Ukraine, are
not party to the conflict and must not be a target. In this
regard, all actors, including the parties, must consider
and prioritize the safety and interest of civilians in
accordance with international humanitarian law.
The imperative to ensure that humanitarian
passages are open and functioning at all times cannot
be overstated. We believe there is an urgent need for
a humanitarian resolution that reflects the unity and
resolve of the Security Council to assist the people
of Ukraine.
Ultimately, the only way out of this crisis is an
immediate and unconditional cessation of the military
campaign. We urge the parties to do this to allow
humanitarian assistance to flow and create room for
diplomacy and constructive dialogue, including through
the good offices of the Secretary-General, towards a
sustainable political solution.

S/PV. 8998

We underscore the need for an urgent resolution of
this armed conflict. Its impact is already being felt by
multiple countries in the form of increased prices of
food products, fertilizer, oil and other essentials. If it is
not quickly prevented, this trend, including the added
effects of unilateral sanctions, will exacerbate State
fragilities and fuel ongoing conflicts across the world,
especially in the global South.
In closing, Kenya restates its recognition of
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Ukraine.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): At the outset, I
would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, Mr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization (WHO),
and Mr. Raouf Mazou, Assistant High Commissioner
for Operations, Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, for their briefings.
As the conflict in Ukraine lingers on, the dire
humanitarian situation in the region is further
deteriorating. Brazil is deeply concerned with the
growing number of civilian casualties, including
children, as well as the increasing flows of refugees
and internally displaced people. According to some
estimates, the number of people impacted by the
conflict is around 18 million, of which more than
6 million are internally displaced, and nearly 3 million
have fled Ukraine. The destruction of infrastructure
has caused food shortages, energy outages and
intermittent communications.
Under these circumstances, supply chains have been
disrupted. The access to medical facilities is impaired.
Medical supplies are running low, their distribution is
uncertain, and some stockpiles are out of reach owing
to military operations. Hospitals and medical personnel
are struggling to provide care to the sick and wounded.
In response to the most pressing needs for humanitarian
assistance, the Brazilian Government last week sent
a donation consisting of water purifiers, around nine
tons of food and half a ton of medical items, totalling
approximately 20,000 items donated by the Brazilian
Ministry of Health. With the assistance of the Embassy
of Brazil in Warsaw, the supplies landed at the capital
and were delivered to Ukraine in coordination with the
country’s authorities.
The international community must come to the
assistance of the people most in need, not only those

22-2911413/22

S/PV.8998

Threats to international peace and security

directly afflicted by the hostilities in Ukrainian territory
but also the refugees in neighbouring countries. We
commend the World Health Organization for its work
to ensure the delivery of health supplies to Ukraine and
its neighbouring countries. The availability of medical
personnel, medicines and health equipment is crucial
to meet the urgent needs of the sick and wounded.
Currently, Ukraine’s health system is under critical
pressure to cope with the demands for assistance from
the many victims of the conflict.
It is distressing to know that, as of 12 March, the
World Health Organization verified 31 attacks against
health-care facilities in Ukraine, resulting in dozens of
deaths and injuries, including among health workers.
The attacks against health-care facilities are particularly
worrisome, as they deprive people of life-saving
services. Attacks against health-care infrastructure are
violations of international humanitarian law.
We reiterate our position that the immediate
cessation of hostilities in Ukraine is the main condition
to guarantee the passage of civilians from conflict zones
to safe areas. Moreover, only with a comprehensive
and effective ceasefire can there be rapid, safe and
unhindered access of humanitarian assistance to those
in need.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russia): We listened very carefully to the briefers,
and we share the concerns voiced by United Nations
about the humanitarian crisis that is unfolding in a
number of regions in Ukraine. It is also rightly pointed
out by our colleagues in the Security Council. The
difference, however, is that the assessments of some,
in particular Western States, go above and beyond the
refugee situation with the campaign of disinformation
in Ukraine — which started at the beginning of
the special military operation — reaching greater
and greater heights. Today we heard a whole slew
of such information from our colleagues, including
the accusation of the shelling of the now infamous
maternity hospital in Mariupol and the Mariupol
theatre; that Russia is not allowing refugees to leave;
that Russia shelled the Sultan Suleiman Mosque; that
Russia used automatic weapons to shoot at a breadline
in Chernihiv. All these fakes have been refuted on
multiple occasions.
The American colleague referred to the DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization (WHO), who
allegedly said that 33 hospitals were allegedly bombed
14/22

17/03/2022

by Russia. I would like to inform her that the DirectorGeneral of WHO — one should ask him — did not
say that. To our knowledge, it is not within acceptable
norms of the WHO to attribute the responsibility for
a strike on a medical facility to anyone. Concerning
the issue of attribution and who is responsible for the
destruction of medical facilities in Ukraine, we have
many questions and will return to this topic later.
Concerning the breadline in Chernihiv, that
has been refuted many times. There is no Russian
military presence in Chernihiv. It was a consequence
of distributing weapons to whoever wanted them in
Ukraine. At the time, in addition to other types of
weapons, 25,000 automatic weapons were distributed
to the population at large.
With regard to the Sultan Suleiman Mosque in
Mariupol, the Mosque’s treasurer refuted the allegation
that the Turkish mosque, in which there were 80 people,
was shelled by Russia from the east. I do not know
who will wind up holding the record on cynicism in
the Guinness World Records book, but I know who
will hold the record on fakes uttered during one single
Security Council meeting in that book.
As I said, the situation in and around Mariupol is
a kind of symbol for the Western and Ukrainian fake
factory. To those who do not know, I want to explain
what is special about that city. During the events from
2014 to 2015, when the Ukrainian military machine
pitted planes and tanks against residents who disagreed
with the new Maidan Government in the east, Mariupol
was one of the main centres of resistance in the Donetsk
People’s Republic. Its residents almost unanimously
supported the independence of the Republic in a
referendum and actively opposed the nationalist regime
in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Nazis have not forgotten that.
They soaked the city in blood and turned it into a kind
of headquarters and stronghold of the volunteer Nazi
battalions, primarily the Azov Battalion, as well as the
Right Sector.
At the airport in Mariupol there was the infamous
prison, with all the trappings of a torture centre,
including ditches containing the bodies of the tortured,
solitary-confinement cells and chainsaws. That is
representative not of the Middle Ages, but of neoNazism. That is exactly why Ukrainian radicals are
desperately holding on to that city. First, it hides much
evidence of their crimes, and, secondly, they understand
that they will have to answer for them.
22-29114

17/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

That is why they are ready to drag all the people
of Mariupol to their graves. Just as the Nazis did
when Berlin was besieged in 1945, they are using the
residents as human shields, while not allowing them to
evacuate and placing heavy weapons next to residential
buildings, in violation of international humanitarian
law. Both our Western partners and, unfortunately, the
representatives of the Secretariat stubbornly refuse
to see that. However, it is difficult to hide the truth.
We call attention to the statement by the International
Committee of the Red Cross, which sheds light on
such facts.
In a situation like the current one, it is not surprising
that Mariupol has become almost the leader in terms of
the number and sophistication of fakes, the manufacture
of which has become the main task of the Ukrainian
regime. I will highlight three of the most shocking.
The first is, of course, the former maternity
hospital in Mariupol, allegedly destroyed by a Russian
missile. I will not dwell on it in detail. I will simply say
that we covered that earlier and included the relevant
information in a letter to the Secretary-General.
It is difficult to find a reasonable explanation for
the fact that our Western colleagues chose to ignore
not only our advance-warning that the maternity
hospital had long since been turned into military
firing post for the Ukrainian nationalists, but also the
irrefutable evidence pointing to the staged nature of
the White-Helmets-style photo shoot there, as well as
the opinions of reputable ballistic experts, who say that
the building was not hit from the outside but that there
was an explosion from the inside. They also ignore the
opinion of ballistic experts, who say that nothing hit the
building but that there was an explosion.
The second piece of false information was mentioned
today by our Western colleagues: Russia allegedly hit
the Mariupol theatre, where more than 1,000 people had
sought refuge. In fact, on 13 March, public information
was already widely available, provided by individuals
in Mariupol, who had miraculously managed to escape
the city. They said that the Azov Battalion was holding
a huge number of people hostage in the building and
was preparing for a bloody provocation. We are not
surprised by the fact that the world “children” is written
on the ground in front of the building.
The Russian armed forces were informed about
the situation and the building that houses the theatre
had never been considered a target for a strike anyway.

S/PV. 8998

However, Western reporters are quick to report certain
information about provocations. That has become a
tragic hallmark of provocations in Ukraine, as they
cover up abuses conducted by nationalist battalions and
Ukrainian armed forces.
Following Western propaganda efforts to ensure
that the mass media throughout the world showed the
image of a man who had lost his wife due to a Ukrainian
strike conducted using a Tochka-U missile with cluster
munitions in the centre of Donetsk — which was
reported as an incident that had occurred in Kyiv — it
is very difficult for us to ask members to be objective in
their assessments. Once again, let me recall that none of
the members present or the Western mass media made
any mention of the tragedy in Donetsk, which resulted
in the death of 20 deaths of civilians.
The third false piece of information is that Russia
is allegedly forcing people from Mariupol and other
Ukrainian towns into Russia, and, as such, only
humanitarian corridors into Ukraine should be opened.
That is a barefaced lie. Since the beginning of the
special military operation, the Russian Ministry of
Defence hotline has received more than 2.5 million
requests for evacuation into Russia. Regrettably, we
must underscore that we have been unable to evacuate
everyone thus far. That is because Ukrainian authorities
are preventing people from leaving.
Nonetheless, over the past 24 hours alone, we
managed to ensure the evacuation from Mariupol,
which we had finally managed to unblock, of more
than 31,000 civilians, including 89 foreign nationals,
including 71 staff members of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, nine Greek
nationals and nine Pakistani nationals. Of the 31,000
evacuees, only 36 people moved to Kyiv-controlled
territories in the Dnipropetrovsk oblast. The remainder
opted for Russia and areas of the Zaporizhzhya and
Kherson oblasts, under the control of Russian armed
forces, and categorically refused to move to territories
under Kyiv control.
The entire humanitarian operation was conducted
by the Donetsk People’s Republic forces and Russian
armed forces, without any participation from the
Ukrainian side. I would like to draw the attention of
the Council to the fact that the car jam at the exit of
Mariupol moving towards Berdiansk and Melitopol,
liberated from Ukrainian Nazis, is 10 kilometres long.
Until Russian forces entered the city, that was not seen.

22-2911415/22

S/PV.8998

Threats to international peace and security

It is not surprising, as peaceful civilians were needed
by the Nazis as human shields. Those who escaped
Mariupol described the mass atrocities and crimes
committed by the territorial defence battalions and
abuses against the elderly, women and children. All of
those people are now being provided with medical and
psychological assistance. The situation in other areas
is different.
Yesterday we fully complied with the silence
regime along humanitarian corridors, proposed by the
Ukrainian side, in the direction of Kyiv, Zaporizhzhya,
Zhytomir, Sumy, Kharkiv and Poltava. That has been
confirmed several times by means of objective control,
including with the use of drones.
With regard to the issue of humanitarian corridors
into Russia, neo-Nazis refused to allow people to leave
and threatened them. Those who managed to break
through were ruthlessly shot at. Yesterday, in the
Kharkiv direction, once again there was a line of buses,
full of refugees, being shot at as they moved along the
humanitarian corridor towards Russia. As a result, four
people died and others sustained injuries.
Despite all of the challenges and obstacles,
yesterday alone, without the participation of Kyiv, we
managed to evacuate from dangerous areas 12,440
people, including 2,242 children. Overall, since the
beginning of the special military operation, 271,231
people, including 58,422 children, have already been
evacuated. They crossed the border into Russia. That
includes 31,000 individual cars. We stand ready to
receive even more people.
We have more than 9,500 points of temporary
housing in the Russian Federation. In territories that have
been liberated, we create the necessary conditions to
ensure that those who want to can receive humanitarian
assistance, which, in many places, remains the only
possible means of survival. The medicine, clothing
and food, received from international organizations,
in particular the International Committee of the Red
Cross, is resold by the mayors of Ukrainian cities
to local entrepreneurs. That has been confirmed in
Zhytomir, Ivano-Frankivsk, Vinnytsia, Rovno, Lutsk,
Dubno, Vladimir-Volynsky and Lviv.
Some 6,910 foreign nationals from 22 States are
essentially being held hostage by the territorial defence
battalions. In addition, the crews of 70 foreign ships are
blocked in the seaports of Ukraine due to a high level
of mine-related risks. That situation was created by
16/22

17/03/2022

Kyiv authorities in their internal waters and territorial
sea and related to possible provocations by Ukrainian
armed forces from the shore.
We continue sending humanitarian assistance to
those in need in Ukraine. Mariupol alone received
more than 450 tons of food, medicine and basic
necessities. Overall, since 2 March, our Ministry from
Emergencies and Ministry of Defence have provided
approximately 3,000 tons of humanitarian cargo, as
well as construction materials, to certain regions of
Ukraine, including Donbas. Another issue is that in
several cases, local administrations threaten those
who receive Russian humanitarian assistance with
punishment. Every day, Western capitals claim to be
providing Kyiv with weaponry of all kinds.
Yesterday Washington announced that, this week,
Ukraine will receive defence assistance valued at
$1 billion. They are fuelling the conflict. The kind of
tragedy that results from the indiscriminate distribution
of light weapons to anyone who wants them is quite clear.
I wonder whether or not Western voters and taxpayers
know about the risk of such weaponry — including
portable air defence weapons, for example — ending
up in the hands of terrorist groups in Europe. Do they
not understand how dangerous it is to fuel the situation
in Ukraine and how dangerous it is for their own
security? Everyone has heard about the drone that flew
from Ukraine and landed in Croatia. It was filled with
explosives. By the way, it went unnoticed as it flew
over several countries from Ukraine to Zagreb, and the
distance between the westernmost point of Ukraine and
Zagreb more than 700 kilometres.
We note with regret that Ukraine has always
been a pawn in the geopolitical struggle against
Russia, and it remains a pawn. Western politicians
could not have cared less about the people in Donbas,
including women, children and the elderly, who had
been suffering and dying from Ukrainian shelling
throughout all these years. If that were not the case,
we would not now be dealing with the salacious uproar
surrounding the humanitarian draft resolution on
Ukraine. After the text was developed by France and
Mexico, it immediately ceased to be humanitarian
and was instead filled with political formulations that
have nothing to do with humanitarian issues. As we
were clearly told, the Western countries do not need
the draft resolution without such formulations. In order
to obtain an anti-Russian product, they were ready to
submit it not to the Security Council, but to the General
22-29114

17/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Assembly, ignoring the fact that such a document will
not help humanitarian workers in any way whatsoever.
Russia submitted its own draft resolution
(S/2022/231) to the Council containing everything that
the humanitarian workers need. It does not contain any
political assessments, which are not found in any other
humanitarian resolutions of the Council. The document
is open for co-sponsorship by all United Nations
States Members. However, we are being told that the
humanitarian draft resolution Russia submitted does
not satisfy Western countries, thereby demonstrating
the true goal of the co-sponsors of the first so-called
humanitarian Council draft resolution. That is true
hypocrisy and cynicism.
Another example of cynicism is the fact that many
colleagues from various delegations have come to us
to complain about relentless pressure and arm-twisting
from Western partners, up to and including economic
blackmail and threats. The United States and Albania
have issued a letter in which States Members are called
upon to refrain from sponsoring our draft resolution.
We understand how difficult it is for Member States
to withstand that kind of onslaught. For that reason, we
have decided not to ask for a vote on our draft resolution
for the time being, but we are not withdrawing it. Instead,
we will call for an urgent meeting tomorrow morning to
once again discuss the issue of United States biological
laboratories in Ukraine, taking into account the new
documents that came into our possession during the
special military operation. We will be sending a letter
to the Emirati presidency on that issue promptly.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Director-General
Ghebreyesus and Assistant High Commissioner Mazou
for their briefings.
China is deeply worried about the worsening
humanitarian situation in Ukraine and deplores the
reported increase in civilian casualties and refugees.
The pressing task now is to call for maximum restraint
by all parties and to ensure the safety and security of all
civilians, including women and children, while meeting
their basic humanitarian needs so as to prevent the
occurrence of a larger-scale humanitarian crisis.
China supports the work by the relevant parties
in maintaining communication, ensuring a safe
and unimpeded humanitarian corridor and further
facilitating personnel evacuations and humanitarian

S/PV. 8998

assistance. The number of refugees and displaced
persons caused by the conflict is still on the rise, hugely
impacting Ukraine and its neighbouring countries.
China supports the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the World Health
Organization, among others, in actively conducting
operations and mobilizing the international community
to assist all those in need.
Recently, we have seen how some people of
African or Middle Eastern descent have encountered
difficulties during the evacuation process. That should
be taken seriously and addressed properly. All refugees,
regardless of their colour, race or religion, should be
afforded the necessary protection under international
refugee law.
China is paying close attention to the humanitarian
situation in Ukraine and has put forward a six-point
proposal. The Red Cross Society of China has provided
Ukraine with three batches of humanitarian supplies,
the third of which contains milk powder and quilts
for children — specifically helping the Red Cross
Society of Ukraine assist displaced children affected
by the conflict.
We welcome any initiative or proposal from any
party that contributes to alleviating or resolving the
humanitarian crisis in Ukraine. The Security Council
bears the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, and it should therefore
play a positive role in easing the humanitarian situation
in Ukraine. China hopes that the Council can remain
united on the humanitarian issue and demonstrate a
constructive attitude.
The international community shares a common
aspiration for a ceasefire at an early date to alleviate
the situation on the ground and to prevent civilian
casualties — an aspiration that China shares. To
date, Russia and Ukraine have held four rounds of
negotiations. Keeping the negotiations going means that
there is a chance for a ceasefire, and therefore a chance
for a peaceful future. China remains committed to
promoting peace through negotiations. We support the
United Nations and the parties concerned in vigorously
carrying out good offices. We also hope that all parties
will do more to facilitate peace talks and not add fuel
to the fire.
The facts have proven that relying on sanctions
alone will solve nothing, and will instead create new

22-2911417/22

S/PV.8998

Threats to international peace and security

problems. In the light of the global economy’s sluggish
recovery, ever-escalating sanctions are undermining
stability in international industrial and supply chains,
thereby exacerbating food and energy crises, damaging
people’s livelihoods in all countries — especially
developing ones — and triggering new humanitarian
consequences. That is also an issue to which the
Security Council should pay attention when addressing
the humanitarian situation in Ukraine.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary General DiCarlo,
Assistant High Commissioner Mazou and DirectorGeneral Ghebreyesus for their briefings.
Three weeks have passed since the Russian invasion
of Ukraine began, and the toll is truly devastating. We
have heard tragic figures, with more than 3 million
refugees and nearly 1.8 million internally displaced
persons. Those are exorbitant numbers, especially if we
remember that, exactly one month ago, we were sitting
in this very Chamber evaluating the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, when we were told that what was
happening on the ground were only military exercises
(see S/PV.8968). What, then, will the humanitarian
perspective be if the pattern that has prevailed so
far continues?
I want to begin by acknowledging the solidarity of
all the countries that have received refugees, especially
those that have taken on the largest flows. But the needs
of people who have not been able to get out or have not
been able to be evacuated from besieged urban areas
have continued to grow, and will continue to do so,
especially for those who do not have access to basic
services such as drinking water, food and medicine. It
is therefore imperative to ensure safe and unrestricted
access for humanitarian and health personnel, who are
the only ones able to provide those basic services to the
civilian population.
As we have heard, the World Health Organization
has recorded 43 attacks on medical facilities in Ukraine.
The indisputable fact is that attacking health facilities
is expressly prohibited by international humanitarian
law. There is therefore an urgent need to ensure that
the more than 300 medical facilities along or within the
lines of conflict are respected.
We condemn attacks on medical personnel, their
means of transport and the equipment they need to do
their work. The short- and long-term consequences
of these actions on civilians and health-care systems
18/22

17/03/2022

can be irreversible and are therefore unacceptable.
We reiterate our call for compliance with resolutions
addressing this issue: resolution 2286 (2016), which
includes specific references to the protection of
medical personnel and humanitarian personnel, and
resolution 2573 (2021), which refers to civilian objects
considered indispensable.
In the same vein, we welcome the decision issued
yesterday by the International Court of Justice, ordering
the immediate suspension of military operations that
began on 24 February. As we have repeatedly stated
in the Security Council, the fundamental premise for
humanitarian assistance is the cessation of hostilities.
While the United Nations and various humanitarian
actors are focusing their efforts on providing the
urgent assistance that the population needs, it is also
appropriate to reiterate that a solution to this conflict
will be achieved only through dialogue and diplomacy.
We recognize the initiatives under way, including
the recent meeting in the framework of the Antalya
Diplomacy Forum. Any genuine attempt at negotiation
should be welcomed.
We therefore regret that, despite the genuine good
faith efforts in which we have been engaged these past
two weeks, together with France and other States,
whose constructive participation we are grateful for,
the Security Council has yet to issue an unequivocal
call for a cessation of hostilities. Such a call from the
Council would be the most significant humanitarian
assistance that the civilian population in Ukraine
could receive.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
I thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Mr. Raouf Mazou and
Dr. Tedros Ghebreyesus for their comprehensive briefings.
What we have heard today reflects the serious
deterioration of the humanitarian situation as a result
of the continued conflict in Ukraine. The number of
refugees is increasing at an alarming rate. Civilians
throughout Ukraine continue to suffer owing to the
obstacles hindering the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, such as food, medical equipment and other
basic needs. At the same time, the damage to the
civilian infrastructure will aggravate the humanitarian
situation in major Ukrainian cities, especially Mariupol.
22-29114

17/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8998

In this context, my country would like to focus on four
main points.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

First, we look positively at the ongoing negotiations
between the Russian Federation and Ukraine. We hope
that these negotiations will pave the way for calm to
allow humanitarian organizations to carry out their
tasks and meet the needs of civilians. In this context,
there is an urgent need to take concrete steps aimed at
de-escalating the situation on the ground and building
trust between the two parties, including by concluding
agreements that enable humanitarian organizations to
deliver aid safely to those in need, establish corridors
for exiting civilians and reach an agreement on ensuring
their protection.

The representative of the United States has asked
for the floor to make a further statement.

Secondly, my country values the essential role of
neighbouring countries, especially Poland, Romania and
Moldova, and others in responding to the humanitarian
crisis by receiving refugees and expanding social safety
networks to meet their needs. At the same time, and
drawing from our experiences in the Middle East, we
recognize the importance of supporting these countries
in order to provide full care to refugees, especially as
the prolongation of the conflict will entail continued
waves of displaced persons.

Let us not forget that Russia is the aggressor in this
situation. It is the one that is creating the pretext for
attacks on its own people, and we cannot be fooled by
its efforts in that regard. It has troops inside Ukraine.
It is killing people inside Ukraine. That is the reason
for us being at this meeting today. It is not to deal with
its propaganda.

Thirdly, in parallel to the ongoing rounds of
negotiations, my country stresses the importance of
adhering to international law, in particular international
humanitarian law, the violation of which constitutes a
threat not only to the rights of civilians, but also to the
international order. In this regard, we reiterate our call
on all parties concerned to respect their international
obligations and to stop targeting civilians and
civilian infrastructure.

Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize UnderSecretary-General
DiCarlo,
Director-General
Ghebreyesus and Assistant High Commissioner for
Operations Mazou. I also recognize the representative
of the aggressor State present here in the permanent
seat of the Soviet Union.

Fourthly, and in conclusion, the United Arab
Emirates believes that the Council’s response to the
humanitarian crisis resulting from the conflict in
Ukraine should focus on humanitarian action in a
practical and meaningful manner, in coordination
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and other relevant humanitarian actors. We
emphasize that a solution to the crisis can be achieved
only by intensifying diplomatic efforts, immediately
ceasing hostilities throughout Ukraine and seeking
a sustainable peace that preserves Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
in addition to enhancing regional and international
security and stability.

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I was momentarily pleased to hear that the
Russians were pulling down the vote on their farcical
humanitarian draft resolution S/2022/231, which was
doomed to fail. We know that if Russia truly cared about
the humanitarian crisis — the one that it created — it
could simply stop its attacks on the people of Ukraine.
But instead, it wants to call for another Security
Council meeting to use the Council as a venue for its
disinformation and for promoting its propaganda.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.

Let me begin with a quote:
“The operation is developing successfully
and in strict accordance with plans that have been
previously approved.”
Putin said that yesterday, three weeks after the
unprovoked and unjustified Russian invasion of
Ukraine had started.
Over these weeks, the international community has
wrestled with the question why. Why has the Russian
Federation decided to cosplay the Nazi Third Reich by
attacking a peaceful neighbouring State and plunging
the region into war? What are the reasons and what is the
plan? Yesterday we got the answer: killing Ukrainian
children — 108 innocent souls so far. “Success ... in
strict accordance with plans ... previously approved”,
according to Putin.

22-2911419/22

S/PV.8998

Threats to international peace and security

Children are a deliberate target, given yesterday’s
bombardment of the Mariupol Drama Theatre — a
shelter for hundreds of local residents, mostly women
and children. Despite the big signs “children” painted
on the road on both sides of the building being clearly
visible, Russian pilots dropped an aerial bomb. The
building was completely damaged but the shelter
fortunately withstood. It did not turn into one more
mass grave, as Putin’s plan, previously approved,
probably envisaged.
Of course, Putin’s plan does not limit murders only
to children. All civilian Ukrainians and foreign citizens
are under threat. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights has recorded
726 confirmed cases of the killing of civilians, while
believing that the real figures are considerably higher.
Indeed, they are. Just yesterday, in the city of
Chernihiv, 53 civilian residents were killed by Russian
bombs and shells. On the same day in Merefa, Kharkiv
region, 21 people were killed following Russian shelling
that destroyed the local school and residential buildings.
The plan is also to raze Ukrainian cities to the
ground: Kharkiv, Sumy, Volnovakha, Okhtyrka, Izyum
and Mariupol — pain for Ukraine and the entire world
and an eternal shame for Russia. There are almost 2,400
confirmed victims among the civilian population.
Ninety per cent of the city’s infrastructure has been
destroyed. Russian troops seized one of the hospitals,
gathered 400 civilians there and use the building as a
military position, hiding behind civilians as a human
shield. “The suffering in Mariupol must not become
the future of Ukraine.” That was said by Peter Mauer,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, who is currently in Ukraine.
Putin’s plan is to violate the agreements on a
ceasefire and safe passage for the civilian population
from the temporarily occupied territories. Yesterday
Russian troops shelled a convoy of civilian vehicles
headed from Mariupol to Zaporizhzhya. Five people
were killed, and many were injured, including children.
The plan, previously approved, is to terrorize
local residents who remain in the territories seized
by Russian troops. Small villages, where the Russian
soldiers stay, suffer the most. Russians break into
houses, throw people out into the streets and take their
food. Eyewitness reports of torture, abductions of local
officials and even extrajudicial killings come from
across the occupied territories. Forcing Ukrainians to
20/22

17/03/2022

flee their homes as refugees has also been a part of
that Barbarossa-style plan. Almost 3.2 million refugees
have left Ukraine so far.
Against the backdrop of the increasingly aggravated
humanitarian situation, Russia has dared to submit the
humanitarian draft resolution S/2022/231. An appeal by
a serial killer to United Nations Members to co-sponsor
that most egregious hypocrisy is outrageous. They may
like to think twice before they dive into the blood of
children and adults executed by the Russian military
in Ukraine. Let me quote Saint Patrick in that regard:
“Never trust a dog to watch your food”.
At the same time, there is no doubt that action on
the humanitarian front in the United Nations is urgently
required, and I encourage all responsible nations to
support the relevant efforts in the General Assembly.
I also encourage all to join the group of friends of
accountability following the aggression against
Ukraine, co-founded by Albania, Colombia, Denmark,
the Marshall Islands, the Netherlands and Ukraine.
That group will act as a forum among States Members
of the United Nations for the discussion and promotion
of accountability measures in Ukraine following the
Russian military aggression.
Yesterday the International Court of Justice
delivered its order on provisional measures in the
case concerning Allegations of genocide under the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide (Ukraine v. Russian Federation).
The Court ordered that the Russian Federation shall
immediately suspend the military operations that
it commenced on 24 February 2022 in the territory
of Ukraine.
Despite the order being binding on Russia under the
Charter of the United Nations, today the Kremlin openly
and blatantly disregarded it, stating that it “cannot take
this order into account” because there is no “agreement
between the sides”. Should that be surprising to us? I do
not think so, as from the very first instance of Russia’s
presence in the United Nations it was in contempt of the
United Nations Charter. That was the case when Russia
was allowed to occupy the Soviet seat at the United
Nations and the Security Council. That was the case in
Georgia and in Syria, as well as in Ukraine’s Crimea
and Donbas in 2014.
I encourage the Security Council members
to exercise their duty, envisaged by Article 94,
paragraph 2, of the United Nations Charter, to make
22-29114

17/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

recommendations or decide upon measures to be
taken in the case of Russia’s failure to comply with
the obligations incumbent upon it under the judgment
rendered by the Court.
Perpetration-induced traumatic stress (PITS) is
a form of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Its
symptoms are caused by being an active participant in
causing trauma. Sufferers of PITS may be found in many
roles, such as among soldiers and executioners, where
they are expected to cause trauma, including death, but
among diplomats, especially here at the United Nations
and especially here in the Security Council?
Compared to the better known and understood
PTSD, there appears to be greater severity and different
symptom patterns for those affected by PITS.
The case of the military aggression of Russia
against Ukraine and the mass atrocities perpetrated by
the Russian army, ordered by Putin and defended by
Russian diplomats, will be examined by scholars and
scientists, including in the areas of sociology, history,
philosophy, psychiatry and theology.
Today, however, I would like to quote from Into the
Abyss, a documentary about executioners who carry out
the death penalty. One guard began crying and shaking
uncontrollably when “the eyes of all the inmates he had
executed began flashing before him”.
Do the eyes of Ukrainian children, women and the
elderly killed by the Russians flash before the Russian
Ambassador? If they do, we may consider how to sponsor
a decision to help him deal with perpetration-inducted
traumatic stress. But now, have some decency and stop
the egregious manipulation of the Security Council. It
is obscene.

S/PV. 8998

important interventions today. I shall start by paying
tribute to the fearless Ukrainian soldiers and civilians
alike who are defending their homeland, freedom
and the Charter of the United Nations. They are also
fighting for those who were forced to flee. I would also
like to express my gratitude for the work done by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the World Health Organization and
their partners for maintaining their presence across
Ukraine and continuing the delivery of assistance.
The Security Council has gathered here today to
discuss the fastest-growing humanitarian and refugee
crisis since the Second World War — the consequence of
the Russian aggression on Ukraine. In that connection,
I would like to stress the following points.
First, this is 100 per cent a war of choice, and
the methods of waging it are also a matter of choice.
It is Russia that decided to resort to brutal force,
indiscriminate weapons and brutal siege tactics.
Now Russia is going as far as targeting journalists
and kidnapping mayors of Ukrainian cities. In other
words, the aggressor decided to change the nature of
this conflict. It is a clear manifestation that Russia
deliberately chose to create a humanitarian catastrophe
in Ukraine and blatantly disregards all the principles
of international humanitarian law. This should worry
us all. In truth, disregarding international law is a
pattern that Russia has pursued in Syria and other
places. To underpin that approach, earlier today the
Kremlin rejected an order by the International Court of
Justice — the highest court of the United Nations — to
cease its attack on Ukraine.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.

Secondly, without resolving the dire humanitarian
situation there will be no peace. Therefore, we urge
Russia to change its military modus operandi and allow
full and unimpeded humanitarian access and relief to
those in need. The safe passage of civilians from the
various cities affected by the conflict must be allowed.
Take the situation in Mariupol, where around 350,000
residents still remain trapped in the city, as food,
water and medicines continue to dry up. Those people
require urgent humanitarian assistance and are exposed
to safety and security risks. We therefore call for an
immediate ceasefire and humanitarian access to the
most affected areas.

Mr. Szczerski (Poland): I would like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General and the briefers for their

Thirdly, the humanitarian consequences of the
ongoing war are not limited to Ukrainians in their own

It would be too dignifying for the Russian delegation
if I ended right here, like this. Instead, I would like to
quote a tweet by Dario Franceschini, a member of the
Italian Government. Today he tweeted:
“Italy is ready to rebuild the Theatre of
Mariupol. The Cabinet of Ministers has approved
my proposal to offer Ukraine the resources and
means to rebuild it as soon as possible. Theatres of
all countries belong to the whole humanity.”

22-2911421/22

S/PV.8998

Threats to international peace and security

home territory; those who have fled are also affected.
Already, more than 3 million have been forced to leave
Ukraine as a result of Russia’s military aggression. We
have already reached the number of over 1.9 million
people who crossed our border since 24 February.
Most of them found shelter in Poland. We have already
registered 170 nationalities on our border. That means
that this concerns us all, and we are all the victims of
that aggression.
As a neighbour and close friend of Ukraine, we see
first-hand the dramatic humanitarian consequences of
this war. Every day, on the Polish-Ukrainian border, we
are witnessing a growing number of people crossing
the border severely traumatized. We believe that the
involvement of United Nations bodies and agencies
experienced in dealing with these kinds of needs,
together with the continued efforts of Polish authorities,
will bring about rapid and appropriate solutions.
In the spirit of solidarity, Poland will continue to
admit and provide shelter, food, health care and safety
to every person in need, regardless of nationality,
race or religious creed. Aside from institutional care,
thousands of Polish people are organizing bottom-up,
showing their solidarity with Ukraine, opening their
homes to refugees and volunteering at reception centres.
As I deliver this speech, the First Lady of Poland,
Agata Kornhauser-Duda, is building an international
coalition of First Ladies, Highnesses and all people
of goodwill in order to effectively protect those in
vulnerable situations, namely, women, children, elderly

22/22

17/03/2022

persons and persons with disabilities — many of them
with post-traumatic stress disorder.
The Polish Government has urgently implemented
new immigration measures for Ukrainian citizens
fleeing their country. The new law, which took effect
on Monday, legalizes the stay of citizens of Ukraine
in order to enable them to take up employment and in
order to provide them with health care, education and
accommodations in Poland. It also offers temporary
financial help to Polish citizens who welcomed
refugees into their homes. Ukrainian citizens may
apply for a one-time subsidy to meet their basic needs.
The Government will allocate funds for the schooling
of Ukrainian students. Every Ukrainian citizen fleeing
the war has been guaranteed the same access to the
public health-care system that Polish citizens have.
We will continue to provide assistance to Ukrainian
citizens fleeing the horrors of war brought on them
by Russia. I can tell the Council that we already have
45,000 pupils from Ukraine enrolled in Polish schools.
But we and the other countries of the region — some
of whose Ambassadors I see today in the Chamber — all
urgently need international assistance to help us carry
out these good deeds.
Today Ukraine is paying a high price for defending
its independence, territorial integrity, democracy and
the Charter of the United Nations. The determination
and courage of the Ukrainian people inspires the world.
We cannot fail them. It is crucial to show our solidarity
with Ukraine and its people by acting now.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

22-29114
