S/2003/672

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 June 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 25 June 2003 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you the text of the Quartet statement, which
was issued following the meeting of the Quartet principals — representing the
United States of America, the European Union, the Russian Federation and the
United Nations — at the Dead Sea in Jordan on 22 June 2003 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-40775 (E) 250603

*0340774*

S/2003/672

Annex to the letter dated 25 June 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Statement by the Quartet
22 June 2003
Representatives of the Quartet — United Nations Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov, Greek Foreign Minister George
Papandreou, United States Secretary of State Colin Powell, High Representative for
European Common Foreign and Security Policy Javier Solana and European
Commissioner for External Affairs Chris Patten — met today at the Dead Sea in
Jordan.
The Quartet members reviewed developments since their last meeting, in
Washington on 20 December 2002. They welcome the appointment of Palestinian
Prime Minister Abbas and the strong start he and his Government have made in
difficult circumstances, and the acceptance by Israeli and Palestinian authorities of
the road map presented to the parties on 30 April 2003, leading to realization of the
goal expressed by President Bush and shared by the Quartet members, of two
States — Israel and Palestine — living side by side in peace and security, in 2005.
They strongly endorse the results of the Red Sea summit meetings, and pledge to
support actively Prime Minister Abbas and Prime Minister Sharon in carrying out
the commitments made at these meetings.
They welcome the very positive message and personal commitment of
President Bush, and his decision to place a mission on the ground charged with
helping the parties to move towards peace, through establishment of a credible and
effective structure led by the United States of America, in close cooperation with the
Quartet, to coordinate, monitor and promote implementation of the parties’
commitments and responsibilities, as laid out in the road map. The Quartet fully
shares President Bush’s expectation that both parties will meet their obligations in
full, and welcomes the initial steps taken by the parties towards this goal.
The Quartet members deplore and condemn the brutal terror attacks against
Israeli citizens carried out by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and the Al-Aqsa
Martyrs Brigade since the road map’s presentation. The Quartet calls for an
immediate, comprehensive end to all violence and welcomes efforts by the
Government of Egypt and others to achieve such an immediate and comprehensive
halt to armed action by Palestinian groups. All Palestinian individuals and groups
must end acts of terror against all Israelis, anywhere. The Quartet calls on the
Palestinian authorities to take all possible steps to halt immediately the activities of
individuals and groups planning and conducting attacks on Israelis. The Quartet
supports immediate Palestinian action to restructure and consolidate under Prime
Minister Abbas all security services, and calls on all States to assist in such efforts.
The Quartet welcomes the discussions between Israel and Palestinian
authorities over transfer of security responsibility in Gaza and Bethlehem. They call
on both sides to reach agreement as soon as possible on workable arrangements and
timetables for implementation.
The Quartet calls on all States in the region and around the world to end
immediately any form of support, including fund-raising and financial assistance, to

2

S/2003/672

groups and individuals that use terror and violence to diminish the chances for
peace, and calls for an end to all forms of incitement to violence and hatred. The
Quartet expresses its deep concern over Israeli military actions that result in the
killing of innocent Palestinian and other civilians. Such actions do not enhance
security and undermine trust and prospects for cooperation. While the Quartet
recognizes Israel’s right to self-defence in the face of terrorist attacks against its
citizens, it calls on the Government of Israel to respect international humanitarian
law and to exert maximum efforts to avoid such civilian causalities.
The Quartet also calls on the Government of Israel to make all possible efforts
to support Palestinian authorities and ease the plight of the Palestinian people
through immediate actions. The Quartet strongly urges Israel to facilitate movement
of people and goods, as well as access by international humanitarian organizations.
These steps must be taken as rapidly and comprehensively as possible to improve
the humanitarian situation and normalize the daily life of the Palestinian people. The
Quartet recalls its position that settlements activity must stop. In this context, it
welcomes the undertaking made by Prime Minister Sharon at Aqaba, and first steps
taken by Israel on the ground, to remove unauthorized outposts. The Quartet
members reviewed progress made on Palestinian institutional reform, endorsed the
result of the meetings of the Task Force and Ad Hoc Liaison Committee held earlier
in the year, and reaffirmed their support for all efforts to fulfil the reform goals set
forth in the first phase of the road map — including adoption of a Palestinian
Constitution and preparations for free, open and fair Palestinian elections as soon as
possible.
The Quartet reaffirms its commitment to a just, comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict, including progress towards peace between
Israel and Syria and Israel and Lebanon. Such a peace would be based on the
foundations of the Madrid Conference, the principle of land for peace, United
Nations Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002),
agreements previously reached by the parties and the initiative of Saudi Crown
Prince Abdullah — endorsed by the Beirut Arab League Summit — calling for
acceptance of Israel as a neighbour living in peace and security, in the context of a
comprehensive settlement.
The Quartet looks forward to continuing to work together in close consultation
on these issues with the parties.

3
