156

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

to Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, the Sudan and
Uganda the technical assistance needed to finalize the necessary arrangements for the establishment of the proposed
intergovernmental body;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in close co-operation with the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and the appropriate specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system,
to continue to extend all necessary assistance to those
countries in their efforts to combat the effects of drought
on the basis of the recommendations of various multiagency missions;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and the appropriate specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system, to assist the Governments of the region, at their
request, in establishing or improving national machinery
to combat the effects of drought and other natural disasters, to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its
second regular session of 1985, of the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/206. Implementation of the medium-term and
long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3054 (XXVIII) of I 7 October
1973, 3253 (XXIX) of 4 December 1974, 3512 (XXX) of
15 December 1975, 31/180 of21 December 1976, 32/159
of 19 December 1977, 33/133 of 19 December 1978, 341
16 of9 November 1979, 35/86 of5 December 1980, 361
203 of 17 December 1981, 37/165 of 17 December 1982
and 38/225 of 20 December 1983,
Taking note of decision 84/28 of 29 June 1984 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme 124 concerning the implementation of the
medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation
programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region,
Deeply concerned by the tragic consequences of a disastrous and persistent drought involving a substantial
decrease in food and agricultural production in the
Sudano-Sahelian countries,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts made by the United
Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office in helping to combat the
effects of drought and to implement the medium-term and
long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme adopted
by the States members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe!, as well as in
mobilizing the necessary resources for financing priority
projects,
Also noting with satisfaction the collaboration between
the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control
in the Sahe! and the Club du Sahe! and urging that this collaboration be continued and strengthened,
Welcoming the inclusion in the agenda of its thirtyninth session of the items entitled "Countries stricken by
desertification and drought" and "Critical economic situation in Africa",
Bearing in mind the statements made by many delegations during the current session of the General Assembly
12 4 See O/fu:ia/ Records of the Economic and Sona/ Council. /91i4. Suppl,·
ment No. 10 (E/ 1984/20), annex I.

in which they emphasized the continuing and increasing
seriousness of the drought and desertification in the
Sudano-Sahelian countries and in other regions of Africa
and their devastating impact on the economic and social
situation,
Considering that, owing to the nature and magnitude of
the needs of the States members of the Permanent InterState Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe!, the solidarity action taken by the international community to
support the recovery and economic development efforts of
those countries should be continued and intensified,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the medium-term and long-term
recovery and rehabilitation programme in the SudanoSahelian region,,.,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Governments, United
Nations bodies, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and individuals that have contributed to the
implementation of the medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian
region;
3. Requests all Governments to increase the resources
of the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office by making
voluntary contributions on the occasion of the United
Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities,
as well as through other, in particular bilateral, channels so
as to enable it to respond more fully to the priority
requirements of the Governments of States members of
the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control
in the Sahe!;
4. Requests the international community to support
the implementation of the Second-Generation Programme
of the States members of the Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sahe!, inter alia, by providing
more assistance in all its forms for carrying out the following activities:
(a) Development projects already formulated and
approved by the Governments;
(b) Regional projects to combat desertification;
(c) Surveys needed for establishing development
potentials at national and regional levels;
(d) Strengthening and/or establishing national and subregional research and training institutes designed to find
solutions to the problems confronting the Sahelian
countries;
(e) Strengthening of national and subregional capacity
for planning, management and evaluation of integrated
development activities;
5. Requests all Governments and all organs, organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to
give special attention to the increasingly critical food situation in the countries of the Sabel;
6. Welcomes the results achieved by the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme, through
the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office, in assisting
the States members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe! to implement their
medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation
programme;
7. Reaffirms the role of the United Nations SudanoSahelian Office in co-ordinating United Nations efforts to
help the countries of the Sahe! to implement their recovery
and rehabilitation programme;
12S A!)9,21 I-E- 1184 58 and Add I

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _l57

8. Invites the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office
to continue to strengthen its co-operation with the States
members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sahel and with the Committee
itself, with a view to expediting implementation of the
medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation
programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region, and in particular to help those countries to formulate and implement
national medium-term and long-term plans to combat
desertification and drought, with a view to achieving food
self-sufficiency;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to report
to the General Assembly, through the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme and the
Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of
the medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/207. Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2816 (XXVI) of 14 December
I 971, by which the Office of the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator was established, 36/225 of 17 December 198 I, by which it reaffirmed the mandate of the Office
and strengthened its capacity, and 38/202 of 20 December
1983, in which it, inter a/ia, noted with interest the steps
taken to strengthen the capacity of the Office, and of the
United Nations system as a whole, to respond to disasters,
and called for a further report on the matter to be submitted to the Assembly at its thirty-ninth session, through the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session

of 1984,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution
I 984/60 of 26 July 1984,
Noting with appreciation the effective response of the
Office of the Co-ordinator and of the international community to recent major and continuing disaster situations,
Recognizing that shortage of resources continues to
hamper the full achievement of the aim ofrapid and effective response to the needs of countries affected by disasters
and that, if this shortage is to be overcome, further efforts
will be required by the international community to provide both funds and assistance in kind,
Considering that all possible new and innovative
approaches should be examined with a view to improving
further the rapid delivery of emergency relief,
Noting the wealth of expertise and training facilities that
exists and that could be drawn upon by disaster-prone
developing countries,
Recalling the importance attached in the Substantial
New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least
Developed Countries 126 to the reduction of losses caused
by disasters of all kinds and the creation of infrastructures
which would be beneficial in this regard,
Convinced of the absolute necessity of maintaining a
sound financial basis, in accordance with repeated requests
by the General Assembly, to ensure the continuation of the
work of the Office of the Co-ordinator at its present level
as a minimum,
126 Report of the United Natwns Conjeren<'e on the Least Developed
Countries, Paris, /. /4 September 198 I (United Nations publication. Sales
No. E.82.1.8), part one. sect. A.
127 N39/267-Ell 984/96 and Corr. I

Appreciating the contributions made by donors in supporting international relief operations, including those
made to the Trust Fund of the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief ( ·a-ordinator,
I. Takes note with sails.faction of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, 127 as well as his
report on strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
system to respond to natural disasters and other disaster
situations, 128 called for in paragraph 12 of General Assembly resolution 38/202, and of the statement made by the
Co-ordinator on 5 November 1984; 129
2. Recognizes that information is one of the essential
elements for the fulfilment of the mandate of the Office of
the Co-ordinator as the focal point of the United Nations
system for disaster relief co-ordination, and emphasizes
the importance of improving the flow and quality of information during disaster relief operations so that a more
complete picture of relief channels and activities, assistance received and unmet requirements may be available to
all concerned;
3. Stresses, in this regard, the primary importance of
inter-agency assessment missions organized by the Office
of the Co-ordinator with the participation of the appropriate organizations of the United Nations system and other
relief bodies in order to ensure the effective co-ordination
of disaster relief activities, assistance and requirements;
4. Recognizes the value of united appeals, launched
after the joint development with the agencies concerned of
concerted relief programmes based upon the findings of
inter-agency assessment missions, to be sent at the invitation of the Government concerned, as a most effective tool
for co-ordination and urges Governments to continue to
respond to such appeals accordingly;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to modify existing
United Nations procurement procedures, as necessary, to
permit, on the part of the Office of the Co-ordinator, a
timely and more effective response to the special and
immediate requirements of countries exposed to disasters
or facing an emergency situation;
6. Ca/ls upon those contributing assistance in kind to
provide, when appropriate, special grants to cover the
costs of transport and distribution of the assistance to and
within the affected country;
7. Requests the Office of the Co-ordinator to study, in
co-operation with the parties concerned, the most appropriate steps to ensure the ready availability of relief supplies and transport equipment;
8. Urges Governments to increase their efforts to
reduce delays in the provision of food assistance in
response to natural disasters and other disaster situations;
9. Recommends that as the Co-ordinator phases out
his emergency co-ordination responsibility in a given
country, he should contribute to ensuring the necessary
transition to the rehabilitation and reconstruction phase
by passing on relevant data to competent organs and agencies of the United Nations system;
I 0. Calls upon Governments and international relief
organizations to put at the disposal of the Co-ordinator the
names and specializations of qualified disaster personnel
available, in case of need, for inter-agency assessment missions, the execution of relief programmes or other disaster
mitigation activities, and to inform him of existing dis12RA 39 267-E/1984.96/Add I and 2
1~9 See

0/ncwl Records of th,· (iencru/ A 'l.semhfr, Th1rrr-11rnth Sc.\.H1•n.

\(',.('nd C'nnimatec. :\4th mret111~. para,

1-8
