S/PV.8734

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8734th meeting

Thursday, 27 February 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Croo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mrs. Cedano
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Maas
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Prince
Ms. Goolab
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the review of alternative modalities for the
border crossing of Ya‘rubiyah (S/2020/139)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401(2018), 2449 (2018) and 2504 (2020) (S/2020/141)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-05214 (E)
*2005214*

S/PV.8734

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, I will brief the Council on the delivery of
assistance to north-eastern Syria following the adoption
of resolution 2504 (2020), including the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the feasibility of alternatives to the
use of the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the review
of alternative modalities for the border crossing
of Ya‘rubiyah (S/2020/139)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401(2018),
2449 (2018) and 2504 (2020) (S/2020/141)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Syrian
Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs; and Ms. Henrietta Fore,
UNICEF Executive Director.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2020/139, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the review of alternative
modalities for the border crossing of Ya‘rubiyah; and
document S/2020/141, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401
(2018), 2449 (2018) and 2504 (2020).
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: I will begin my briefing today with
the unfolding humanitarian catastrophe in northwestern Syria, which continues to demand the Council’s
attention and action. I will also speak to the importance
of the cross-border operation — a critical lifeline into
the north-west.
2/27

27/02/2020

Finally, I will touch on the humanitarian situation
in Rukban and deepening humanitarian needs in many
other parts of the country. UNICEF Executive Director
Fore will further brief on the impact of the crisis on
families in Syria.
Last week I spoke via video link with 14 Syrian
women in Idlib and northern Aleppo. All are
humanitarian workers helping their own communities;
almost all have been displaced with their families from
other parts of Syria, some multiple times. What is
happening in north-western Syria, they said, is beyond
imagination. It is not humanly tolerable. They told me
of children so traumatized they no longer speak. One
of the women, who works as a midwife in Idlib city,
told me she can see how the intensely stressful situation
is affecting her patients. Early deliveries, miscarriages
and low-weight births are on the rise. Pregnant women
are asking her for caesarean deliveries out of fear of
going into labour while on the move and without
medical care.
Our latest available data indicate that almost
950,000 people have fled the advancing front lines
in north-western Syria since 1 December. Most have
moved into the north-west of Idlib governorate, a small
area along Syria’s border with Turkey that already
hosts hundreds of thousands of displaced people. Many
of these exhausted families have moved over and over
and over again — all amid freezing conditions. The
women from Idlib described to me the day-to-day
reality of living in this overcrowded environment. One
had found shelter in a basement with 15 other adults
and 20 children. There was no privacy. Some women
told me they could not change their clothes for weeks.
Violence against women, they said, had become routine.
The Secretary-General has stated that international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians
have been systematically ignored. He warned that
fighting is now advancing into areas with the highest
concentrations of people. Hospitals, schools, camps and
other sites where displaced families have sought shelter
are not being spared. In the last 10 days, a camp hosting
more than 800 people was hit by shelling in Dana, which
is now the most crowded of the sub-districts of Idlib
20-05214

27/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

governorate. Idlib Central Hospital was among several
facilities struck this week, causing multiple casualties.
Operations at the facility had to be suspended, except
for emergency medical treatment.
A massive humanitarian operation is under way
in north-western Syria. In January, food assistance for
some 1.4 million people was delivered via the crossborder mechanism, as were health supplies for almost
half a million people and non-food items for more
than 230,000 people. That is more than in any other
month since the cross-border operation was authorized
in 2014. Despite these immense efforts, the women in
Idlib told me that simply getting food, clean water and
heating is a daily struggle.
The cross-border modality is absolutely essential to
our response in north-western Syria. People in need in
Idlib cannot currently be reached at this scale in such
a timely and direct manner through any other means.
As the Secretary-General has stated, the Security
Council has a critical role to play in support of these
humanitarian efforts.
I thank donors for generously contributing over
$100 million this month alone towards our $500 million
appeal for the humanitarian response in north-western
Syria over the next five months. This amount includes
the release of $42 million from the Central Emergency
Response Fund.
I would now like to turn to the situation in northeastern Syria. In north-eastern Syria, civilians remain
extremely vulnerable. Over the past weeks, renewed
hostilities in and around Tall Tamr sub-district
have displaced an additional 1,600 civilians to
Qamishli, while another 800 people have arrived
in Raqqa. This displacement adds to the hundreds
of thousands of people already displaced in northeastern Syria. Across the north-east, an estimated
1.9 million people require humanitarian assistance. The
majority — 1.34 million people — are in areas outside
of Syrian Government control.
In the second half of 2019, the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners scaled up the response in
north-eastern Syria, reaching hundreds of thousands
of people with supplies from within Syria and through
the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing, via the cross-border
modality. Nonetheless, significant gaps remained. Until
10 January, the United Nations provided cross-border
assistance into north-eastern Syria via Al-Yarubiyah
crossing — mainly health and medical items that could

S/PV. 8734

not otherwise be consistently delivered to people in need.
We briefed the Security Council on the importance of
renewing Al-Yarubiyah as an authorized crossing point,
warning that any reduction in humanitarian access
would cause further suffering.
With the adoption of resolution 2504 (2020) and the
removal of Al-Ramtha and Al-Yarubiyah as authorized
crossing points, the Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to report on the feasibility of using alternative
modalities to the Al-Yarubiyah crossing
“to ensure that humanitarian assistance, including
medical and surgical supplies, reaches people in
need throughout Syria through the most direct
routes, and in accordance with the humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence” (resolution 2504 (2020), para. 6).
The Secretary-General’s report concludes that,
“[i]n order for all humanitarian needs to be met,
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic would
need to facilitate greater cross-line access to the
north-east of the country, in particular for medical
assistance. The Government would also need to
consent to the delivery of humanitarian assistance
through cross-border operations into the north-east,
at safe and logistically feasible border crossings,
using the most direct routes” (S/2020/139, para. 46).
Should the required steps to enable the delivery of
aid from Damascus not be taken, and in the absence of
consent from the Syrian Government and neighbouring
countries to use border crossings into north-eastern
Syria, the report further concludes that
“the Security Council would need to authorize the
United Nations and its implementing partners to
use additional crossings” (ibid., para. 48).
Of the alternatives, in the current context, the Tall
Abyad crossing is deemed the most feasible option.
The report lists four requirements for the crossline modalities to work effectively. First, there must
be timely approval by the Government of Syria to
import all necessary medical supplies into the country.
The report highlights that expedited approval for
some imports has already taken place, with the recent
approval of 11 of 36 requests submitted by the World
Health Organization (WHO).
Secondly, a simplified, expedited and reliable
approval process by the Government of Syria to enable

20-052143/27

S/PV.8734

The situation in the Middle East

regular and predictable deliveries from Damascus into
the north-east by land is necessary. The United Nations
Population Fund reports that a first road delivery of
medical items has been sent to Qamishli. Approval
of a specific request by the WHO for delivery by land
remains pending.
Thirdly, approval by the Government of Syria to
allow access all areas and facilities within north-eastern
Syria to ensure assistance reaches all people in need,
impartially and without discrimination is required.
While aid has been delivered to north-eastern Syria,
this assistance needs to actually reach all people in
need, regardless of where they live or who is operating
the medical facilities they use.
Fourthly, aid deliveries by local authorities in
north-eastern Syria should be facilitated to all locations
without delay. It is also the responsibility of local
authorities to ensure that aid is not impeded.
Yesterday, in response to our requests for overland
access to north-eastern Syria, we received general
approval from the Government of Syria to transfer
medical assistance by land to all parts of the country.
This is a welcome development and one that we hope
will indeed translate into all types of required medical
supplies and equipment reaching all people in need in
the north-east, wherever they are located.
If viable alternatives to Al-Yarubiyah are not found
for medical items, the gap between the humanitarian
response and humanitarian needs will increase further.
If medicine runs out and medical facilities are unable
to carry out life-saving procedures, deaths will occur.
The first shortages are expected as early as March for
medical facilities providing reproductive health care,
which were previously supported by cross-border
operations. A larger gap in medical items could occur
by May.

27/02/2020

organized departures. In January, the United Nations
conducted four inter-agency assessment missions to
areas of return in Homs, hosting around 10,000 people
who were formerly in Rukban. Those families are
living in extremely difficult conditions. Almost all are
living in makeshift tents. Many are struggling to meet
their immediate food needs. Our information indicates
that thousands still wish to leave Rukban. Planning is
ongoing to support informed and voluntary departures.
I call on all parties to facilitate those efforts, as well as
to assist those who remain, until durable solutions can
be found for all people in Rukban.
Humanitarian needs across the country remain
immense and are worsening. The number of people
assessed as food insecure has increased in 2019 by
1.3 million, reaching 7.9 million people in 2020. As I
said at the start of my briefing, the terrible human toll
of the situation in north-western Syria demands the
Council’s attention and action.
I would like to close with a message from the
Syrian women in Idlib with whom I spoke last week.
They said to me:
“We are Syrian women, mothers and
humanitarian workers. We are doing all we can to
keep working, in spite of the conditions; in spite of
what is happening here. We do not want to leave for
Europe. We want to stay here in Idlib and rebuild
our lives. All we are asking is for the misery to stop;
for the killing to stop. We want the right to live.”
I echo the Secretary-General’s renewed call for
an immediate ceasefire to end the humanitarian
catastrophe and avoid an uncontrollable escalation.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Fore.

A shipment of essential medical items intended
for transport to north-eastern Syria via Al-Yarubiyah
remains in Iraq. The World Health Organization is
engaging actively with the Government of Syria to
bring that assistance into Syria by air and ensure
that that vital medical assistance urgently reaches all
Syrians in need in the north-east. The shipment process
was initiated today.

Ms. Fore: Another year, another decade — another
grim chapter in the Syrian catastrophe that has left the
country and its people reeling from the decimation and
destruction of a seemingly endless war. The year 2020
is barely two months old and, according to the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, some 300
people have been killed in Idlib and Aleppo since the
start of the year.

I now turn to the situation in Rukban. More than
19,400 people, almost half of the population, have now
left the Rukban area — the vast majority through self-

The situation is worsening by the day. The
escalation of fighting in the north-west since December
has pushed more than 900,000 people, including more

4/27

20-05214

27/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

than half a million children, away from their homes and
into danger — a staggering mass movement of people
in such a short time. For some, this is the sixth or
seventh time they have been displaced. Many have fled
to north-western Idlib, while others have scattered to
Afrin, A’zaz and Al-Bab, near Aleppo and the Turkish
border. Tens of thousands now live in makeshift
tents, public buildings, in the open air, huddled under
trees — exposed to the rain, snow and the sub-zero cold
of the harsh Syrian winter.
The recent strikes on those makeshift camps in
Idlib and on the children and teachers horrifically killed
just two days ago as 10 schools were attacked are both
reprehensible and morally repugnant. Those acts also
clearly demonstrate the terrifying daily conditions of
those living through that nightmare. We have heard and
read reports of children freezing to death. When wood
runs out, families burn whatever they can find — plastic
bags, garbage and discarded furniture — just to provide
a flicker of heat against the cold, or a simple fire to
cook whatever food they can find.

S/PV. 8734

children; of the 6.5 million Syrians going hungry every
day because of food insecurity. The price of essential
food items has risen 20 times since the war began,
which is devastating for a country in which 80 per cent
of the people already live below the poverty line.
Families are forced to sell off their household
assets or send their children to work, just to meet
basic necessities. Children are going without vital
immunizations, medical treatments or other health
services because of high costs or gaps in service.
One in three Syrian children is out of school. A total
of 6.7 million refugees have fled Syria since the war
began, and 6.2 million — and counting — are internally
displaced. Almost a decade of war has forced nearly
half of the country’s population from their homes.
Most of all, we measure that global failure in
the innocent lives lost and broken by the conflict.
In 2018, more than 1,100 children were killed in the
fighting — the highest number of children killed in a
single year since the start of the war.

In those informal settlements, children and women
are at particular risk of violence and exploitation.
Makeshift toilets offer no safety or privacy. Landmines
and improvised explosive devices dot the landscape.
Every step people take is a risk. In the north-west,
280,000 children have had their education cruelly
snatched away. An estimated 180 schools are out
of operation — destroyed, damaged or being used
for shelters; another blow to children’s hopes and
futures. Access to health care is almost non-existent
or financially out-of-reach. Hospitals continue to be
targeted. Seventy-two have suspended services because
of the fighting.

Last year was scarcely better; 900 were killed and
hundreds maimed. And these are only those we could
verify; the true number is much higher.

But the situation in the north-west is just the latest
entry in the war’s devastation. Across the country, the
nine-year war has decimated public services. More than
half of all health services and facilities and three out of
10 schools are non-functional. The economy is in free
fall, with the destruction of physical capital costing
an estimated $120 billion and half a trillion dollars
in economic losses. The Syrian pound has lost nearly
50 per cent of its value over the past year.

The horrific scale and speed of the crisis has
multiplied the humanitarian needs. UNICEF, our sister
agencies and our partners are doing all we can. Last
year we screened 1.8 million mothers and children
for malnutrition and delivered health consultations
to more than 2 million. More than 7.4 million people
across Syria received water and sanitation services,
including improved access to water, hygiene kits and
purifying tablets.

But the true cost of the carnage is not measured
in lost infrastructure or economic devastation. It is
measured in the daily lives of the people — of the
11 million people across Syria who still require urgent
humanitarian assistance, almost half of whom are

We provided almost 400,000 women and children
with psychological counselling to help them cope with
the trauma that they have endured. We helped 1.8 million
children continue their education. We provided winter
clothing and blankets to more than 37,000 children, and

As the Council learned last week from the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic, children have been detained
and used as bargaining chips. Thousands, Syrian and
foreign alike, are confined to camps that are not fit for
children. Armed groups have recruited and used boys
to fight on the front lines. Girls as young as 9 have
been raped, and one in four children is at risk of severe
mental disorders.

20-052145/27

S/PV.8734

The situation in the Middle East

27/02/2020

we vaccinated almost 600,000 children under the age
of 1.

on authorities to remove all children from detention and
place them in appropriate care.

This is on top of the thousands of children whom we
have reached, and continue to reach, across Syria over
the last nine years. But the needs are overwhelming and
rapidly outpacing our resources. I will be travelling to
Syria and the region this weekend to meet with officials
and our humanitarian teams on the ground to see what
more must be done to meet these urgent needs. We
know that we need more funding and more resources
to support these lives and give Syrian society even a
chance at a better, more peaceful future.

Fifthly, we renew our call to the Council to lend
its support and influence to a negotiated political
solution that ends this war once and for all. As the
Secretary-General said last week, there is no military
solution to the Syrian crisis; the only possible solution
remains political.

But we also need the Council and its members to
stand up for the children of Syria and to speak with one
united voice.
First, we call on parties all over Syria to protect
children and the essential civilian infrastructure that
they and their families need so desperately, such as
schools, hospitals and water systems, which Syria will
need to rebuild when the fighting stops and a political
settlement is under way.
Secondly, we desperately need a cessation of
hostilities in north-west Syria. In the meantime, we
need regular humanitarian pauses to allow civilians
to move safely out of harm’s way if they can and wish
to do so. This would also give aid workers the room
that they need to provide urgent care for people in
need and conduct impartial assessments, including
across borders.
Thirdly, we need greater humanitarian access
across the board to reach people in the most effective
and timely manner, from within Syria and from
neighbouring countries. That includes allowing road
access for humanitarian convoys delivering medical
supplies from Damascus or cross-border into north-east
Syria, as well as visas and travel permits.
Fourthly, we urge all Member States to honour
their obligations under the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and to repatriate children in a safe,
voluntary and dignified manner. The conditions under
which many children are living, in particular children
formerly living in territory held by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, do not provide the necessary care
and protection to every child. When in the best interest
of the child, family unity must be maintained so that
children can be repatriated with their siblings and
primary caregiver, usually their mother. We also call
6/27

Investing in the children of Syria is the best
investment that any one of us can make — an investment
in the future and an investment in peace. Yet we are
letting this opportunity slip through our fingers as
another year begins. The longer the war continues, the
more children are going to die on the world’s watch. More
will be forced from their homes to make long, perilous
journeys to safety. More neighbouring countries will be
under pressure to accept more refugees when they have
already been so generous in hosting them. And with
each passing month, prospects for the ability of Syria
and the region to recover grow more hopeless.
Schools bombed, communities flattened, bodies
broken, minds shattered, families torn apart, futures
and hopes stolen — and still the fighting continues.
The message is clear: we cannot afford to greet another
year with the same carnage, the same flouting of
international humanitarian law, the same inhumanity
with which we began 2020.
A child born at the start of this war is now 9 years
old. Are we forced to admit to her that peace is beyond
our grasp? That we are unable, or unwilling, to stop this
destructive war?
Next year we will mark the tenth anniversary of the
Syrian conflict, an anniversary that none of us wants
to see. Millions of Syrian children are crying tonight,
from hunger and cold, from wounds and pain, from
fear, loss and heartbreak. They and their families face
a brutal winter and an uncertain year ahead. We must
stand with them. We must tell them that we choose
peace. History will judge us harshly — and justly — if
we do not.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Fore
for her statement.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and
Development of Belgium.
20-05214

27/02/2020

S/PV. 8734

The situation in the Middle East

(spoke in English)
I am delivering this statement on behalf of the two
co-penholders, Germany and Belgium, and I welcome
the presence here of Minister Maas of Germany.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Mueller
and Executive Director Fore for their briefings.
Their statements helped to shed light on the ongoing
tragedy in Syria, as they were illustrated with concrete
examples that they have encountered in Idlib in the vital
work that UNICEF and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) are undertaking
to alleviate the unspeakable suffering there. Both
briefings recalled once again that after nine years of
war, 11 million Syrians, in particular children, continue
to be in need of humanitarian help and protection. These
numbers need to prompt us to take action. They are a
dire reminder of the fact that the humanitarian situation
in Syria must remain at the top of the Council’s agenda
and that the Council needs to act.
Now more than ever before, the situation in
Idlib requires our common attention and common
action: 950,000 people have fled the violence since
the beginning of December, and OCHA foresees that
another 200,000 men, women and children may have
to take the same decision shortly. The conditions that
these people are experiencing are dire. If they decide
to stay behind, they risk being hit by indiscriminate
bombings. If they decide to leave, they have no other
option but to join those who have already found refuge
in overpacked camps, in unfinished housing, in tents,
or, for the most unfortunate, under the open sky, in
freezing temperatures.
Let us make no mistake: all of those people face
serious protection risks. The situation in Idlib goes to
the very core of why we all committed to the principles
of international humanitarian law. Those principles
must not be neglected; they must be put into practice.
We would like to echo the Secretary-General’s
statement last week in which he called for an immediate
ceasefire, adding:
“There is no military solution to the Syrian crisis.
The only possible solution remains political.
This man-made humanitarian nightmare for the
long-suffering Syrian people must stop. It must
stop now”.
In the wake of the adoption of resolution 2504 (2020),
on the cross-border mechanism, we the co-penholders

thank the Secretary-General for his report concerning
alternative modalities to the Al-Yarubiyah crossing,
which, regrettably, could not be extended along with
the two other crossings into Idlib last month. We the
co-penholders will continue to consult with all members
of the Council in a transparent and inclusive way in
order to consider how best to take forward the options
outlined in the report. The Council has to guarantee that
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners can
continue to deliver vital humanitarian assistance to all
those in need in a timely, safe, sustained and unimpeded
manner. The Syrian people need our commitment; their
humanitarian needs should be our constant guideline.
We will address that further in our national statement.
I will now
national capacity.

make

an

intervention

in

my

I would like to start by paying tribute to all the
humanitarian workers in Syria — many of whom are
Syrians — especially those who provide support to
the north-west of the country. Since the beginning of
the Syrian crisis in 2011, Belgium has provided more
than €230 million to alleviate the humanitarian needs
of the Syrian population. We intend to approve an
additional €4 million in humanitarian aid to the Syrian
people via the cross-border pooled fund and the Syria
humanitarian fund.
In my remarks, I would like to focus on two points:
first, the situation in Idlib, and secondly, the question of
humanitarian access.
On the situation in Idlib, the Council has the
mandate and the responsibility to maintain peace
and international security. The situation in Idlib
requires the full attention of the Council. I support
the Secretary-General’s call for an immediate and
sustainable ceasefire. We call on all parties concerned
to show a maximum level of restraint. The front lines
have progressed towards the most densely populated
areas. There is a risk of all humanitarian action being
suffocated. Moreover, the direct confrontation between
Turkey, on the one hand, and Syria and Russia, on the
other, constitutes a dangerous escalation that could
have unpredictable consequences.
Belgium repeats its unequivocal condemnation
of the attacks perpetrated by groups the Council has
designated as terrorist groups. But efforts to fight
terrorism never relieves parties of their obligations
under international humanitarian law. Those grave
violations of international humanitarian law cannot

20-052147/27

S/PV.8734

The situation in the Middle East

27/02/2020

remain unpunished. I want to reiterate the political
and financial support of Belgium to the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. We fully support the United Nations board
of inquiry.

(spoke in French)

On the question of humanitarian access, since 2014
the humanitarian needs in Syria have all but decreased.
Regrettably, no agreement was reached in January to
renew the crossing point of Al-Yarubiyah, which offered
access, through the most direct route, to people in need
in the north-east, in accordance with the humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence. We thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2020/139) on the alternative modalities for the
border crossing. The report shows clearly that this gap
will be hard to fill. It offers two venues.

Mr. Maas (Germany): “I wish for a life without war
and shelling. I wish I could be successful at school.”
Ten-year-old Amina said that to an Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs team a few days
ago. She is one of more than 500,000 children in Idlib
who are displaced, many of them for the second or third
time. Children like Amina have never experienced
peace; they have never gone to school, and now some of
them are freezing to death.

On the one hand, it clearly states that cross-line
access can work only if four conditions are fulfilled. In
view of past experiences, the international community
needs verifiable, unquestionable guarantees that the
Syrian authorities will implement the conditions, as
outlined by Ms. Mueller, in full and without delay. The
United Nations needs to closely monitor the process
and deliver full and detailed data that would allow the
Security Council to fully understand the how those
conditions are to be implemented and, specifically,
where gaps in humanitarian access remain. The Syrian
authorities’ track record on humanitarian access
raises a number of questions. Their good faith will be
systematically evaluated based on their ability to fully
and sustainably implement those conditions. A partial
or conditional implementation is unacceptable.
The second venue mentioned in the report is the
crossing point of Tall Abyad as the most feasible
alternative to the Al-Yarubiyah crossing when it
comes to cross-border options. As such, that option
must be actively considered by all Council members,
in conjunction with the necessary prerequisites and
guarantees. As mentioned before, the co-penholders
will continue to see how to best advance the options
outlined in the report. We must focus on access to
humanitarian aid for all those in need. Today, more
than ever, it is time for action.
8/27

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to those other members of the
Council that wish to make statements.
I call on the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Germany.

It is becoming more and more difficult to put
the human suffering in Idlib into words, but we all
heard the shocking facts and figures that our briefers
just presented. We owe them and all humanitarian
workers our gratitude and full support and respect.
Mr. Lowcock recently called the situation in Idlib the
biggest humanitarian horror story of the twenty-first
century. The Executive Director of UNICEF spoke of
a child-protection crisis of unprecedented scale, and
Ms. Bachelet called the current attacks on civilians
cruel beyond belief.
Germany calls on the Syrian regime and on Russia
to listen to those voices and to stop ignoring the facts.
As parties to the conflict, they have an obligation to
protect civilians. Instead, they are bombing civilian
infrastructure, such as hospitals and schools. Let me be
clear — conducting counter-terrorism measures does
not absolve anyone, especially the countries represented
in this Chamber, from respecting international
humanitarian law, and indiscriminate attacks against
civilians are war crimes. Those responsible must be
held accountable.
There is more that the Council can and must do
to stop the suffering. First and foremost, we must
ensure full humanitarian access. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2020/139) on alternative access
routes leaves no doubt that cross-border aid remains of
vital importance. The Council needs to look at every
possibility to meet all humanitarian needs in accordance
with humanitarian principles. As co-penholders, we are
committed to ensuring just that. Aid must reach those
20-05214

27/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

in need, including in north-eastern Syria. The cold is a
threat to thousands of people. Germany has stepped up
its assistance by €25 million to provide shelter for those
in need, and last week the European Union also decided
to increase its humanitarian support. But all of us need
to do more.
Secondly, a humanitarian ceasefire is essential.
I discussed that a few days ago with my Turkish and
Russian colleagues at the Munich Security Conference,
and together with France we stand ready to continue
working towards such a ceasefire, at the highest level,
with Russia and Turkey. We heard from our briefers
that civilians need a break from the horrors of war and
they need it now.
Finally, we must step up our efforts to find a political
solution. A regime that has been killing and torturing
its own people cannot bring lasting peace and stability
to Syria, and reconciliation without accountability for
the terrible crimes committed will not work. Those who
continue to fight in this war should finally realize that.
A political solution overseen by the United Nations and
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) is the only way to
resolve this conflict.
While we are sitting here, 3 million civilians in
Idlib are in fear of their lives; 80 per cent of them are
women and children. We have failed them for far too
long. We owe them a better future — a future in which
children like Amina are going to school instead of
hiding in bomb shelters.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): It is a
human-made humanitarian nightmare.
“There is nothing that will protect a baby against
the bombs being dropped on the tent they are
sleeping in.”
Those are the words of Mark Lowcock two days ago
when he was asked what could be done to end the
catastrophe in Idlib. It is a wretched image. But for
so many Syrians, tragically, he is describing what has
become a daily reality. Shelter, food and medicine are
desperately needed. But they are no match for Russian
air strikes. If we are to end the humanitarian crisis in
north-west Syria, we must concentrate all our efforts
on immediately establishing a durable and verifiable
ceasefire, brokered by a fully empowered United
Nations. That will require Russia to ground its planes
at once and to tell the regime to pull back its forces.

S/PV. 8734

Reports from Idlib in the most recent days are
stomach-turning. According to The New York Times and
The Washington Post, Syrian boys and girls are being
killed in regime attacks on schools. Aid workers cannot
reach affected areas with food or water. Parents are
burning their own clothes to keep their children warm.
Families are digging out caves for shelter. Babies are
freezing to death. Yet, as Lowcock noted on Tuesday,
the members of the Security Council cannot agree on
how to deal with this problem. But what is the source of
our disagreement? Is it that nearly all Council members
object to handing down death sentences to thousands
of innocent Syrians, while our Russian and Chinese
colleagues, whether explicitly or implicitly, do not?
In the light of the Al-Assad regime’s relentless
and escalating pursuit of a military solution with the
aid of Russia and Iran, United Nations humanitarian
operations are more important than ever. The
Bab Al-Hawa and Bab Al-Salam border crossings
authorized by resolution 2504 (2020) are now the only
humanitarian lifelines for millions of Syrians trapped
in the north-west. They are the only lifelines because
they are all that Russia would accept in negotiations
without shutting down the entire mechanism.
With the closing of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing,
it is imperative that the two crossings still operating
be renewed by July. The consequences of closing
Al-Yarubiyah are grim and mounting, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2020/139) details. Barring further
Council action, medical supplies will run out for the
1.9 million civilians in north-east Syria left stranded
by Russian and Chinese vetoes. These individuals
now count among Syria’s most vulnerable, and most
are children. They have been courageously served
by UNICEF throughout the conflict but it is critical
that UNICEF be allowed to continue providing vital
aid to young Syrians who are starving, freezing, sick
and displaced.
The Secretary-General’s report names alternatives
to the cross-border mechanism that would rely on
the Al-Assad regime to manage and distribute vital
resources. But we know better. The truth is that we cannot
depend on the Al-Assad regime to deliver any crossline assistance regardless of what roads or airports it
may now control. The most feasible alternative crossing
location identified by the Secretary-General’s report is
Tall Abyad. That is the exact same crossing that the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
recommended, and that the United States supported,

20-052149/27

S/PV.8734

The situation in the Middle East

just a few months ago. We encourage the Council to
explore this alternative from a principled humanitarian
position, as it has the potential to save thousands of
innocent lives.
In all of this, we cannot forget that the crisis did
not simply happen. It was imposed on the Syrian people
by two of our members. The now closed Al-Yarubiyah
crossing was fully functional. It did not need an
alternative. It remains the best, most direct option
to provide cross-border aid to north-east Syria. The
shameful fact is that Russia and China have knowingly
rejected the most effective means of saving the most
lives in favour of unreliable or specious options. There
is no reason to believe that the Al-Assad regime will
responsibly manage humanitarian assistance funding,
and we should not put a single dollar of that funding
in its hands. Having killed hundreds of thousands
of its own people, the regime cannot be expected to
consent to rapid, impartial and unhindered deliveries
of cross-border and cross-line aid. That is why we all
must be prepared to renew United Nations cross-border
operations throughout Syria, which is precisely what
the Secretary-General has recommended to the Council.
President Trump and I want the Syrian people to
know that the United States continues to stand with
them, but I want to close today by addressing my 14
colleagues. One day, maybe soon, maybe years from
now, there will be a time of reckoning for those who
knew that babies were freezing to death in Syria and
did nothing, for those who knew children were dying in
air strikes on schools and did nothing and for those who
knew millions faced a shortage of critical medicines
and did nothing. But the Council can act, which means
that each country represented here has a choice. They
can feed the hungry, shelter the weary and heal the sick
or they can sit back and watch them suffer and die and
be forever remembered for doing so. Which will it be?
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Ms. Mueller and Ms. Fore for their briefings. I
welcome the presence of the German Federal Minister
for Foreign Affairs and your own, Sir.
There is an urgent need to silence the arms in Idlib
and to establish an immediate cessation of hostilities.
France condemns in the strongest possible terms the
intense bombardments being carried out by the regime’s
air force and its allies, in particular Russia. Those
bombardments indiscriminately target the population
and civilian infrastructure in the north-west, including
10/27

27/02/2020

hospitals, schools and displaced persons camps. These
crimes — for they are crimes, if words have any
meaning — must not go unpunished. We will continue
to support all the mechanisms put in place by the United
Nations and we will maintain our commitment within
the framework of our national jurisdictions.
We are very well aware of the presence of terrorist
groups in Idlib. We will never take the problem of
terrorism lightly. We fight it with resolve and France
is engaged on the front line in the fight against Da’esh
and other such groups. In Idlib, as elsewhere in Syria,
the fight against terrorism means fighting the groups
that are under Council sanctions and not, as Syria and
Russia do, indiscriminately striking all opponents, be
they terrorists or not, and any civilians in the way.
But the fight against terrorism cannot justify
violations of international humanitarian law. War has
rules and respect for international humanitarian law is
binding on all. The protection of civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, as well as civilian
infrastructure, must remain a top priority. In Idlib and
elsewhere in Syria, children are dying under the bombs
or in the cold. That must end. The Executive Director of
UNICEF will back me up on that.
Today we must join efforts to achieve an immediate
and lasting ceasefire in Idlib. Fourteen Foreign
Ministers of States members of the European Union,
including Mr. Le Drian and Mr. Maas, expressed that
view yesterday.
We call on Russia to continue negotiations with
Turkey to achieve immediate de-escalation. However,
the Astana format has proven incapable of preventing
humanitarian catastrophe and escalation. We therefore
have a responsibility to mobilize collectively to silence
the guns. France and Germany are working towards
that end. The United Nations has a central role to
play here, as provided for in resolution 2254 (2015).
France reiterates its full support for the efforts of the
Secretary-General and the Special Envoy, from whom
we await cease-fire proposals.
At the same time, everything must be done
to ensure humanitarian access to those in need of
assistance. It is essential that the parties, in particular
the Syrian regime, ensure humanitarian actors safe and
unhindered access to populations in need. We call on
Russia to engage to that end.
20-05214

27/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

The figures Ms. Mueller cited speak for themselves.
There is no alternative to the cross-border mechanism
for delivering assistance in the north-west. It must be
safeguarded and we are determined to do so. It is a
matter of life or death for millions of Syrians.
With regard to the north-east, we thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the review of
alternative modalities for the border crossing of
Al-Yarubiyah (S/2020/139), which highlights the
lack of progress in delivering cross-line medical aid
from Damascus. We condemn the Syrian regime’s
obstruction. Its recent statements must be reflected in
lasting action and we will be vigilant: we are not fooled
by its strategy of instrumentalizing humanitarian
aid. We further condemn the fact that the Security
Council did not extend its authorization for the use
of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point. It is essential that
solutions be reached without delay to allow for the
sustainable transportation of medical equipment in the
north-east.
The Secretary-General’s recommendations are
clear. It is necessary to combine cross-border and
cross-line aid. It is therefore up to the Security Council
to assume its responsibilities and act accordingly. For
our part, we will remain highly vigilant regarding the
delivery of humanitarian aid to the north-east, where
the stakes are crucially high. We are talking about relief
for an area where poverty and exclusion fuelled the
emergence of Da’esh.
The tragedy unfolding before our eyes makes
a political solution more necessary than ever. The
offensive in Idlib leaves no doubt about the intentions
of the Syrian regime, aided by its external supporters,
principally Russia: to regain control of Syria by force,
without negotiating anything, and to make a show of
seeking a political solution while working towards a
total and bloody military victory.
It is more urgent than ever to get the political
process back on track with a view to implementing
all provisions of resolution 2254 (2015), in particular
through confidence-building measures and the holding
of free and transparent elections supervised by the
United Nations in which all Syrians can take part. Only
a political solution will, moreover, enable the 6 million
Syrian refugees to return to their country in safe and
dignified conditions. We regret that such conditions are
not yet in place.

S/PV. 8734

Finally, France, as well as its European Union
partners, stands ready to finance reconstruction and lift
the sanctions as soon as a political settlement is firmly
and irreversibly under way, and not before. The key for
overcoming the deadlock is thus in the hands of the
regime and its allies. Faced with the tragedy unfolding
before our eyes in Idlib, we must today unite our efforts
to put an end to the continuing humanitarian, political
and security disaster.
Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
would like to welcome the Deputy Prime Minister of
Belgium, Mr. Alexander De Croo, and Mr. Heiko Maas,
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany. I
would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller and Executive Director Fore for their briefings.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains
extremely concerned by the humanitarian situation
affecting millions of Syrians. The latest reports of
aggression are alarming and continue to compound an
already dire humanitarian crisis. We yet again implore
all parties to the conflict to exercise maximum restraint
and to recommit to a cease-fire. We must also applaud
the willingness of the members of the international
community to engage in dialogue on the escalating
situation in the north-west.
The humanitarian emergency in Syria necessitates
immediate action, as underscored in the SecretaryGeneral’s bimonthly report on the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165
(2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018) and 2504 (2020)
(S/2020/141). All parties must therefore facilitate the
work of humanitarian actors so as to ensure timely,
safe, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access to
all those in need, wherever they may be.
The crisis underscores the vital importance
of the cross-border mechanism in maintaining the
humanitarian response. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the review of alternative modalities
for the border crossing of Al-Yarubiyah (S/2020/139).
We take note that, after careful consideration, the Tall
Abyad border crossing has been designated as the most
feasible alternative. It is our hope that that crossing will
indeed be utilized and be able to effectively assist in
addressing the existing humanitarian deficits. We once
again reiterate our support for resolution 2504 (2020)
and will continue to remain in favour of the most
advantageous access arrangements.

20-0521411/27

S/PV.8734

The situation in the Middle East

We acknowledge that there is a need for counterterrorism operations to protect Syria’s people and
sovereignty. However, we must once again remind all
parties that those operations do not discharge them of
their responsibilities under international law. Military
operations should never be placed above the well-being
of citizens. The protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure is paramount and all activities must
respect the principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution.
The reconstruction of Syria, especially of its
medical and education facilities, is integral to the
improvement of the humanitarian situation. We therefore
encourage members of the international community to
contribute to Syria’s rebuilding. Without that critical
infrastructure, internally displaced persons are forced
to remain in overcrowded camps and bombed-out
buildings and access to basic necessities will continue
to be a far-off luxury.
Furthermore, reconstruction is a necessary
precondition for the safe, dignified and voluntary
return of millions of refugees. We also appeal to those
countries that have imposed unilateral sanctions on
Syria to engage in dialogue with the Syrian Government
on that issue to aid the country in meeting its most
urgent humanitarian needs. The current humanitarian
crisis will only continue to deteriorate in the absence
of a political resolution of the conflict. It is for the
Syrian people to determine their own destiny, without
interference, through an inclusive process that meets
their legitimate aspirations.
The humanitarian situation is at its worst. Too
many people are consistently going without necessary
services and children continue to be robbed of their
childhoods. There is nothing left for them to do and
nowhere else left for them to go. The international
community must reinforce the hope of the Syrian
people by taking positive action to end the conflict and
bring peace and stability back to Syria.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, and Ms. Henrietta
Fore, UNICEF Executive Director, for their briefings. I
also welcome the ministers participating in the meeting.
Tunisia has been following with concern the
military escalation in the north-west of Syria, as well
as the ongoing communication and the repeated appeals
by many Security Council members and the Secretary12/27

27/02/2020

General to stop the fighting and restore calm. We
are also concerned at the reports of the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in and around Idlib and the
continuing violence and acts of terrorism. Casualties
among civilians, including children, are on the rise.
There have also been consecutive waves of displaced
persons against a backdrop of insufficient shelter
capacity and aid for meeting urgent humanitarian needs.
We stress once again that an immediate ceasefire
and a commitment of all parties to exercising selfrestraint must remain the highest priorities. We reiterate
our condemnation of attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including those attacks launched
by groups designated as terrorists by the Security
Council. We emphasize the importance of combating
those terrorist organizations. We call on all parties
to fulfil their obligations under international law and
international humanitarian law to protect civilians at
all times and to ensure the safe and sustained delivery
of aid.
We have been following the latest efforts aimed
at reaching a ceasefire in north-western Syria through
bilateral and multilateral negotiations. Tunisia
welcomes all efforts made to this end. We also
believe that an international umbrella could help to
advance these efforts and initiatives and ensure their
effectiveness, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015), since such efforts become more effective when
the Council is united. We recall once again that any
initiatives undertaken to ensure a ceasefire in Syria are
mere temporary solutions as long as they do not address
finding a joint practical solution that counters the such
terrorist organizations listed by the Security Council
as Al-Qaida, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and Da’esh. These
groups must be eradicated completely from the region.
Tunisia has reviewed the recommendations
set forth in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/139) on ensuring the delivery of humanitarian
aid, including medical supplies, to those in need in
an expeditious and safe manner. This result could be
reached by adopting an approach that combines the
delivery of relief items across borders and conflict lines
to north-eastern Syria. We believe that ending crossborder aid deliveries requires a smooth and progressive
approach that takes into consideration Syria’s unity,
independence and territorial integrity, while ensuring
the safe, unimpeded and sustained delivery of
humanitarian aid in line with international law and
the principles of humanitarian action and ensuring the
20-05214

27/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian Government’s full ownership over coordinating
relief efforts. To overcome outstanding issues related
to meeting humanitarian needs in areas receiving
aid, including delays in obtaining approval and other
practical and administrative roadblocks, various parties
need to facilitate the work of the United Nations and its
partners on the ground.
The dialogue and cooperation between the United
Nations and the Government of Syria must be enhanced
in order to ensure an effective and coordinated
humanitarian response. My country’s delegation
welcomes the fact that, according to the letter of the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the
President of the Security Council, dated 26 February
2020, the Syrian Government is ready to make progress
in relief efforts in cooperation with the United Nations.
We look forward to resolving the issue relating to the
delivery of surgical and medical supplies to the northeast of Syria that has arisen between the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Syrian Government through further discussions about
alternative routes by land, sea and air proposed by the
Syrian Government.
My country stresses that the only sustainable
solution to the situation in Syria — and the only way
to restore peace and security in the country — is a
political settlement in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015). To that end, the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political process in Geneva must resume under the
auspices of the United Nations, paving the way for
the drafting of a constitution by consensus of Syrian
civil society representatives and political parties,
preparing the ground for free and fair elections under
the supervision of the United Nations, preserving the
unity, independence and territorial integrity of Syria
and contributing to peace and security in the region.
In conclusion, we once again commend the tireless
humanitarian efforts of the United Nations in Syria,
despite the difficulties and challenges on the ground.
We support the noble work of the United Nations to
protect lives and alleviate the humanitarian suffering
in Syria and other conflict areas.
Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Ms. Henrietta Fore and Ms. Mueller
for their briefings.
We once again address the humanitarian situation
in the Syrian Arab Republic where — with great
regret — we have to witness a bleak picture for so many

S/PV. 8734

people with humanitarian needs. For the Dominican
Republic, what has been described by the representative
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs today and in the days preceding this meeting
is a cause for deep concern, not only because of the
deterioration of the situation, which is regrettable,
but also because of the inability of the international
community — of all of us — to stop the violence and
suffering in the north-west of the country. Women
and children continue to pay the highest price in this
conflict at the mercy of violence for which they are not
responsible but are its victims.
We appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General
and the Special Envoy for Syria to get the relevant
parties to recommit to the ceasefire agreements and
to implement them fully. This must be the priority at
the present juncture. We are resolutely accompanying
these efforts because we are convinced that there is no
military solution, but rather one derived from political
negotiation, with a view to a future based on peace and
reconciliation and respect for the fundamental rights of
all Syrians.
Having said that, the Dominican Republic
would like to highlight a few points in the context
of humanitarian assistance, which is the subject of
today’s meeting, and to try to be as constructive as
possible. We reiterate that attacks against civilians and
such civilian infrastructure as hospitals, schools and
camps for displaced persons are serious violations of
international humanitarian law. They are unacceptable
and must stop immediately.
We appreciate the efforts of both international and
Syrian humanitarian organizations to meet the needs
on the ground. We advocate for full funding of the
humanitarian response plan for Syria, including the
provisions necessary to cover the needs of the hundreds
of thousands of displaced persons in the north-west,
many of them housed in makeshift tents in the cold,
rain and snow. But all of this must be accompanied by
safe and unhindered humanitarian access, including
for the United Nations. In this regard, we would like
to welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
modalities and alternatives for the Al-Yarubiyah
crossing in the north-east of the country (S/2020/139).
The Dominican Republic recognizes the enormous
challenges on the ground in reaching the affected
populations, and we therefore believe that this remains
the best option.

20-0521413/27

S/PV.8734

The situation in the Middle East

Even so, and given the circumstances, we
understand that any decision must respond only to
the level of existing needs, in the most direct manner
possible and in accordance with humanitarian
principles. Guarantees to facilitate a humanitarian
response must precede any decision by the Council. In
the absence of such guarantees, and without the direct
and extended assistance of the United Nations, we
believe that there is still a long way to go. We welcome
the recent authorization of air and land deliveries of
medical supplies to the north-east — and by land to all
of Syria — as Ms. Mueller has announced.
In conclusion, we reiterate the need to make
further progress on — and obtain better results with
regard to — the release of arbitrarily detained persons,
in particular women, children, the elderly and the
disabled, and to provide credible information on missing
persons to their families. Family reunification reaches
the deepest fibres of any society and is at the heart
of building trust and reconciliation. That is why my
country calls for even more progress in that area, while
advocating the commitment and political will needed to
advance the political process — the only credible way
to bring peace to the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I join others in welcoming
you, Mr. President, to today’s briefing. I would also like
to welcome the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany to today’s briefing.
We would like to express our thanks to Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller and UNICEF Executive
Director Fore for their briefings.
We remain deeply concerned about the increasing
level of human suffering in the north-west of Syria
since the beginning of December 2019 due to tensions
and hostilities, as highlighted by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2020/141). The surge of displaced
persons — 300,000, 500,000, 700,000 and now nearly
1 million persons, 80 per cent of them women and
children — only increases the risk of civilians falling
victim to attacks, cold, hunger, disease and so on. We
are particularly concerned about the number of civilians
killed by weapons, of whom more than 31 per cent are
children. That is simply unacceptable.
We are also concerned that the humanitarian
situation remains dire in other parts of the country,
especially in the north-east. Health-care and education
services have either been heavily affected or have
collapsed, leaving the majority of the Syrian population
14/27

27/02/2020

in the most vulnerable conditions. We therefore urge
all concerned parties to comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and ensure
that the protection of civilians and the delivery of
humanitarian assistance are a top priority.
On this occasion, we would like to commend the
tireless efforts of United Nations agencies, working
with their partners, to bring much needed humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian people, providing them with
shelter, food and medical and health services. Their
important work should not be interrupted or impeded,
so that the humanitarian crisis can be contained
and alleviated.
Secondly, we thank the Secretary-General for his
recent report on the review of alternative modalities
for the border crossing of Al-Yarubiyah. It will serve as
an important tool for the Security Council to evaluate
the situation and work to ensure that humanitarian
assistance reaches the right destination at the right time.
We are particularly concerned about the information
indicating severe disruptions to medical and nutritional
supplies for civilians in north-eastern Syria.
Moving forward, we strongly urge the countries
concerned and the United Nations to work closely
together to find the most effective and feasible ways
and means to deliver assistance to people in need, when
they need it most. All suggestions on cross-border
and cross-line options are on the table. We welcome
all efforts aimed at facilitating the more expeditious
delivery of humanitarian assistance.
The only way to end the humanitarian crisis and
bring stability to Syria is by achieving sustainable
peace. We join the other members of the Council in
reiterating our support for the Secretary-General’s call
for an immediate ceasefire and urge parties to engage
in dialogue and negotiations to find a lasting solution,
in accordance with the principles of international law
and international humanitarian law, as well as relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
others in welcoming you, Mr. President, and the
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany to
the Chamber.
We thank Assistant Secretary-General Mueller
and UNICEF Executive Director Fore for their
important briefings.
20-05214

27/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8734

My delegation welcomes the most recent report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017),
2401 (2018), 2449 (2018) and 2504 (2020) (S/2020/141),
as well as the report of the Secretary-General on the
review of alternative modalities for the border crossing
of Al-Yarubiyah (S/2020/139).

of alternative modalities for the border crossing of
Al-Yarubiyah. A combination of more cross-border
and cross-line access is indeed necessary to maintain
the levels of humanitarian assistance in north-eastern
Syria. We also believe that it is crucial for the Syrian
Government to facilitate more cross-line access to
north-eastern Syria, especially to allow medical
distribution, in a timely manner, to all civilians in need.

We share the Secretary-General’s call for an
immediate and unconditional ceasefire in Idlib.
Indonesia would like to highlight, in that regard, the
existing request from the Council to the SecretaryGeneral, in resolution 2254 (2015), to lead the effort,
through the office of his Special Envoy and in
consultation with relevant parties, to determine the
modalities and requirements of a ceasefire, as well
as to continue planning for the support of ceasefire
implementation. While acknowledging the close
linkage between a ceasefire and a parallel political
process, Indonesia would like to reaffirm its strong
support to the ongoing work of the Special Envoy. I
wish to underline three points.

We therefore appreciate the Syrian Government’s
cooperation in its decision to authorize the delivery
of cross-line humanitarian aid and the transportation
of medical aid via land routes, as indicated in the
letter received yesterday from the Syrian Permanent
Representative. Indonesia sincerely hopes that
humanitarian operations in targeted areas can be
enhanced and sustained as a result. My delegation
reiterates the importance for all parties to allow safe,
unimpeded and sustained access for the United Nations
humanitarian response to all requested areas, based
on the United Nations assessment of needs in all parts
of Syria.

First, Indonesia urges all parties to the conflict
to immediately cease hostilities. The humanitarian
situation in the north-west is extremely disturbing,
with approximately 950,000 people displaced since
1 December 2019. That number has increased
significantly in a short period of time. The number
of civilians killed as a result of hostilities is also
increasing. We condemn any targeted attacks on
civilian infrastructure and camps for internally
displaced persons. We urge all parties to take the
necessary steps to protect civilians and to ensure
respect for international humanitarian law, including
the principles of distinction and proportionality. Once
again, Indonesia appeals to all relevant parties in the
conflict to stop the violence, especially their military
operations in densely populated areas.
Secondly, my delegation notes that the cross-border
operation remains a key mechanism for providing
live-saving humanitarian assistance to people in need.
The increased demand in the north-west should be
immediately addressed. When humanitarian responses
are overwhelmed, the international community must
redouble its efforts to support humanitarian operations
in north-western Syria.
Thirdly, we take note of the observations made
in the report of the Secretary-General on the review

Let me stress one important last point. The issue
of humanitarian assistance should not be politicized by
anyone. It is crucial for us, the members of the Security
Council, to lead by example.
In conclusion, my delegation commends the tireless
efforts of all humanitarian workers on the ground,
in spite of the security situation, in responding to
the increasing needs in the north-west. They are our
real heroes.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank
the Deputy Prime Minister of Belgium for presiding
over today’s debate. I also thank the Federal Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Germany for being here with
us today.
I would like to thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator and the UNICEF
Executive Director for their briefings. The information
they have provided us paints an alarming picture of the
humanitarian situation, which is claiming the lives of
women and children. This can no longer be tolerated.
We must respond to the moving call made by the
Executive Director of UNICEF to the Council.
The Niger condemns the recent attacks on schools
and hospitals, which have resulted in the deaths of
several civilians, including students, teachers and

20-0521415/27

S/PV.8734

The situation in the Middle East

doctors. We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2020/139) and his analysis of the situation related
to the crossing points, which will help the Council to
better assess their importance.
The report of the Secretary-General confirms what
we already knew about the humanitarian situation in
Syria: that instead of improving, as we had so strongly
hoped, it is, unfortunately, constantly deteriorating.
According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, from February 1 to February 20,
more than 100 civilians were killed.
Since the most recent consultation on the
humanitarian situation in Syria, the Syrian regime
forces have registered gains in their fight against
terrorism. The price of that confrontation continues
to be paid by civilians, including many women and
children, who are exposed to dangers of all kinds
during this period of extreme cold. It cannot be said
often enough: the fight against terrorism, legitimate as
it may be, must be waged within a framework of respect
for human rights.
In this context of armed conflict, the delivery of
humanitarian aid has been gravely imperilled. We
commend the decision of the Syrian authorities to
authorize certain agencies to deliver humanitarian aid.
That process must continue, especially when it involves
medical products and equipment.
Resolution 2504 (2020), which allowed the
continued use of humanitarian corridors, was beneficial;
however, coordination between aid workers and the
Syrian Government needs substantial improvement.
Today more than ever, the situation in Idlib demands
our attention. It must move us to an outpouring of
solidarity and commitment to doing everything in our
power to stop the ongoing military escalation, which
will only worsen the already catastrophic humanitarian
situation. I commend the Secretary-General on his
efforts to obtain a ceasefire as soon as possible between
the parties in open conflict in Idlib. If the hostilities
do not cease, the meagre but hard-won gains registered
will be wiped out.
In conclusion, while we in this Chamber have taken
the floor, three women have spoken from the heart in
the face of the suffering of the weakest: the children of
Idlib. Let us listen to them. Let us work to put an end to
the tragedy in Syria, which has lasted for far too long.
16/27

27/02/2020

Ms. Goolab (South Africa): Allow me to join others
in thanking Ms. Ursula Mueller and Ms. Henrietta Fore
for their briefings on the humanitarian situation in
Syria. I wish also to welcome Deputy Prime Minister
De Croo and Minister Maas to the Council.
As we have heard today, the humanitarian situation
in north-east Syria continues to deteriorate, with
women and children the worst affected by this crisis.
The increase in violence in the region has seen hundreds
of thousands of civilians displaced.
South Africa particularly emphasizes its grave
concern regarding the attacks on civilian infrastructure
and basic services, including health and education
facilities. The continual violence will have long-term
effects on the people, particularly the children, of Syria.
South Africa reiterates that all parties to the conflict
must adhere to their obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
particularly with regard to the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure.
South Africa once again urges all parties to seek
a non-military solution to the conflict. This would
require a cessation of hostilities and a solution that
upholds Syrian sovereignty and territorial integrity. In
that regard, we wish to stress that external support for
armed groups and United Nations-designated terrorist
groups must cease immediately. External role-players
should not be allowed to use the conflict in Syria as a
proxy for their own interests.
In view of the rising tensions and the potential
of a direct military confrontation between Syria and
Turkey, we look towards various forums, including
the Astana process and bilateral engagements between
the stakeholders, to contribute to the lowering of
these tensions.
As the humanitarian crisis worsens, those
providing essential assistance have had to work harder
to meet the needs of those requiring aid. We deeply
appreciate their commitment in these changing and
challenging circumstances.
My delegation has taken note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on alternative modalities for the
Al-Yarubiyah crossing point, as requested by the
Council in resolution 2504 (2020) (S/2020/139). We note
the observations of the Secretary-General and support
his view that all parties to the conflict and the Security
Council itself must live up to their responsibilities
20-05214

27/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

to ensure that the people of north-east Syria receive
the assistance they so desperately need. It is vital for
there to be safe, unimpeded and impartial delivery of
humanitarian assistance to all those who require it.
We have also taken note of the letter from
the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic regarding authorization for a World Health
Organization convoy and for the transportation of
medical aid via land routes. That is a positive step in
addressing the humanitarian situation. We note from
the Secretary-General’s report that crossline operations
have improved since the Syrian Government approved
the use of land deliveries. As challenges remain for
crossline deliveries of aid, particularly for medical
assistance, we encourage the Government of Syria to
heed the recommendations of the Secretary-General to
facilitate a simplified, expedited and reliable approval
process to enable regular and predictable deliveries
from Damascus into the north-east by land.
As we have stated before, the only sustainable
solution to the conflict in Syria remains an inclusive
Syrian-owned and Syrian-led dialogue aimed at a
political solution that is reflective of the will of the
Syrian people. In that regard, South Africa fully
supports and appreciates the hard work of Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen in working towards achieving
that goal.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): Estonians all over the
world celebrated their independence day earlier this
week — 102 years. However, in the light of what we
have just heard in the briefings delivered by Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller and Executive Director, it is
hard to remain joyful today.
We are all witnessing a tragedy unfolding in Syria.
More than 900,000 people have been displaced during
the past three months and at least 300 others are dead.
Our Syrian colleagues tell us that it is a fight against
terrorism, but actually they are turning the cradle
of civilization into a graveyard. To date it is mostly
ordinary people who have continued to suffer.
Only two days ago the Syrian army, assisted by
the Russian armed forces, targeted 10 schools in Idlib
governorate. According to eyewitnesses, at least four
people were killed and 15 injured in one of those attacks
because the school building served as a makeshift
refuge for the fleeing people.

S/PV. 8734

In addition to the human suffering, we remain
extremely worried about the escalating military
conflict between the Turkish, Syrian and Russian
forces operating in the area. Turkey offers shelter to
more than 3 million Syrian refugees and is determined
to de-escalate the situation in Idlib. The attacks carried
out by the Syrian army threaten both of those important
Turkish efforts.
Looking at the humanitarian disaster in Idlib, 14
foreign ministers of the European Union yesterday
highlighted their strong concern over the situation. We
reiterate here their call on the Syrian regime and its
allies to end this offensive and to resume the ceasefire
established in 2018.
The Astana format has failed. It might have worked
as a short-term remedy for some, but it is now certainly
falling short in protecting and helping civilians in
Syria. That means that we must once again consider a
stronger Security Council role for Syria.
Regarding the situation in the north-east of the
country, the Secretary-General’s report on the review
of alternative modalities for the border crossing of
Al-Yarubiyah (S/2020/139) indicates that the region
faces a serious lack of medical supplies in the coming
months. However, there are alternatives to substitute
for the closing of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point in the
cross-border aid mechanism, including Tall Abyad in
Turkey or even Damascus itself.
For the Syrian regime to fill the gap, Syria will need
to ease bureaucratic restrictions for aid organizations
and grant unimpeded humanitarian access everywhere
to those in need. Unfortunately, as reported by the
United Nations, the Syrian regime has so far largely
decided to neglect those requirements, giving
access only in a sporadic manner. The international
community will not normalize its relationship with the
Syrian regime unless Damascus decides to abide by
international humanitarian law and Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015).
That is the position of both Estonia and, more
broadly, the European Union. In short — there must be
investigation before rehabilitation, responsibility before
availability and justice before any kind of recognition.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the visit to New York of the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Finance and Development
Cooperation of Belgium in order to preside over

20-0521417/27

S/PV.8734

The situation in the Middle East

today’s meeting. We thank Under-Secretary-General
Mueller and UNICEF Executive Director Fore for
their briefings.
China supports the United Nations in continuing
its effective delivery of aid to Syrian civilians. The
political, economic and security situations in Syria are
complicated and its humanitarian situation remains
dire. The international community should increase its
humanitarian aid to Syria. The United Nations and the
Security Council must apply integrated measures to
handle the Syrian humanitarian crisis in a comprehensive
and impartial manner. In that connection, I would like
to emphasize the following points.
First, the international community should provide
the United Nations with adequate funding and supplies
and continue to deliver humanitarian aid to civilians
throughout Syria. Years of war have led to harsh living
conditions for the Syrian people, who do not have the
means to buy fuel, food and medicine. The international
community should continue to provide Syria with
necessary assistance. In addition, efforts must be made
to stabilize the country’s economy in order to secure
the Syrian people’s basic livelihoods. In areas with
relatively stable security, the Syrian Government is
rebuilding houses and medical and educational facilities
and clearing the explosive remnants of war. Those
efforts are conducive to addressing the humanitarian
situation in Syria.
Secondly, terrorist forces must be eliminated
if we are to put an end to the Syrian conflict. The
international community should fully cooperate in a
joint effort to bring terrorists to justice. The occupation
of Idlib by terrorist forces and their systematic attacks
on civilians, journalists and medical workers, as well
as the acute problem of foreign terrorist fighters, are
major obstacles to the restoration of peace and stability
in Syria. We should work to eliminate the entrenched
terrorist safe havens in Syria, in accordance with the
relevant Council resolutions and international law.
China supports all parties in their continued efforts
to seek a comprehensive and long-term solution to the
Idlib problem through dialogue and negotiation.
Thirdly, the Syrian Government has the primary
responsibility for improving the humanitarian
situation in Syria. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and other humanitarian
agencies must strengthen coordination and cooperation
with the Syrian Government; abide by the Charter of
18/27

27/02/2020

the United Nations; observe the humanitarian principles
of neutrality, impartiality and independence; and fully
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria.
The cross-border humanitarian aid delivery mechanism
is a special modality for relief in certain situations and
should be adjusted to developments on the ground.
In a letter to the President of the Council and the
Secretary-General, the Permanent Representative
of Syria expressed his willingness to accept the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. The Syrian
Government agreed to the World Health Organization’s
use of border crossings and multiple airports under
Government control for shipping supplies. It also
authorized the use, by the Syrian Red Cross and other
United Nations humanitarian agencies, of roadways for
transporting medical supplies in Syrian territory for
the purpose of delivering aid. OCHA should accept that
Syrian proposal.
China is closely monitoring the humanitarian
situation in Syria. Since the start of the Syria crisis,
China has delivered multiple batches of food aid to Syria
and has provided medical services, power equipment,
office facilities, public transportation and personnel
training in various areas relating to the delivery of
humanitarian aid. China has also cooperated to that
end with eight agencies, such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and has done all it can
to help Syria’s neighbours to manage their refugees.
China intends to continue helping the Syrian people,
including Syrian refugees outside of Syria.
China categorically rejects the accusation made by
the United States. Since the start of the Syrian crisis,
China has been committed to diplomatic efforts to push
for an early conclusion to the conflict and a political
solution to the Syrian issue. China has no ulterior
motives with regard to the Syrian issue. We are guided
by the best interests of the Syrian people. We have made
judgments and established our positions based solely
on the merits of the case. China resolutely supports the
efforts of the legitimate Syrian Government to maintain
its sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity. That is also conducive to peace and stability
in the Middle East.
China has consistently supported the comprehensive
and impartial management of the Syrian humanitarian
issue. It has consistently advocated the humanitarian
principles of neutrality, impartiality, independence
and non-interference with regard to the delivery
20-05214

27/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

of humanitarian aid to Syria. Those principles are
widely accepted by the international community and
are indisputable. China has consistently played a
constructive role in the Council’s discussions of the
Syrian humanitarian issue.
All countries are entitled to voice their opinions,
make recommendations on issues and determine their
voting positions independently, in accordance with their
own principled positions. China rejects the levelling of
frivolous accusations against other countries, which
constitutes an abuse of the Security Council platform.
A political solution is essential for improving the
humanitarian situation in Syria and must be based on
safeguarding the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria. China supports
Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts to reach a Syrianled and -owned solution and to use the platform of the
Constitutional Committee in the search for a political
solution that addresses the concerns of all parties in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are happy to see you preside over
the Security Council, Mr. President, and we are
grateful to Ms. Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF,
and Ms. Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings. Ms. Mueller
has done a great deal in her position, especially with
regard to managing so-called forgotten crises. In
general, she has demonstrated talent and a principled
approach as a humanitarian and I thank her for her work.
Since
Council
meetings
take
place
regularly — perhaps too regularly — I imagine
that many members of the Council can write each
other’s statements. We, for example, knew in advance
what our colleagues from the troika, the humanitarian
penholders, would say. We have heard those ideas more
than once. Our colleagues can also probably imagine
our remarks although they prefer to ignore them. That
is more convenient.
But I propose that today we do something a
little different and focus on two recent reports of the
Secretary-General — on alternatives to the border
crossing of Al-Yarubiyah (S/2020/139), closed earlier
by a decision of the Security Council, and on the
humanitarian situation in Syria (S/2020/141). They
contain quite a few disturbing points, over which,
together with United Nations colleagues, we express
our concern.

S/PV. 8734

Among those issues is the humanitarian situation
in Idlib. We are convinced that it is not a normal
situation when, in an area of a large-scale humanitarian
operation with a budget of hundreds of millions of
dollars, for several days, or even weeks, people have
to spend the night in the open air. We believe that such
a situation could have been predicted and prepared for
in advance, particularly given the risks associated with
the winter period. The Turkish side is not impeding
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to Idlib and
humanitarian workers have plenty of resources so why
has this problem still not been resolved?
Moreover, from the reports of humanitarian
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), we know
that among the displaced persons there are people who
died as a result of heaters in tents catching fire. Those
reasons, not the cold, as many colleagues try to portray,
account for the majority of the victims. We believe
that humanitarian workers and companies supplying
such devices must address such incidents and prevent
their recurrence.
Let us now return to the reports of the SecretaryGeneral. During previous meetings, colleagues from
other delegations have repeatedly criticized us for the
fact that the Russian position, as they put it, is never
supported by facts and that we stand alone in the
Council. Today is an opportunity to provide some facts.
First, as we have noted, the only long-term solution
to the issue of Idlib, and frankly of Syria as a whole,
is the definitive and irreversible expulsion of terrorists
from the country. We urge members not to say that
we are exaggerating the problem and not to try to
whitewash Hayat Tahrir al-Sham.
The report of the Secretary General (S/2020/141)
clearly describes those with whom some Council
members are trying to flirt. They are guilty of killings,
abductions, arbitrary detention, torture and public
executions of civilians, journalists, public figures and
health service providers, bans on peaceful assembly and
preventing civilians from entering safe zones. That is in
paragraph 15. As for the issue of the ratio of civilians to
fighters, even if, as members claim, there are not many
fighters, they are nevertheless capable of carrying out
their atrocities across the entire province. The number
of them therefore does not really matter, so we do not
accept that argument.
Secondly, at every meeting we are told that
Damascus does not cooperate. The purpose is

20-0521419/27

S/PV.8734

The situation in the Middle East

clear — to create the illusion that there is no progress
on humanitarian access, from which can be drawn the
well-worn conclusion, namely, that it is not possible to
reach an agreement with the Government. Even today
we have heard similar statements.
In the meantime, the Syrian Government has
increased the number of approvals for humanitarian
operations to 600 a month. All United Nations agencies
and 28 international NGOs are registered and working
in the country. That is in paragraph 38 of the report.
Furthermore, the vast majority of the aforementioned
approvals — 95 per cent, to be exact — are so-called
“blanket” approvals, which gives humanitarian actors
flexibility compared to other kinds of approvals. In
principle, they do not limit the number of humanitarian
operations in authorized areas and are therefore
particularly valued by the humanitarian community.
I repeat, in the past two months the Syrian side has
issued 1,193 such approvals, as stated in paragraph
32. The number of people receiving such assistance is
4.4 million in just two months.
I would also like to recall that, according to
paragraph 31 of the report, there are 1,700 United
Nations staff members in the country, and these are only
the United Nations staff members, not including local
personnel and staff of humanitarian partners, who are
even more numerous. They are all somehow in Syria,
which means they have been granted visas; they are all
working there. That was almost entirely ignored today.
We have the impression that some of our colleagues
simply do not read the reports of the Secretary-General.
We are not trying to say that there are no problems.
There are, and the report highlights that. We are simply
asking members not to describe the world in black and
white, not to disregard the other side of the issue, not to
increase political pressure and not to rush to bury the
Astana format.
Like many other countries, we are working with the
Syrian side to resolve existing difficulties. The country
is at war with terrorists. A number of natural resources
have been cut off. Production chains have been
disrupted and illegal unilateral sanctions seek precisely
to undermine the effectiveness of State governance.
There are active terrorist cells in the country that do
not hesitate to use the humanitarian element in their
grim media and armed struggle. That applies to the
reports of bombings of schools and hospitals. There
is no United Nations presence in Idlib. To affirm such
20/27

27/02/2020

bombardments, it is enough just to make two telephone
calls. We have often identified such fake reports based
on supposedly reliable information.
Today, our American colleagues spoke of
bombardments of internally displaced persons camps.
As Ms. Mueller said in her briefing, in this period there
has been only one example of shelling of an internally
displaced persons camp, the Dana camp. It was not a
bombardment but artillery shelling. I would ask that
our colleagues be more exact when speaking about
such issues.
Thirdly, since the Secretary General’s report
on alternative modalities for the border crossing of
Al-Yarubiyah has been issued, let us be clear here and give
an alternative point of view, with references, of course,
to the text. I would recall that the entire information
campaign in support of that border crossing served one
purpose — to prevent any changes in the cross-border
mechanism. Since it has always been presented as a legal
precedent in the context of international humanitarian
law, year after year colleagues have insisted that it
remain unchanged. We understood such considerations
but did not share them. I would recall that the arguments
regarding Al-Yarubiyah were based on two points: there
are no alternatives to Al-Yarubiyah and the only way to
reach north-east Syria from Damascus is through Iraq.
All other points of view were considered nonsense,
including the Russian and Syrian proposals.
Let us now turn to the report contained in document
S/2020/139. The first fact is that, except for some
medical supplies, all deliveries — I repeat, everything,
that is, food, equipment and sanitary supplies — were
delivered to the region beyond the Euphrates from
within Syria, not from Iraq, as set out in paragraphs 12,
13 and 41 of the report. They are still being delivered.
On 18 February, a convoy of the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA) travelled from Damascus to
Qamishli. That is in paragraph 40. Earlier, a World Food
Programme convoy passed through the same route.
Next, with regard to there being no alternatives to
Al-Yarubiyah, the whole final part of the report outlines
those very alternatives, the main and most feasible of
which is to obtain approval from Damascus for the only
kind of humanitarian aid that is not covered by regular
deliveries from within Syria, namely, medical supplies.
At the last meeting on this issue (see S/PV.8727),
I cited a Syrian note addressed to the United Nations
Resident Coordinator, approving the delivery of a
20-05214

27/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

shipment that had been delayed in Iraq. Damascus issued
that approval in one day, although it proved impossible
to execute the delivery for security reasons, which
we understand. Yesterday, the Government approved
the delivery of medical supplies from warehouses in
Damascus to the north-east of the country. The February
UNFPA convoy, which I mentioned earlier, covered that
route in four and a half days. It is therefore acceptable
from a security standpoint, since the United Nations
Department for Safety and Security agreed to it. Syrian
troops are clearing the key Damascus-Aleppo route to
make that possible. I believe that if my colleagues were
to allow the Syrian Permanent Representative Bashar
Ja’afari to speak without a time limit and not ignore his
words, he would lay out in detail the humanitarian efforts
being made by the legitimate Syrian Government, at a
time when the Western countries are basically choking
his country with sanctions.
The report also refutes the complaints of some
Security Council members about the acute lack of
medical supplies in the provinces of north-eastern
Syria. Paragraph 5 of the report notes the opposite — the
fact that hospitals have stocks that will last until May.
The only sphere in which a shortage may be felt is
reproductive health, but even there we still have a
month, as noted in the report. I recall that the Syrian
side has already agreed to a one-time air delivery of
supplies from Erbil, in Iraq. That approval is also
contained in the aforementioned note.
No matter how certain members of the Security
Council seek to dramatize the situation, substantial
progress has been made, as the Secretary-General
has acknowledged. He has also called on the sides to
provide support until all medical supplies have been
successfully delivered to the hospitals. For our part, we
are ready to continue to assist this process and call on
everyone to do the same. We reiterate that the more we
approach this issue with calm and professionalism, the
better will be the chances for its successful resolution.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
welcome you, Sir, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Germany to the Council today. I thought he was
totally right. As he said, it is ever more difficult to
put the human suffering in Idlib into words. It is so
true, as we see the terrible human consequences of the
escalating violence committed by the Syrian regime
and Russia in Idlib province.

S/PV. 8734

The representative of Russia asked why
humanitarian agencies were finding it so difficult to
protect the desperate people out in the open air at the
moment. The answer is because they are being bombed,
they are being shelled, they are being attacked. It is
extremely difficult indeed to provide assistance to
people in those circumstances. The intensity and pace
of the Syrian and Russian campaign mean that civilians
who are able to get out of the way in time have nowhere
to go. They have no shelter. They are forced to sleep in
the open air. Children are literally freezing to death.
At the last humanitarian session, we said that over
358,000 people had been displaced since the first of
December. That number is now over 948,000, 80 per
cent of whom are women and children. I say to my fellow
Council members that we should be under no illusion
that this is the worst humanitarian situation thus far in
this terrible conflict. The continued attacks not only
directly cause civilian suffering, but they also hamper
the aid effort, amplifying the scale of this disaster.
The representative of Russia also talked about
terrorism, and he urged us in a different context not
to exaggerate problems. I would simply note that
yesterday the Russian Ambassador to London stated in
a media interview that terrorists made up 1 per cent
of the population of Idlib. Even were that the case, I
would simply say that international law does not permit
anyone to attack the 99 per cent to handle 1 per cent.
We remain appalled that civilian infrastructure
continues to be attacked. On Sunday, the White Helmets
reported that Russian warplanes hit a children’s and
women’s hospital in Balyoun, in Idlib. As the United
Kingdom’s Minister for the Middle East said on Monday,
“The United Kingdom has condemned and
continues to condemn these flagrant violations of
international law and basic human decency”.
Let me remind all military forces on the ground,
especially their commanders, that following political
orders is no defence against war crimes. Accountability
will come, no matter how long it takes. I also wish to
say as well that we look forward to the report of the
Secretary-General’s board of inquiry, and we urge
Secretary-General to make those findings public.
We need there to be an immediate cessation
of hostilities. We strongly support the Turkish
Government’s efforts to re-establish the ceasefire
agreed in 2018. We also stand behind the Secretary-

20-0521421/27

S/PV.8734

The situation in the Middle East

27/02/2020

General and his Special Envoy for Syria in their efforts
to stop the violence and save those many lives now
in peril.

to make them do so. For the sake of the innocent
people dying in Syria, there is no alternative to cross
border access.

Turning to the north-east, I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2020/139) on the
implementation of resolution 2504 (2020) and on
alternatives to the Al-Yarubiyah crossing, as requested
in that resolution. The report makes clear that there is no
alternative. Since the loss of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing
in the cross-border mandate, those living in areas of
north-eastern Syria not under the control of the Syrian
authorities have been denied the medicines and medical
items they so desperately require. Without access
through Al-Yarubiyah or the provision of a credible
alternative, medical facilities will see their stocks
of vital medicines dwindle, putting their continued
operation and the Syrian patients who depend upon
them at risk. As many have said, a particular area of
concern is reproductive health stocks. We note with
great concern the forecast that stocks in the north-east
could be depleted by the end of March, preventing vital
procedures such as caesarean sections — a preventable
tragedy for Syrian women — and, more widely, supplies
will run out by May.

The United Kingdom remains the third-largest
donor to the United Nations-led humanitarian response
across Syria. We have allocated $152 million this
financial year to projects implemented by organizations
delivering cross-border aid, primarily into north-west
Syria. Since the conflict began, the United Kingdom
has committed over $4 billion of humanitarian funding
in response to the conflict, and we remain committed
to providing help to those in need. We want to continue
to provide this much-needed assistance. We must be
sure that the aid is going to those who need it most,
wherever they are, on a principled basis. Therefore,
pending clarity about the future of cross-border
operations beyond July, and given the clear interference
and obstruction of aid by the authorities in Damascus,
we will be looking very seriously at this question.

The Russian Federation has said that we can trust
the authorities in Damascus to deliver aid throughout
Syria. Well, let us examine that claim. It is, of course,
welcome that, in recent hours and days, the Syrian
authorities have granted authorization for humanitarian
delivery. But we have heard promises before; what
matters is what actually happens on the ground, and
in that respect we need the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to provide
regular and granular data to the Security Council on
the Syrian regime’s performance when it comes both
to cross-line humanitarian aid and that within the areas
controlled by the authorities.
The Secretary-General’s report makes clear that
responses to requests are delayed for months; even
when approval is given, under half are permitted to
proceed. Key medical supplies are routinely removed
from convoys. In 2019, there were precisely zero road
convoys from Damascus to the north-east of Syria. In
areas controlled by Al-Assad, we see humanitarian
aid withheld from towns and communities deemed
insufficiently loyal to the regime. We therefore place
little faith in promises by the Syrian authorities, but
we do call upon them again to meet their humanitarian
obligations and we call on their Russian protectors
22/27

As set out in this Chamber before and as others
have said today, we will not consider providing any
reconstruction assistance until a credible, substantive
and genuine political process is firmly under way.
Russia’s contribution to Syria has been through military
hardware and bombs on his people, not development
aid, and that will have to change.
We are facing the worst humanitarian crisis in the
worst conflict in the world. Innocent men, women and
children are dying and will die if nothing is done. It is
in the hands of Syria and Russia to take or to save lives.
It is their choice. The human and humane thing to do is
to cease the fighting and let the aid workers and medics
in to act. It is in their hands.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Let me start my statement with a piece of
information that I suppose is worthy of the attention
of all the participants in today’s meeting, especially
Ms. Mueller and Ms. Fore. The day before yesterday, the
authorities of the Turkish occupation cut off the potable
water supply for Al-Hasakah city and the surrounding
villages supplied by a plant called Alouk, knowing full
well that this plant is the sole source of potable water
for Al-Hasakah, which is a city located in north-eastern
Syria — and not north-western Syria. Al-Hasakah and
the surrounding area are populated by 600,000 people,
all of whom are civilians, mostly women and children.
20-05214

27/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

That crime is similar to the crimes perpetrated by
terrorist groups in the suburbs of Damascus in 2012,
supported by Turkey and Qatar. However, those groups
were eradicated by the Syrian Arab Republic. This
most recent Turkish crime is therefore similar to those
crimes that were perpetrated by armed terrorist gangs
in Damascus in 2012, when they dumped diesel oil into
the Ayn al-Fijah spring, the main source of potable
water to Damascus, with a population of 8 million
people. We just wanted the Council to keep this matter
in mind.
Four noteworthy positions are discernible under
this month’s Belgian presidency of the Security Council,
the first of which is the endeavour by certain Member
States to transform the Security Council into a NATO
platform for supporting the Turkish aggression and
for levelling threats against my country, in violation
of the provisions of the Charter. This approach will
eventually undermine the role of the Security Council,
whose purpose is to maintain international peace and
security. This position was aired in public during the
meeting that was held on 6 February (see S/PV.8715).
The second noteworthy position concerns a
statement by the Permanent Representative of the Israeli
occupying Power, when he said that it was necessary
to physically get rid of the Palestinian President,
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, as a sine qua non of what he
calls peace, which is a flagrant threat of liquidation of
the President of the State of Palestine, made within the
precinct of the Council Chamber.
The third noteworthy position is represented by
the response of the Israeli Prime Minister, Netanyahu,
to a question related to the attacks launched by his air
force against my country, Syria, on 14 February. He
said — and, by the way, this is very important for the
President of the Council and his country — that maybe
those attacks were launched by the Belgian Air Force.
The fourth noteworthy position finds its locus in
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, who has styled
himself as the propagandist of misleading films and
whose only aim is to undermine the Government of my
country, in violation of the requirements of his mandate,
taking advantage of the self-imposed isolation of some
who have shut down their embassies in Damascus or
the geographical distance of others or the sometimes
inadequate knowledge of the external interventionist
roles that have had such catastrophic consequences on
our region for decades.

S/PV. 8734

The representative of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines was very right in her political analysis,
notwithstanding the geographical distance between her
country and mine, and the fact that her country does not
have an embassy in Damascus. I invite other Council
members to objectively follow her example and her
logical analysis.
We are not accusing Mr. Lowcock falsely. Let me
mention in this regard a simple example of the very
misleading approach of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, namely, that the UnderSecretary-General — and today Ms. Mueller — failed,
in his briefing to the Council on 19 February (see
S/PV.8727), to mention that the two humanitarian
workers of the British humanitarian organization
Oxfam were Wissam Hazim and Adel Al-Halabi, who
were martyred a few days ago as they pursued their
humanitarian work in the Dara’a province. We again
pay our heartfelt condolences to their families and
colleagues. These two men were Syrian citizens killed
in cold blood by armed terrorist groups that consistently
impede humanitarian work, the efforts of the Syrian
Government and its partners, to deliver humanitarian
aid to the people who need it. These groups are but
terrorist organizations that Mr. Lowcock continues
to depict as non-State armed opposition or non-State
actors, whereas they are considered by others to be
jihadist organizations.
The Syrian Arab Army and its allies managed to
exact a defeat on the terrorist groups in Idlib and their
paymasters, thereby returning a sense of safety and
jubilation to millions of Syrians in Aleppo thanks to
the delivery of their city from the onslaught of wrath
and terrorism. We have relaunched operations at the
Aleppo international airport with the first flight in eight
years. There is no doubt that the work of the Syrian
Government and its allies in countering terrorism in
Idlib is but a constitutional and national task. It is also a
precise implementation of Security Council resolutions.
Out of our eagerness to protect the security
and safety of our citizens and after taking a number
of initiatives, including the opening of a number of
humanitarian crossings, the Syrian Government calls on
the Syrian citizens who recently fled their regions and
homes to return to the areas liberated from terrorism in
north-western Syria. The Syrian Government stresses
its commitment to guaranteeing the safety, security
and protection of those citizens and ensuring all their
required basic needs.

20-0521423/27

S/PV.8734

The situation in the Middle East

My country’s delegation calls on the States that
have leverage over the Turkish regime and the terrorist
groups affiliated with it to compel them to allow our
citizens to return to their homes, as well as the 1 million
Syrians whom the Turkish aggression had displaced
from Manbij, Afrin, Tal Rifaat, Jarabulus, Ain Arab and
other places. My country reiterates its call on United
Nations entities to promptly provide humanitarian aid
to those citizens instead of making statements and
briefings that do not honestly reflect the reality on the
ground and contribute only to giving cover to terrorist
organizations and their sponsoring Governments.
We have informed the Security Council of
our disappointment in the reluctance of the World
Health Organization (WHO) to import the medical
consignment that is being held in Iraq, notwithstanding
the authorization that was given to the WHO by the
Syrian Government on 29 January, almost a month ago.
The Syrian Government authorized the entry of that
consignment through the Bukamal border crossing. On
22 February, my country’s Government sent an official
letter to the WHO Regional Director, reporting its
readiness to cooperate with Iraqi authorities to transfer
that aid to Syria through the Bukamal border crossing
or any other legal official crossing, including airports
and the ports of Tartus and Latakia. On 25 February,
my country’s Government also informed WHO of its
approval of a one-time transfer of that aid through Erbil
airport in Iraq to Al-Qamishli airport, in north-eastern
Syria, provided that it would be distributed under the
supervision of the Syrian Red Crescent and Syrian
Government authorities and in partnership with the
United Nations. Yesterday, we informed the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the Security Council and the
Member States of the Council of that approval.
Regrettably and notwithstanding all this,
Ms. Mueller and Ms. Fore appear not to have heard
about this information. They failed to inform Council
members of it in their briefings today. In her briefing,
Ms. Mueller mentioned the Al-Yarubiyah border
crossing 11 times although, according to the relevant
Security Council resolution, that crossing was closed.
Nonetheless, she mentioned it 11 times. She then
said that Tall Abyad crossing is the most viable and
logical option. She attributed that to the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2020/139). That is not true because
the Secretary-General’s report does not say that the
Tall Abyad crossing is the most logical option. As my
colleague the Ambassador of the Russian Federation
24/27

27/02/2020

said, the report provides alternatives, based on
coordination with the Syrian Government, for the
delivery of aid from Damascus to anywhere in the
country. That is according to the report and not as
mentioned by Ms. Mueller.
My country’s delegation recalls that cooperation
among the Syrian Government, the United Nations and
its agencies, as well as our partners from 38 foreign
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and 1,400
national societies, has enabled us, during the years of
the so-called crisis, to continue to deliver humanitarian
aid, social support, health care and basic services to
millions of Syrians, including those who live in places
classified by the United Nations as not under the
control of the Syrian Government. That is reiterated in
paragraph 22 of the sixty-fifth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of humanitarian
resolutions, which indicates that, together the Syrian
Government and the United Nations deliver food aid
to more than 3.5 million people every month in areas
classified as being under the control of the Government
in north-eastern Syria.
What does that mean? It means that aid delivery
is viable in the north-east of the country from within
the country’s borders, with complete cooperation
and coordination with the Syrian Government, far
removed from any attempt to antagonize and politicize
humanitarian aid and without the need for the crossings
mentioned in resolution 2504 (2020), which are
earmarked by the Erdoğan regime to become crossings
for his military machinery and aggressive troops
in support of terrorism, amid total silence from the
Security Council.
I would like to inform the Council of the approval
granted by my country to transport aid via contact lines
to areas in need within Syria, provided that such aid is
delivered exclusively to the Syrians who need it, so as
to ensure that it will not end up in the hands of armed
terrorists groups, illegitimate political organizations
or proxy militias. Such aid should also be distributed
under the supervision of the Syrian State, the Syrian
Red Crescent and partners from relevant United
Nations organizations.
Yesterday, the Government of my country sent a
letter to Mr. Imran Riza, United Nations Resident
Coordinator for Syria, in which we informed him of
our approval to transfer medical aid via land routes
throughout the country, especially following the
20-05214

27/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

liberation of the highway between Damascus and
Aleppo, as well as other international highways, from
armed terrorist groups supported by the Erdoğan
regime. The liberation of those highways is a milestone
that serves to ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid
to the civilians in my country who need it. Anyone
seeking to provide a different explanation, by calling
for a ceasefire and negotiations with Da’esh and the
Al-Nusra Front in Idlib, is either ignorant of the situation
in Syria, directly supports terrorism or is responsible
for the bloodshed of Syrians.
Why did Western countries, starting with the United
States and followed by others, not negotiate ceasefires
in the past with Bin Laden, Al-Zarqawi, Al-Baghdadi,
Al-Julani and their terrorist entities? If the crux of the
matter is a ceasefire with terrorist entities, then why did
the United States and Western countries not negotiate
ceasefires with Bin Laden, Al-Baghdadi, Al-Zarqawi,
Al-Julani and others?
My country reiterates its categorical rejection of
any Turkish or other foreign illegal presence — United
States, British and French — on Syrian territory. We
call on the Turkish regime to curb its aggression and
unbridled support of terrorism in Syria, Libya, the Horn
of Africa and other regions. We also call for an end to the
Israeli acts of aggression, which are conveniently used
to alleviate pressure on terrorist groups and provide
support to the Turkish aggression, thus unveiling the
alliance and link between the Turkish regime and the
Israeli occupation of my country.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): First of all, I would
like to thank UNICEF Executive Director Fore and
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for their very
valuable briefings.
I would also like to pay tribute to all humanitarian
workers who continue to risk their lives to help the
Syrian people, against all odds. Each and every day, we
witness another tragic new phase of the humanitarian
disaster unfolding in Syria. The reports of United
Nations agencies tell the story of twenty-first centurystyle barbarism. Such brutality and disregard for human
life is beyond comprehension.
The Al-Assad regime and its supporters have a
strategy that leaves civilians with two options. They
can stay in the Idlib area and desperately hope to

S/PV. 8734

survive the indiscriminate attacks of the regime and
its supporters, or they can leave their homes and run
for their lives, under very harsh winter conditions. The
strategy is not new. It has been the modus operandi of
the regime from the beginning. That is how it has killed
innocent people in order to hold onto power. We are
therefore familiar with that plan of action.
Now, the question is, what is our strategy? Will the
international community stand idly by as millions of
people are displaced and children continue to freeze
to death? Will we continue to watch as schools and
hospitals are bombed? The situation in Idlib is not just a
humanitarian tragedy; we are faced with serious crimes
against humanity. We have a collective responsibility to
stop the massacre.
We have already made it clear that Turkey is not
going to stand idly by. We are not going to just watch.
We are already hosting 4 million Syrian refugees in our
country and providing care and protection to 5 million
people within Syria. Around 1.7 million of Syrians in
Turkey are children. More than half a million Syrian
babies were born in Turkey in the last nine years.
Altogether, 9 million Syrians are under Turkey’s
protection. Our presence on the ground gives hope to
millions. We will continue to help our Syrian sisters
and brothers; we will not let them down.
As for the unfolding crisis, the road map is clear, and
I would like to reiterate it once again. First, we need an
immediate cessation of hostilities. Secondly, we need
the full implementation of the Sochi memorandum.
And, thirdly, we need to return to the status quo
ante. These are the main messages that we have been
conveying to Russia, the guarantor of the regime,
at all levels. Our talks with Russia to ensure that the
regime acts in compliance with existing frameworks
on Idlib are continuing. The regime’s deliberate
attacks on our forces has been a turning point. We
are now more determined than ever to preserve Idlib’s
de-escalation status.
As President Erdoğan stated very clearly again
today, we will not withdraw our forces, and we will not
abandon our observation posts. We will not allow the
regime to act in a way that is contrary to the agreements
on Idlib. Acting in self-defence, we have already
reinforced our forces on the ground. We will continue
without hesitation to take all necessary measures.
Turkey ensures the safe passage of lifeline convoys
to millions of Syrians through the United Nations cross-

20-0521425/27

S/PV.8734

The situation in the Middle East

border mechanism. Currently, people in the north-west
are fully relying on cross-border aid. We are working
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs to increase the capacity of the two existing
crossing points.
Today shelter continues to be the most pressing
need on the ground. We urgently need temporary
housing, makeshift schools and hospitals for the more
than 1 million newly uprooted people, half of whom
are children. We should also immediately address their
needs in terms of food and medicine.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s appeal to
donors for an additional $500 million to meet the needs
of newly displaced people over the next six months.
But funding continues to fall short. We urge the
international community to step up its contributions.
The Secretary-General, in his recent report
(S/2020/139), recommended the Tall Abyad border
crossing as the most feasible alternative for crossborder operations in the north-east. We will take all
measures necessary to operationalize that alternative,
in full cooperation with the United Nations. We
welcome that and will be ready to work with the
members of the Security Council on the upcoming
cross-border draft resolution. Cutting cross-border aid
by not renewing that mechanism cannot be an option.
Humanitarian assistance should not be the subject of
petty negotiations. It is our joint responsibility to bring
assistance to the millions of people in need in Syria. If
we fail, history will not forgive us.
Here I would also condemn the representative of
the regime for his attempt to intimidate United Nations
humanitarian officials.
Nine years ago the Syrian people spoke out for
democracy and a better future. But their legitimate
demands were met with force, and they faced
destruction and torture. The expectations of the
Syrian people are still legitimate. The regime and its
supporters continue to seek a military solution. What
we understand from their actions is that they want to
destroy the political process by killing each and every
member of the opposition.
The Council knows better than Al-Assad’s
murderous regime that there is no alternative to a
political solution in Syria. A Syrian-led, Syrian-owned
political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015) is
still the only option. Syria can still be a democratic,
26/27

27/02/2020

secular and stable country with secure borders and a
strong economy. The Syrian people deserve nothing
less. But they need our help. They need the Council to
play its role to bring peace and security to Syria.
As to the previous speaker’s delusional statement, I
will not honour him with a response, because, I reiterate,
I do not consider him a legitimate representative of the
Syrian people.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Ottoman State started by invading Syria in
1516, as everyone knows. However, the Syrians, known
for their patience, overthrew the Ottoman State in Syria
in 1916, after 400 dark years of Ottoman occupation.
Today, as members have seen, the Turkish
representative threatened us once again, very arrogantly.
He deems himself to be above the law.
Our disagreement is not with the Turkish people.
Our disagreement is with the Erdoğan party, which
sponsors terrorism in my country. Our disagreement is
with the sponsors of terrorism in Turkey, because that
terrorism has destroyed our infrastructure and led to
the killing of hundreds of thousands of civilians. I told
the Council in my statement that the Turkish regime
had cut off the water supply to Al-Hasakah province,
where 600,000 civilians live.
The representative of the Turkish regime has no
right to speak on behalf of the Syrian people; only the
Syrian Government can speak on their behalf. Neither
he, nor his leader nor his President can speak on behalf
of the Syrian people. We speak on behalf of the Syrian
people. We are the representatives of the Syrian people
in this international Organization.
The Syrian Government has not been waging a
war against its own people. We are in a legitimate war
against terrorism and against the sponsors of terrorism:
Turks, Qataris and Saudis. They are the proxies, but the
original sponsors, in the West, are even more dangerous
because they are initial sponsors of terrorism.
My country’s Government is the victim of an
unprecedented terrorist project to target a legitimate
Government by investing in terrorism. All present have
seen what happened when some invested in terrorism
in Iraq; when they did so in Libya; and when they did
20-05214

27/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

so in Africa, especially in the Horn of Africa, where
Erdoğan’s regime sponsors terrorism. Wherever we
look, we find the fingerprints of the Turkish regime
on the sponsoring of terrorism in those regions. Of
course, I could speak about this issue at length, but in
the interests of time I shall not.
We have seen clearly today that some ignore the
importance of the Astana framework and say that it is no
longer viable. This is not true. The Astana framework
compels the Turkish regime to fight terrorism. That
is why the Turkish regime does not want the Astana
framework to be sustained and successful. The Astana
framework compels it to combat terrorism in Idlib and
to distinguish between terrorism and the so-called
moderate opposition.

S/PV. 8734

The Syrian Government has no problem with the
civilian opposition because we deal with it in Geneva.
There is a Special Envoy, Geir Pedersen, and, before
him, there were Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Brahimi.
We have no problem with unarmed and non-terrorist
civilian opposition. We must distinguish between the
two. The Syrian Government has the right to combat
the terrorism sponsored by Turkey, Qatar and Saudi
Arabia, as I said, along with other countries.
The Astana framework is what has led to the current
situation of peace and safety in most Syrian territories.
That is why they want to distance themselves from
the Astana framework. They have a terrorist project.
They want to perpetuate terrorism by exerting political
pressure on the Syrian Government. This is their project.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

20-0521427/27
