UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/12
23 March 1994
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3353rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 March 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item "The situation in
Afghanistan", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council deeply regrets that the food blockade imposed on
Kabul continues. This situation is increasing the hardships of the
population in all sectors of the capital, since the humanitarian aid that
has so far been provided has not alleviated substantially the plight of
hundreds of thousands of the city’s starving inhabitants.
"The Council continues to believe that the seriousness of the
humanitarian situation is entirely due to the ongoing fighting in
Afghanistan, and calls for its immediate cessation. This fighting has been
the cause of the suffering of the Afghan population and of repeated
interruptions in the delivery of humanitarian aid in that country.
"The Council therefore calls for an immediate end to the obstacles to
the passage of humanitarian aid in order to ensure that future supplies are
distributed without hindrance to the whole of the population. In this
regard, the Council expresses its appreciation to the countries in the
region for facilitating efforts to provide humanitarian assistance to Kabul
and other provinces of the country. Furthermore, the Council calls upon
the international community to extend urgent humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan in order to alleviate the suffering of the Afghan people.
"The Council stresses the importance that it attaches to full
compliance with international humanitarian law in all its aspects and
recalls that those who violate international humanitarian law bear
individual responsibility.
"The Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s appointment of a special
mission to Afghanistan, in accordance with General Assembly resolution
48/208. This mission will canvass a broad spectrum of Afghanistan’s
leaders to solicit their views on how the United Nations can best assist
Afghanistan in facilitating national rapprochement and reconstruction.

94-14639 (E)

230394

/...

S/PRST/1994/12
English
Page 2

"The Council supports this mission, which is due to leave Geneva soon,
and urges all Afghans to assist it in carrying out its mandate and thus
promote a cessation of hostilities, the resumption of humanitarian aid and
the restoration of peace in Afghanistan."

-----
