UNITED NATIOiVS

TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

13 AUGUST

1973

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l

736)

. .. .. . . . .. .. . . . , . . . . , . .. .. . . ..

Welcome to Sir Donald Maitland, representative of the United Kingdom, and
expression of thanks to the retiring President . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption

of the agenda

. . . ,. . , . ,. . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . .. . . ..

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 11 August 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10983)
. . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . ,. .*. . . . .. . . . . *I . . .. . . . . .. . . .I

1

SIPV. 1736

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SIXTH
Held in New York

on Monday,

President: Mr. John SCALI (United States of America).
hesent:
The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Jndonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 736)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 11 August 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 10983).
The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.
Welcome to Sir Donald Maitland, representative of the
United Kingdom, and expression of thanks to the retiring
President
1. The PRESIDENT:

I should like to put aside my gavel

for a moment to bid a very warm welcome to Sir Donald

M&land, who makes his initial appearance in this chamber
as representativc
of the United Kingdom scarcely 24 hours
after his arrival in New York. I also wish to express for my
own delegation and for the entire Council deep appreciation for the distinguished leadership provided the Council during the month of July by the United Kingdom
Mission. We say “Thank you” to Sir Colin Crowe, who
came back to New York expressly to preside over the
resumed Middle East debate. His impeccable performance
added a chapter to the record of an outstanding Briton who
will be long remembered by us all. I might also say “Thank
YOU” to Sir Kenneth Jamieson for his valuable contributions to our work during July.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East

Letter dated 11 August 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/10983)
2.

The PRESIDENT:

A letter has today been addressed to

the President of the Security Council by the representative

MEETING

13 August 1973, at 3 p.m.
of Lebanon, requesting that he be invited to participate in
the discussion of this item without the right to vote. If I
hear no objection I shall, in accordance with the usual
practice, proceed to invite the representative of Lebanon to
take a place at the Council table in order to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra
(Lebanon) took a place at the Security Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT: I have also today received a letter
from the representative of Israel in which he requests an
invitation to participate in the discussion of the question
before the Council without the right to vote. In accordancr
with the usual practice and jf there is no objection,
propose to invite the representative of Israel to take a placr
at the Council table in order to participate in the discussior
without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel)
took a place at the Security Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT: Letters have also been addressed to
the President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Iraq and Egypt in which they ask to be invited to
participate in the Council’s discussion without the right to
vote, I would suggest that, in view of the limited number of
places at the Council table, the representatives I have just
mentioned be invited to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber, and that they be invited
to be seated at the Council table when they are called upon
to speak. There being no objection, I now invite the
representatives of Iraq and Egypt to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. K. Al-Shaikhly
(Iraq) and Mr. A. E. Abdel Meguid (Eg.vpt) took the places
resewed jbbr th.em at the side of the Council chamber.
5. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now begin its
consideration of the question placed on its agenda this
afternoon, which is based on the complaint of the
Government of Lebanon contained in a letter dated 11
August 1973 from the representative of Lebanon to the
President of the Security Council and circulated in document S/10983. Upon receipt of that letter, which requested
an urgent meeting of the Security Council, I instituted
consultations with members of the Council and, with their
concurrence, arranged for the scheduling of this meeting.
6. 1 should also like to draw attention to document
S/10984, which contains the text of a letter addressed to

me on 11 August by the representative of Iraq in connexion
with the item just included in the Council’s agenda.
7. The first name inscribed on my list of speakers for the
discussion of the question before the Council is the
representative of Lebanon on whom I now call.
8. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): Mr. President, as you assume
for the first time the presidency of the Security Council, it
gives me pleasure to extend to you my congratulations and
my best wishes for your success. We trust that under your
presidency the Council will be able to make significant
moves forward in improving conditions for international
peace and security.
9. I also wish to thank the members of the Council for
having convened this meeting at such very short notice.
10. This month was presumed to be one of relaxation for
the members of’the Council. It was generally believed that
it would be an uneventful one, one in which quiet
diplomacy and the visit of the Secretary-General to the
Middle East would create the conditions needed to start
once more efforts
for a peaceful settlement of the
Arab-Iraeli conflict.

control tower informed the pilot of the plane, as we11as
pilots of other planes, of the situation prevailing in tile air
space over the airport because of the presence of the Isrsc]i
military planes, and suggested to him that he delay his
departure, which he did. After a while, the pilot requested
that he be allowed to take off, using runway No. 3 instead
of runway No. 21, which had originally been assigned
to
him, in order to avoid ascendingsouthward. The control
tower allowedhim to take off.
1.5. At 2135 hours, that is, moments after the planehad
taken off, two Israeli Mirage jet fighters dived towardstile
plane and reached it at a point west of the town of Byblos
and ordered it to follow them. One of the Israeli jeti
contacted the pilot by wirelessand ordered him to stayat
an altitude of 6,500 feet. The pilot was forced to followthe
two Israeli military jets for 45 miles west of the Lebanese
coast and then to turn towards the south, where the
hijacked plane entered Israeli air space. The planewas
forced to land at an Israelimilitary air baseunder thethreat
of being shot down. The plane was carrying 74 passengers
of various nationalities, mainly Lebaneseand Iraqis,aswell
asa crew of sevenLebanese.
16. As soon as the Lebanesecivilian plane landed,it was
orderedto open its doors, and membersof the Israeliand
forces in combat uniforms and with guns in their hands
broke into it. They inspectedit and ordered the passengers
and the crew out, whereupon they were subjectedto
military interrogation. After the plane had been forcibly
detained for over two hours at the military base-1
underline the words “military base”-it was permitted to
take off and it landed at the Beirut airport at 1.15 a.m.on
11 August 1973. The pilot of the hijacked plane staled
after his return that he had had to comply with theorders
given to him to ensurethe safety of the passengers
for he
did not want to have his plane and passengers
meet tlrz
tragic fate which the Libyan plane and its 115 passeagcrs
had met on 21 February 1973, when it was shot downby
the IsraeliAir force in Sinai.

11. Last month, in its habitual fashion the Israeli Government attempted to deceive the Council once more during
the debate on the Middle East problem. The Israeli
delegation went to great lengths to assert that what it
described as a mechanical, numerical and undemocratic
decision would, if taken by the Council, constitute a blow
to the efforts of diplomacy and would wreck the chances
for peace. But how soon that apparently innocent pretense
has been belied, and how soon the deceit has been exposed.
We trust that this time the totality of the Council can be
convinced that Israeli falsehoods have always been intended
to borrow more time and, to that end, to hoodwink
international public opinion.
12. I have been instructed by the Government of Lebanon
to request the convening of this meeting of the Security
Council to deal with a grave and unprecedented act of
Israeli air piracy, an act which at the same time violated
Lebanon’s air space and sovereignty. Allow me first to put
on record the facts.

17. The conclusionwe draw from those facts is simpleand
crystal clear and provides no room for double or dubious
interpretation. That conclusion is that Israel hasengaged
as
a State in an act of air piracy, of hijacking, of State
terrorism. In other words, Israel has committed an actof
State terrorism againstinternational law. It already hadthe
distinction of being the only State Member of the United
Nationscondemnedfor aggressionand kidnapping. Nowit
has added to its record the crime of premeditatedaed
well-plannedhijacking.

13. On 10 August 1973, between 2045 and 2220 hours,
Beirut local time, units of the Israeli Air Force, in separate
formations, penetrated Lebanese air space at different
altitudes ranging from 4,000 to 10,000 feet and flew over
different areas of central and southern Lebanon, Some of
these units circulated in the air space over the Beirut area,
between El-Damour in the south and Jounich in the north,
including the air space over the Beirut International
Airport, which at the time was busy with the heavy traffic
of departing and arriving civilian aircraft. The activities of
the Israeli Air Force thus seriously endangered the security
and safety of civil aviation in the air space over the
International Airport of Beirut.

18. It is an indisputable fact that the Israeli authorilics,
which conceived, planned and carried out that operation,
have either sunk to the level of hijackers or elevated
hijacking to the level of a State policy. In either case,the
culpability, avowed and defendedby GeneralMosheDqwt,
Minister of Defence of Israel, is proven beyond any doubt.
This new act, violating Lebanon’sair spaceand sovereiglltp,
breachinginternational law and endangering the safetyof
international civil aviation, has aroused a storm of worldwide public indignation and condemnation,

14. At 2100 hours, a civilian Caravelle airliner belonging
to Middle East Airlines and on lease to Iraqui Airways had
prepared to take off from Beirut to Baghdad. The Beirut

19. It would not be difficult for me to apprisethe Council
of all the repercussionsthat this incident hashad id the
2

world but I shall cite only a few examples which manifest
the strong reactions it has aroused. The ,Sunday Express of
London described it as an “act much more than a crime”.
The Observer stated that “The hijacking of a civilian airliner
in the Lebanese air space is a blow directed against the
international community as a whole, and it is a grave matter
when it is directed from a Government and not from
terrorists.”
Vze Guardian asked: “Is it a wise policy to
break international law? The answer is ‘no’. The hijacking
of a civilian airliner blows up Israel’s request to take
measures against countries involved in aerial hijacking.” 7’ke
Tirne~ of London opined that: “Defying international law
and the international community seems to be a habit
deeply rooted in the Israelis.” The Spanish newspaper
N&?vo Diurio wrote: “This act is an unjustifiable aggression
which makes a mockery of international conventions and
agreements. The international community must condemn
this act most vigorously.” The Yugoslavian newspaper
Borba wrote the following: “This is an ugly act of piracy in
defiance of international law and security.” The paper also
condemned Israel’s horrible conspiracy to murder all the
leaders of the Palestine movements, to whom Israel denies
tlleir right to live free in an independent State. The French
newspapers Le Mode, Les Ethos, l’Humanit6 and Le
Par&en have severely criticized and deplored this act of
Israel.

24. The Council has before it the facts about a clear-cut
case of an act of State piracy or State hijacking. It was
conceived, planned and executed under Israeli Government
orders and by units of Israel’s Air Force. It violates all
international norms and instruments governing the safety of
international civil aviation. It constitutes a flagrant violation of Lebanon’s sovereignty.
25. The assertion of the Israeli Defence Minister that his
Government will undertake similar actions in the future-to
achieve hidden and sinister objectives-constitutes a constant threat not only against Lebanon’s sovereignty and
safety of its civil aviation but also against those of other
Arab and non-Arab Governments.
26. The Israeli Government is embarking on a dangerous
course. It is arrogating to itself the power to establish a
special law outside and above that of the United Nations. In
accordance with that law it is kidnapping people in other
countries and trying them for supposed crimes they have
never committed. It has launched its squads of God’s wrath
to commit murders in different European capitals. It has
resorted to the falsification of passports of several nationalities to cover the sinister activities of its agents. The
international community can no longer tolerate this lawless
behaviour and policy of a State Member of the United
Nations.

20. An official spokesman of the United States State Department deplored the deviation of the plane and the violation of Lebanon’s sovereignty and of international law. A
spokesman for the French Government described it as
“condemnable”.
The British Airline Pilots Association said
in a statement: “This act makes nonsense of Israel’s support
last December of a resolution to impose sanctions against
countries responsible for such acts. This incident clearly
demonstrates that Israel is not fit to be a member of a
civilized organization like the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO). A country which makes hijacking a
tool of its political policy is not fit to be a member of
ICAO.”
The 2,000-member Guild of Air Pilots called for
the expulsion of Israel from ICAO for air piracy in
intercepting the Arab passenger plane over Lebanon and
forcing it to fly to Israel. Even the association of Israeli
pilots has condemned the incident.

27. Mrs. Meir has vowed to fight the Palestinians wherever
they are and as far as Israel’s arm can reach. General Dayan,
uninhibited and unperturbed by the indignation the act of
his Air Force has aroused, has promised more, similar
operations. We believe that the Council has a duty to face
up to this arrogant challenge to and defiance of the United
Nations and international law.
28. In the face of repeated acts of aggression perpetrated
by Israel against Lebanon, my Government finds no other
recourse than to bring our cases before the Security
Council, with the persistent hope that the Council will meet
its responsibilities under the Charter and take the necessary
measures to bring Israel under the rule of international law.
29. In addressing itself to the Council today, the Lebanese
Government does not seek to demonstrate once more its
adherence to the United Nations and its faithful belief in
the Charter and the purposes and principles enshrined in it
or its reliance on the new legal order that our Organization
is engaged in strengthening. The position of Lebanon
vis-&vis the United Nations is well known and does not
need any testimony on my part. But what I wish to stress
to the Council is the fact that the resolutions which it has
adopted on all but one of our complaints may have given us
some temporary solace and satisfaction; they may have
carried some political and moral weight-soon to vanish.
But the Council knows very well the problem caused by the
recalcitrant aggressor, Israel. In the face of Israel’s continued defiance, the Council has failed to move beyond
condemnation, warning and statements of some basic
principles and has failed to adopt meaningful and decisive
measures which, if taken at the appropriate time, not O~Y
would have prevented the aggressor from repeating its acts
but would have stopped the constant deterioration of the
situation in the Middle East and would have enhanced the

21. The chain of Israel’s acts of aggression against
Lebanon is indeed a long one. It began with the most
clastardly attack on the International Airport of Beirut on
28 December 1968, when almost the totality of Lebanon’s
civilian air fleet was destroyed. This was the first act of its
kind perpetrated by any State against international civil
aviation.
22. The Security Council in its resolution 262 (1968) of
31 December 1968 condemned Israel for that attack and
solemnly warned Israel against repeating it.
23. However, it is common knowledge that Israel, in
defiance of that resolution and subsequent ones, unleashed
several attacks against Lebanon which resulted in heavy loss
of life, destruction of towns and villages, ami disruption of
the peaceful life of the Lebanese people. Those acts were in
defiance not only of the Council’s resolutions but also of
the Charter, of the Lebanese-Israeli Armistice Agreement
and of international law and morality.
3

the earth and whose legitimate rights are daily gaining
recognition and support, not only within the United
Nations but also in the world at large. This fact disturbs the
Zionist usurpers; it prevents them from enjoying the fruits
of their aggression and drives them to ever-greater acts of
madness and violence.

role of the Council in its search for ways and means to
settle the Middle East problem.
30. The Council has wide powers under the Charter to
adopt the desired measures to prevent an adventurer State
like Israel from embarking on varying courses endangering
international peace and security. As one of the small
Members of the United Nations, we have the duty and also
the right to warn that constant inaction by the Council will
result in the erosion of the faith which these nations have
placed in it. We do not view the Council with contempt and
speak of it in derision, as do the government officials and
representatives of Israel. We hold the United Nations and
the Council in high esteem and respect. We look at it not as
a platform for propaganda but as an organ endowed with a
historic role to make peace a living reality for our
generation and future generations. We would like the
Security Council to be a resounding success in preserving
peace so that humanity at large may be the beneficiary.

36. The abduction of the civilian airliner over Lebanese air
space is not only the latest act of aggression in the long
history of the Zionists’ violations of the principles and
purposes of the Charter and all the norms and practices of
international law; it is a unique and shocking precedent that
a State Member of the United Nations declares piracy as an
instrument of national policy. This act of international air
piracy confirms the serious and continued threat to
international civil aviation by Israeli military actions. The
world has not yet forgotten the Israeli attack on Beirut’s
International Airport in December 1968 nor the massacre
of the 106 passengers on the Libyan airliner which the
Israelis shot down in cold blood over occupied Sinai last
February. Indeed, those criminal acts prove that militarist
Israel, contemptuous of international law and defiant of the
United Nations, poses a permanent threat to international
peace and security.

31. The Lebanese Government trusts that in the present
case the Council can adopt a resolution condemning in the
strongest terms the abominable act perpetrated by Israel.
We feel that it should address a solemn warning to Israel to
refrain from repetition of its acts and the violation of
Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. As the act
under consideration constitutes an unprecedented threat to
the safety of international civil aviation, the Council has the
responsibility to bring the resolution it may adopt on this
matter to the attention of ICAO for its consideration.

37. The Security Council has repeatedly warned Israel
over the years that its aggressions and grave violations of
the Charter would not be tolerated. The Council has
notified the aggressors that it would have to consider
further and more effective steps, as envisaged in the
Charter, to ensure against repetition of such acts. Alas, the
Council has so far failed to put its words into action, and
the Zionists continue their aggressions and violations with
impunity.

32. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of
Iraq to take a pIace at the Council table and to make his
statement.
33. Mr. AL-SHAIKHLY
(Iraq): I should like first to thank
the members of the Security Council for allowing me to
participate in the Council’s discussion of yet another Israeli
act of aggression, committed in this instance against Iraq
directly.

38. There can be no doubt now that the Zionists are
greatly encouraged in their aggressions by the endless
support-military,
political, diplomatic and financial-which
they receive from Washington. This support, signifying
encouragement, is the cornerstone of United States policy
in the Middle East. The Zionists’ total confidence that
American support will be forthcoming, no matter what the
circumstances or the consequences may be, was amply
justified when the United States promised the aggressor a
further supply of Phantoms on the morrow of the massacre
of the passengers of the Libyan plane. It is obvious now
that the American vetoes which prevented the Council last
year from adopting a draft resolution calling for no more
than a cease-fire and again, a few weeks ago, prevented the
Council’s condemnation of Israel’s acts of aggression in the
area have spurred the Zionists in their latest aggression.

34. The complaint before the Council today concerns a
government-planned hijacking of a civilian airliner in the air
space of a sovereign State. A Middle East Airlines Caravelle
on charter to Iraqi Airways was intercepted shortly after
take-off from Beirut International Airport by two Israeli
Air Force Jets on Friday, 10 August. The airliner, which
was en route to Baghdad, was then forced to land at a
military airfield somewhere in occupied Palestine, where
the passengers and crew were forced to leave the plane at
gunpoint and subjected to hours of detention and interrogation.

39. The persistence of the Zionists in challenging the
world Organization should prompt the Council to adopt
not merely verbal condemnations and further warnings, but
rather immediate steps for the application of disciplinary
measures against this international outlaw, which has been a
Member of the Organization illegally and under false
pietenses for far too long.

35. The official Zionist spokesmen have sought to justify
their act of piracy by declaring that they were after some
Palestinian leaders who were supposed to be among the
passengers. Twenty-five years after their initial aggression
against the Palestinian people, the Zionists are not satisfied
with having ejected the majority of that people from their
ancestral homeland and kept the remnant in subjugation as
third-class persons living under occupation. The Zionist
aggressors now fabricate excuses to abduct or to murder the
national leaders and the intellectuals of this tenacious
people which Israel has failed to eliminate from the face of

40. Perhaps in view of the American veto, this Council no
longer has the power to establish peace and security in our
region, as it is the Council’s primary responsibility to do. It
remains, however, the duty of the Council to assert its
4

moral authority, notwithstanding the right of my country
to adopt all appropriate measures in self-defence in accordance with the provisions of the United Nations Charter.
41. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Egypt, I invite flim
to take a place at the Council table and make his statement.
42. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt) (interpratatiotz from
6wzch):
In taking the floor today in the very serious
circumstances
created by Israeli aggression against
Lebanon, which threatened the security of that country
and interfered with the proper operation of an international
civil airliner, my delegation shares the indignation of world
public opinion at this disgraceful act of state piracy
commjtted by Israel.
43. It is certainly not our intention here to engage in
polemics or acrimonious debates; we have asked to participate in this discussion because we are convinced that it is
our duty to support the complaint of our brother,
Lebanon, and to unmask the true face of Israel: Israel, the
pirate; Israel, the terrorist.
44. The flagrant aggression which Israel has just committed against Lebanon, violating its air space with Israeli
fighter planes and forcing a civilian airplane belonging to
the Middle East Airlines to change its flight direction, and
to land at an Israeli military airport, is an act of
international
piracy and new evidence of the bad faith
shown by Israel towards peace in the Middle East. It is
striking proof of violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, and of Israel’s constant challenge to the international
Organization. Moreover, it is a premeditated
violalion of the Chicago Convention on international civil
aviation,1 and a grave attack on tfle part of a signatory
against the development of civil aviation in the entire
wo 1-Icl
45. These successive infringements of the Charter and of
international
conventions pose a threat to world security.
In this connexion, the preamble of the Chicago Convention
is very clear, and to prevent any abuses of this sort
article 3(c) of that Convention stipulates that:
“No aircraft of any State party shall overfly the
territory
of another State or land upon it unless specifically authorized to do so, and only in conformity with
the conditions of such authorization”.
46. This act of piracy just committed by Israel against a
Lebanese civil aircraft cannot be dissociated from the
general situation now obtaining in the Middle East, as our
brother Ambassador Odero-Jowi of Kenya said so well in
the course of the discussion which took place in the
Sccurjty Council following the Lebanese complaint of April
1973:
‘C. . . the complaint by Lebanon cannot be treated outside
its basic Middle East context, because that would amount
to the Council’s trying to treat only the visible symptoms
of a malignant cancer without recognizing the basic
causes of the disease”. [I 709th meeting, para. IO.]
1 United

Nations,

Trea1.v Series, vol. 15, p. 295.

47. This Council therefore has the duty of eliminating the
causes of tension in the Middle East so that a just and
lasting peace may be estabfisfled in accordance with the
Charter and resolutions of the United Nations.
48. The crux of the Middle East problem is to be found in
the fact that the people of Palestine have been deprived of
their legitimate rights; their right to self-determination and
independence has been denied them for the simple fault of
belonging to Palestine, Moreover, this increasing tension in
the region finds its explanation in the occupation of the
Arab territories since June 1967. This state of affairs will
unfortunately continue so long as Israel persists in using
force to achieve its expansionist goals, so long as Israel
continues to occupy Arab territories and to deny the very
existence of the Palestinian people.
49. But Israel in tfle arrogance which flas motivated it
since its 1967 military aggression, forgets what an eminent
French writer, Mr. Marc Hillel, wrote in his book entitled
Isi%&? en danger de pa&, published in Paris in 1968. He
said:
“Created to ensure peace and tranquifity to men and
women who really needed it, lsracl could not, by the very
nature of things, do anything other than offer them
tension on their borders, an uncertain future, and war”.
50. Indeed, far from ensuring peace, Tel Aviv has become
tfle capital of all the Machiavellian plans of sadistic
terrorism that arc being conceived and carried out to serve
its territorial ambitions against the independence, security
and territorial integrity of the neighbouring States. It is tfle
author of Arab genocide and the producer of an acute form
of racism. Its field of action is no longer limited to its own
territory; its tentacles extend beyond international frontiers, with no regard for custom or for international law,
threatening by its subversive acts the very sovereignty of
countries of such absolute neutrality as Switzerland, for
example.
51. We all remember the fraudulent methods by wflich it
obtained the plans of the Mirage on the territory of the
Swiss Confederation. They are well known to all. The
assassination of a Moroccan civilian in Norway, the fafsification of Britisfl, Belgian, German and, most recently,
Danish passports indicate Lhc criminal character of the
Zionist regime implanted in Israel and of its foreign
affiliates.
52. By prosecuting in Israel a group of 10 Arab and other
civilians who were kidnapped in the territories of autonomous and sovereign countries, Israel arrogates to itself
the role of an international policeman without muc11regard
for international morality or law. Its present as weft as its
past are heavy with countfcss criminal acts, which, I am
sure, the members of the Council recall. Is it possible to
forget the Israeli aggression against the village of Bahr
El-Baquar in Egypt, where innocent school children died
tragically?
Can one forget the intimidation and the
terrorism carried out each day by the Israeli authorities
against the Arab population of the occupied territories?
53. The Council is meeting this time at the request of
Lebanon, which has just become the object of a new act of

aggression by Israel. That aggression, which was committed
by Israel on 10 August 1973 against the national sovereignty of Lebanon, against nationals of several countries
and against the security of international civilian aviation, is
considered as an act of State terrorism, since the perpetrators of this act of terrorism are the highest Israeli
authorities, which have even tried to justify their motives.
In that regard we have learned of the justification which the
Minister of Defence of Israel, General Dayan, claimed to
give on 11 August for this premeditated aggression. It
appears that the purpose of this Zionist terrorist practice is
pure genocide against the Palestinian people and all those
who resist Israeli aggressive and expansionist policies in the
other Arab States.

Charter of the United Nations, of resolutions adopted by
the United Nations and of Conventions adopted under tlic
aegis of ICAO concerning the protection and safety of civiI
aviation and, in particular, the Tokyo Convention of 1963,
the Hague Convention of 1970 and the Montreal Con.
vention of 1971.
58. The international community must co-operate hl order
to put an end to the criminal terrorism of Israel against the
Palestinian people and against the neighbouring Arab
States, some of whose territories are occupied by tile
terrorist forces of Israel. The crimes perpetrated by Israel
against the inhabitants of the occupied Arab territories
constitute the gravest source of unprecedented barbaristn of
international terrorism.

54. According to the observations submitted by States to
the Ad Uoc Committee on International Terrorism in
accordance
with
General
Assembly
resolution
3034 (XXVII),
several countries, including Switzerland,
have established a distinction between the terrorist behaviour of individuals and the illicit acts of violence committed
by States themselves, which constitute a direct violation of
international law.2 The aggression perpetrated by Israel on
10 August 1973 is nothing but an act of State terrorism in
accordance with that distinction. This State terrorism is the
most dangerous form of violence and constitutes a threat to
the security of peoples. This form of terrorism, which is
practised by Israel, is the primary cause of the violence and
blackm.ail which the world is witnessing in the Middle East.
Israel makes acts of terrorism the very core of its official
policy; indeed the Zionist State was founded and is
maintained on this official and venturesome practice.

59. On 10 August the world witnessed a new invention of
terrorism which is now added to the earlier forms accun~ulating in the archives of Israeli terrorism.
60. On many occasions the Security Council has condemned Israel for other aggressions and other acts or
international terrorism. Other international organizations
have also condemned the acts of international terrorisln
practised by the Israeli State. However, it appears that tltc
resolutions, condemnations and measures adopted so far
have not been sufficient to put an end to the criminal
practices followed by Israel, which considers itself to be
above the law.
61. The Israeli record of acts in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations is considerable. The most recent
illustrations are its aggression against Egypt, Syria and
Jordan in 1967 and the continuation of its occupation of
the territories seized during that conflict.

5.5. Israeli fighter planes flew over Lebanese territory on
10 August, violating Lebanese air space. They intercepted a
civilian aircraft belonging to Middle East Airways, which
was chartered by Iraqi Airways. The Israeli fighter planes
threatened this civilian aircraft with the use of force and
compelled it to land at an Israeli military airport, as
described by the representative of Lebanon. This air piracy
is onIy one example of the odious barbaric acts perpetrated
by a State; it is an act of State terrorism directed against
another State. This act constitutes a violation of international law; it is an infrigment on the sovereignty of
another State; it is a threat to the security of peoples.

62. It was Israel which, on 23 June 1972, invaded
Lebanese territory with its armed forces and which, in a
premeditated ambush, kidnapped four Syrian officers and
one Lebanese officer who were taking part in a traditional
visit by officers of the Syrian army to those of Lebanon.
This act was condemned by the Security Council in its
resolution 3 16 (1972).
63. Israel’s record, in its behaviour and in its attitude
towards the Convention on international civil aviation,
includes, inter alia, the perfidious attack by the milifary
forces of Israel against the Beirut airport on 28 December
1968, the result of which was the destruction of 13 civilian
and commercial aircraft. This flagrant aggression was aIso
condemned by the Security Council, in resolution
262 (1968).

56. This Israeli aggression is considered as an international
crime of a unique nature, since the following elements are
grouped within it: first, a premeditated violation of
Lebanese air space; second, a violation of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Lebanon; third, a threat to
international peace and security committed by a State
Member of the United Nations; fourth, a hijacking of a
civilian aircraft belonging to another State by the USCof the
armed force of Israeli fighter planes acting under instructions from the highest Israeli authorities, which is a threat
to the security of international civil aviation; fifth, an illegal
and totally unjustified procedure-in
fact quite an extraordinary procedure-whereby
a control of the passports and
a verification of the identity of the passengers were
undertaken.

64. Israel again, on 21 Februrary 1973, used its Air Force
to destroy a Libyan civilian aircraft in the air, causing the
death of 108 innocent victims. The Assembly of ICAO
condemned this act in its resolution A-19-1.
65. That recapitulation shows us all that Israel is a Zionist
undertaking dedicated to aggression and terrorism. Striving
to become the master of the Middle East by carrying cut its
plans of territorial expansion, Israel indulges in crimes,
piracy, robbery and terrorism and then audaciously tries to
legalize its crime by using numberless vain pretexts.

57. This act of State terrorism committed by Israel is a
flagrant
violation of the purposes and principles of the
-2 %.e document

A/AC.160/1/Add.l.

6

66. The premeditated violation of Lebanese air space
which was committed by Israel in order to carry out its
piracy only shatters further peace and security in the
Middle East, already shattered by events in progress. It only
widens even more the gap which exists between Israel and
the neighbouring countries. This ignoble and heinous act
can in no way find justification in the international order to
which we all belong. But is it not significant that this
aggressive behaviour on the part of Israel occurs after the
long debates in the Security Council a few weeks ago during
which
14 Member States, seeking a peaceful solution,
condemned Israel for the continuation of its occupation of
the Arab territories invaded on 5 June 1967? Is it not
equally significant that this act occurs in the wake of the
United States veto-this veto which blocked the efforts of
14 members anxious to establish a just andlastingpeacein
aocordance with the Charter and resolutionsof the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity and in
accordance with the aspirationsof all those who sincerely
wish to seepeacein the Middle East?
67. Here are the results of the veto: Israel commits
aggression, Israel has nothing but contempt for the international Organization, Israel is encouragedand its appetite
has grown for the lure is enormousand its rapacity has
increased. Its thirst for terrorism could be quenchedonly if
the sourcesof supportprovided to it by the veto and by the
most sophisticated weapons run dry. Such is the very
clearly exposed relation of causeand effect of the act
committed by Israelon 10 August.
68. AmbassadorScali, during the Security Council meeting of 26 July 1973, following the veto he had just castin
favour of Israel, said the following at the end of his
statement:
“Our vote today was a carefully consideredaction
calculated to move the United Nationsaway from empty
judgements on the past and toward concrete, positive
results in the realworld.” [I 735th nzeeting,para. 136.1

in the Middle East. One asksof a State that Providencehas
blessedwith such wealth and power that it be lesspartial
and more objective in a conflict which has causedonly
sufferingandinjusticeto the Arab people.
72. What are we trying to obtain from the Council? To
condemn Israel is not an effective remedy to restore
balanceto the Middle Eastbecausethe only way to prevent
the aggressor
from continuing his crimesis punishment,the
application of the sanctionsstipulated in the Charterthat
we are asking the membersof the Council to apply to
Israel-and it is the members of this Council who are
responsiblefor the preservationof peaceand international
security. Weare askingthem to act in order to preventthe
chaoswhich Israel is spreadingin this region.Weareasking
them to act in order to put an end to its crimes,to its
piracy and to its terrorism. We are askingthem to act to
prevent the dangerousrecidivism of Israel. We are asking
them to act in order to establisha just andlastingpeacein
the Middle East.
73. I shallconclude by recalling here what wassaidby a
great American,GeorgeWashington:
“Observe good faith and justice towardsall nationsand
beware inveterate antipathies against particular nations
and passionateattachment for others.. . . passionate
attachment facilitates the illusion of an imaginary
commoninterest in caseswhere no real commoninterest
exists”.3
74. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakersis that of the representativeof Israel,upon whomI
now call.
75. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President,I shouldlike to
extend to you my delegation’sbest wishesfor success
in
your high office. Sharingthe profound esteemin whichyou
are held, I would add an expressionof hope that perhaps
during your term of office the Security Councilmight be
permitted to deal with an aspect of the Middle East
situation with justice andimpartiality.

69. The logical consequenceof that statementpromptsus
to ask the representativeof the United States:In the light
of the Israeli actions, what were these concrete, positive
results? Piracy, robbery, kidnapping of innocent human 76. In Beirut and Damascus,in Cairo, Baghdad and
beings, attacks against civilian aircraft in the air, State Tripoli, Arab Governments are sheltering and assisting
terrorism exercisedby Israel-is that what the representative murder gangsopenly engagedin the indiscriminatekilling
of the United States had in mind when he made his of innocent civilians at international airports,in air piracy
by hijacking and blowing-up passengeraircraft, in the
statement before the Council?
slaughter of athletes, diplomats and other defenceless
persons.These savageatrocities are being perpetratedfor
70. The blind and unobjective support of Israel by the
United States is creating very serious and dangerous the avowedpurposeof destroying a State Memberof the
consequences and we wonder whether the United Statesis United Nations and depriving its people of the right to
self-determinationand independence.Thereis not a single
not in fact trying to legithnize acts condemned by
precept of law and morality that these bloodthirsty
international law and the Charter, to legalizethe violation
murderers
of guiltlessmen, women and children are not
of the national sovereigntyof the Statesof the Third world
violating. There isnot a singleprinciple of internationallaw
and the use of force for criminal ends.It is an irony of fate
that the United Statesand its ally andprotege,Israel,which and of the Charter of the United Nations that is not torn
asunderby the Arab Governmentswhich harbour, protect
claim that they are suffering from air piracy, are in fact
practising it-one as the principal author and the other asa and connivewith the terror organizations.
co-author and generoussupplierof the weaponusedfor the
77. Yet these selfsameGovernments object when Israel
crime.
refusesto acquiescein the persistent attacks on its life and
71. The United States is mistaken if it believesthat by
3 Quoted in English by the speaker,
supporting Israel it is preservingandprotecting its interests
7

,’

I

!

I

on the lives of its citizens and takes measures to defend
itself and to eradicate the scourge of barbaric terrorism.
The organizers of the Lod massacre are still on the loose.
The surviving murderers of the Israeli athletes in Munich
have been released to the Arab States, where they were
given a hero’s welcome. The leaders of Fatah and its organ
Black September, the Popular Front and similar organizations are still in their headquarters in Arab capitals,
travelling freely from one conference to another, mapping
out the slaughter of innocents. Lebanon and Iraq and Egypt
feel, however, that Israel must do nothing about it. Israel
categorically rejects such counsel. Those who have turned
the world into a dangerous jungle cannot complain that the
man-killing beasts in it are being pursued, or that the
pursuit is conducted not necessarily in white silken gloves.

exception be taken to the struggle against international
terrorism and air piracy waged by Israel. This stru&gle is
directed against criminals who endanger the very fabric of
international relations. If others are affected, it is only an
incidental occurrence that cannot override the necessi(y
and legitimacy of the struggle. No formalistic argumen.
tation can justify interference with efforts to put an end to
premeditated, indiscriminate murder. Only if we agree to
live in a world of inverted values, can international
terrorism and air piracy, as carried on by the Arab mu&r
organizations, be allowed to invoke some legal notions
derived from entirely different circumstances and to se&
protection behind them. The murderers of children on
schoolbuscs, the dispatchers of letter-bombs through the
mails, the barbarians who kill men, women and children at
airports and in civil aircraft have no right to refuge in town
or village, on the ground or in the air. Mankind is
confronted today with a situation similar to the days when
pirates roamed the seven seas attacking ships, killing,
maiming and taking hostages. As it was then in the case of
the seas, striking today at air pirates and terrorists-enemies
of mankind-is imperative and justified at all times and
everywhere.

78. Several weeks ago a Japanese civil aircraft was hijacked
by agents of the Popular Front headed by George Habash,
apparently in an abortive attempt to blow it up or threaten
to blow it up by crash-landing in an Israeli town, On 19
July an Arab assassin equipped with a machine-gun tried to
break into a crowded El-Al office in Athens in order to
massacre the passengers assembled there. On 5 August two
Popular Front terrorists armed with grenades and submachine-guns attacked passengers in an Athens airport
transit lounge, killing three and injuring more than 50. The
only regret expressed by these murderers in a Greek court
was that their victims were not Jews on their way to Israel.

83. Measuresby individual States against terrorismhave
becomeeven more urgent and indispensableasa resultof
the sabotageby Arab Statesof all international action.The
attempt at last year’s General Assembly sessionto take
concrete steps for the suppressionof terrorism wastorpedoedby Arab delegationsand their supporters.Theydid
the same in the Ad Hoc Committee on International
Terrorism, which, in a sessionlasting four weeks,devoted
only two clays to tile examination of measuresagainst
terrorist attacks and ended its discussionsin dismalfailure
and utter helplessness.The absence of effective intcrnational action againstterrorism is dramatically illustrated,
for instance, by the fact that 70 of the 110 Arab terror
agentsapprehendedin variouscountries, including members
of this Council, have been freed without trial or punishment and allowed to rejoin their murder organizationsin
Arab States. These developments have undoubtedly encouragedthe terror groupsto pursuetheir nefariouscrimes.

79. In the evening of 10 August Israeli air force planes
diverted an Iraqi-chartered Lebanese aircraft on a flight
between Beirut and Baghdad. There was reason to believe
that several terrorist leaders responsible for crimes such as
those mentioned, and in particular the notorious George
Habash, were on the flight. After the identity of the
passengers had been checked, the aircraft, with all aboard,
was allowed to proceed to its destination.
80. On the one hand, there is thus heinous premeditated
murder; on the other, there is an effort to prevent murder.
On the one hand, there is merciless random killing for the
sake of killing; on the other, there is an attempt to seize
killers but to avoid hurting the innocent. Enlightened world
opinion will not fail to notice that the Security Council was
convened to discuss a two-hour detention of an aeroplane
for the purpose of weeding out international murderers
while silence had been imposed on the Council regarding
the carnage in Athens, Khartoum, Munich and Lad.

84. Israel, still warding off Arab warfare, launchedagainst
it 25 years ago, cannot forgo its right to self-defenceand
the duty to protect its citizens merely becauseArab
Governmentshave thwarted international measuresagainst
terrorism. Neither can Israel forgo military defenceaction
against terrorism, said to be improper in normal intcrnational conditions, while Arab States are actively carrying
on with their belligerency and permit Arab attacks against
Israel to be organized and initiated from their territories.
The Government of Israel has always observed, andwilI
continue to observe,the cease-fireon the basisof reciprocity. By permitting the useof their territories as bases
for
armed attacks against Israel, by harbouring the headquartersand training campsof the terror organizations,by
allowingleadersof the murder squadsto dwell in andaloVe
freely in and out of their cities, Arab Governmentsare
guilty of flagrant violations of the cease-fire.By makingit
possiblefor murclcrers such as Yassir Arafat and George
Habashto operate from Beirut, to fly abroad without
hindrance and then to return to Beirut, the Lebanese
authorities show no regard for Israel’s rights under the

81. The Arab terrorists, operating with the permission,
support and complicity
of Arab Governments, stand
accused of waging a persistent campaign of world-wide
bloodshed directed against helpless civilians in utter
mockery of the sovereignty of States and of fundamental
human rights. Juxtaposed to this is the Arab charge that in
the pursuit of such terrorists
Israel had entered into
Lebanese airspace and diverted a Lebanese aeroplane. Surely
the sanctity of human life comes before the sanctity of
air-all the more so when a State allows its territory and its
airspace to be used for the promotion of terror warfare
against a neighbouring country.
82. Only if international concepts are completely warped
and principles of humanity callously disregarded can
8

cease-fire and, therefore, cannot complain that Israel does
not respect their rights.

89. We still rememberhow on 1 June 1972 the Prime
Minister of Egypt publicly praisedthe massacre
at Lod. We
still rememberhow the Egyptian Governmentrefusedthe
requestof the Government of the Federal Republic of
Germanyto try to divert the slaughterof Israelisportsmen
at the Munich Olympic Games.

85. AS for Iraq, which hasjoined Lebanon’scomplaint,it
hasnot even acceptedthe 1967 cease-fire.In fact, following
the 1948 Arab invasion of Israel, in which it had participated, Iraq refused to conclude an armistice and has
continued ever since to negate Israel’s right to tidepe~~thcc, repeatedly rejecting all thought of peacewit11
Israel. Iraq, through its representative,declaredagaintoday
that independent Israel, a Member of the United Nations,is
“occupied Palestine”. Simultaneously, Iraq has been a
principal supporter of terror warfare againstIsrael, with
George 1Iabash and his Popular Front as the objects of
special Iraqi attention and assistance.The Iraqi positionon
terrorist activities has been expressedas follows in the
Government-controlled daily AZ-Noor:

90. We all know that shouldthe Egyptian Governmentso
desire,the terror organizationswould ceaseto exist. As
long asthey continue their criminal operations,Egypt will
be heldresponsible
for their bloody atrocities.

91. By now, little credenceis given to the hackneyed
pretexts in Lebanon’sor Egypt’s vain attempts to justify
supportfor Arab terrorism againstIsrael.By now a11know
and rememberthat the objective of the Habashesand
Arafats is not to bring about Israeli withdrawal from the
cease-firelines, but to eliminateIsraelasa sovereignState
“Seizing Israeli planesand their destruction, kidnapping and to annihilate its people, All are aware that Arab
lsraclis and people serving the Israelis,bombing Israeli terrorism, aimed against the Jewish people’s right to
institutions and paralysing Israel’s information mediaself-determination,began50 years ago, and not in 1967.
this strengthensthe resistancemovementand its influence Those who are acquainted with the true situation in
is no lesseffective than that of military operations.”
Israeli-heldterritories and the attitude of their inhabitants
need no convincing that the paid killers operating from
86. 111its attitude towards Israel, lraq hasthus completely Lebanonor other Arab Statesare not representativeof the
repudiated international law and the Charter of the United Arab population of those territoriesor of PalestinianArabs
Nations. It is farcical for lraq to baseany of its arguments in Arab States.Indeed,the allegationthat terrorism is the
on principles of law or provisionsof the Charter. Nothing product of the Palestinianrefugeeproblemcannot standup
could throw more light on the situation confronting Israel to any seriousexamination.It is a fact that for two decades
thnn Iraq’s aligning itself with Lebanon’s complaint to
the presenceof largenumbersof refugeesin Lebanonhad
rcitcratc in the Security Council the view that Israelhasno
not given rise to any terrorist operations on or from
right to exist. May 1 suggestthat membersof the Council Lebanesesoil and that suchoperationsbeganonly when
ponder over this aspectof the problem before pronouncing Jordan suppressedthe terror organizations and it was
tllemsclvcs
on Israel’sstruggleto vindicate its right to live.
consequentlydecidedto move their centresand their bases
to Lebanon.The whitewashingof the terrorist groupsand
87. Egypt too hasjoined the chorus. It is nevera surprise their notorious leadersill-behoovesthe representativeof a
when Egypt rushesto the defence of Arab terrorismand Governmentwhich only recently describedthem as “an
the Arab terrorist organizations. Without Egypt, there army of occupation” andevenhadto fight off their attacks
would have been no terror warfare in the Middle East. in variouspartsof the country, includingthe refugeecamps
of the United NationsRelief andWorksAgency in the Near
Without Iigypt there would have been no massacres
at Lod,
East.The Lebaneseauthorities’failure to curb this terrorist
at Munich and at Athens. After the 1948 defeat of the
invasion of Israel by Arab States, headedby Egypt, it was army of occupationdoesnot changethe latter’s character,
tlrc Egyptian Government that organized the first murder nor the fact that it constitutesa threat againstwhich Israel
squads and scnl Lhcinout on their missionsof deathagainst is entitled to act.
Israeli school children in their classrooms,againstIsraeli 92. This is illustrated to the full by the activities of the
wonicn asleepat night in their houses,againstIsraelimenat
Popular Front and its leader, George Habash,who was
\vork in the fields. While Beirut has becomein recentyears
thought to be on the Lebanese
aircraft divertedto Israel.As
the principal opcralional headquartersof Arab international
a matter of fact, Habashhimself has confirmed, in the
tcrrclrism,
Cairo is uncloubtcdly its political capital. This
meantime,that it washisintention to boardthat particular
was expressed asfollows in a statementby PresidentSadat planeand that he changedhisplansonly at the last minute.
on 6 AIlril 1972 at a confcrcncc in Cairo of all the terrorist
grtmps:

come together once again at one of your
ilssclnblios which you
generally hold in Cairo, Your
nlcct ing-place and your home. 1do not believethat thisis
:, lll;lttcr of ~IXWZ; m, I do not seeit even asa deliberate
cl~oicc, but as somethingnatural, a matter of course.For
~,~)~l;incl for US,there is nothing before us but to fight.”
+WC

IWC

~8. The assistancegiven to Ihe terrorist groups was
stlmm~~~uIl 13yI’rcsi~lentSadat in an interview publishedin
newspaper,Al Bupdc, on 8 January 1W3. To
;I ~~~~~~~~~~
tile questi
‘TO
what extent do you assistthe fedayeen?“3
is unlimited.”
I:gypl’s President replied, “Our assistance

93. The following are someof the attacks carried out by
him andhisorganization:
(a) 23 July 1968: An El-Al airliner en route from Rome
to Israel washijacked and taken to Algiers.The hijackers
were immediately releasedby the Algerian Government,
but the lsraeli passengers
were held as hostages.Under
pressureof world opinion, the 10 Israel women and
children passengers
were releasedon 27 July, but the 12
menweredetainedfor five weeksuntil 31 August.
(b) 26 December1968: An El-Al planewasattacked at
Athens airport. One Israeli passengerwas killed and a

9

stewardess wounded. Two of the Arab terrorists
detained by the Greek authorities.

were

(c) 18 February 1969: A terror squad of the Popular
Front opened fire on an El-AI plane about to take off from
Zurich, killing one member of the crew. The assailants were
arrested, tried by a Swiss court and sentenced to terms of
imprisonment.
[d) 29 August 1969: A TWA airliner en route from
Rome to TeI Aviv was hijacked to Damascus by three
Popular Front members. After passengers had disembarked
there, an explosive charge was set off causing serious
damage to the plane. Two Israeli civilians, travelling on the
plane, were imprisoned by the Syrian authorities for 98
days.
(e) 17 December 1969: Two British citizens, hired by
agents of the Popular Front, were arrested in the act of
attempting to blow up an El-Al plane at London airport.
Convicted by a court in London, they were sentencedto 10
years imprisonment. The Egyptian military attache, who
wasinvolved in the case,left London.

(f) 21 December 1969: Two Lebanesecitizens, agentsof
the Popular Front, were arrested in Atflens and charged
with conspiringto hijack a TWA airliner,
(g) 21 February 1970: Members of the Popular Front
placed a bomb in a Swissairplane en route from Zurich to
Tel Aviv, causing its explosion in mid-air. Forty-seven
passengers
and crew lost their lives.
fh) 6 September 1970: Three aircraft of Pan American,
TWA and Swissair respectively were hijacked by terrorists
of the George Habashgroup. The Pan American plane was
taken to Cairo, after a stopover in Beirut. The Arab
hijackers placed explosive chargeson the plane. On arrival
in Cairo the passengerswere allowed to disembarkand the
aircraft was blown up. The TWA and Swissairplaneswere
diverted to Zerqa, Jordan. The hijackers held several
hundred passengers
ashostagesand demandedthe releaseof
all Arab terrorists detained in United Kingdom, Switzerland
and Germany. On the same day terrorists of the Popular
Front tried to seize an El-Al plane in flight from Amsterdam to New York, but were overpowered by membersof
the crew. One hijacker was killed in the struggle and the
other washanded over to the British authorities, when the
plane made an emergencylanding in London.
(iJ 9 September 1970: A BOAC airliner on its way from
Bahrain to London was hijacked by a squadof the Popular
Front and forced to land in Jordan, its passengers
joining
the others at Zerqa, already there, ashostages.In exchange
for the releaseof these passengers,all the Arab hijackers
detained in the United Kingdom, Switzerland and Germany
were set free. The BOAC, TWA and Swissair planeswere
blown up by the terrorists.
(j) 22 February 1972: A Lufthansa airplane wasseized
by Arab hijackers and forced to land at Aden in the
People’sDemocratic Republic of Yemen. Negotiations for
the payment of ransom to the Popular Front were then
10

conducted in Lebanon, and a sumof $5 million waspaid to
the terror organization for the releaseof the plane. It was
widely reported at the time that the sumof $1 million had
been retained by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of Yemen.
(k) 30 May 1972: Three Japanesemercenariestrailled in
Lebanon by the Popular Front arrived at Lod airport 011an
Air France flight from Rome. With sub-machinegunsand
hand grenadesextracted from their luggagein the passenger
terminal, they murdered 24 passengers
and wounded 78.
Two of the attackers were killed and a third wascaptured,
tried and sentencedto imprisonmentin Israel.
(I) December 1972: A terror squadof the PopularFront
left Lebanonwith instructions to reachHaifa by shipwith a
view to perpetrating terrorist attacks or, if unsuccessfttl,
committing suicide. The squad was discoverediI1 Greece
and its memberswere returned to Beirut.
94. As already indicated, the recent hijacking of the
Japaneseaircraft and the murderousattack on passengers
at
Athens airport were also perpetrated by the HabasB
organization. Needlessto say, the other terrorist groups
were also active during that period, especiallyin assaults
on
civil aviation.
95. George Hebash’sviews could be summarizedby the
following excerpts from his statementswhich appearedin
the Popular Front’s organ Al-Haduj; on Radio Baghdad,in
Life magazineand in the Germanweekly Stern:
“The objective is to put an end to Israel’sexistence.”
“It is our right to hit the enemy anywhere.”
“To kill a Jew far from the battlefield hasmore of an
effect than killing a hundred of them in battle; it attracts
more attention.”
“Of coursewe do not want peace.Peacewould mean
the end of our hopes., . . WCwill continue in the future
to sabotageevery peaceeffort. . . . If that isthe only way
to destroy Israel, Zionism and Arab reaction, then we
want a third world war.”
96. There is no question why Israel tried on IO August to
apprehendan arch-criminallike Habash,responsiblefor so
many savageatrocities. The real questionis: Why is Habash
still free? Why is it that he and others like him arc
permitted by the LebaneseGovernment- in violation of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations-to
continue to plot and perpetrate the killing of innocentIIICII,
women and children? Why is Beirut still the plarulir~g
centre and stagingbasefor terrorist operationssuch asthe
Lod and Athens massacres’?Why is the 1969 Cairo
agreement between the LebaneseGovernment and the
terrorist organizations which granted the murder groups
freedom of operation within the country and turned the
LebaneseGovernment into their partner still in force? Why
do Arab Governments continue to support and subsidize
Habash’sPopular Front and other terrorist organizations
suchasBlack September-Fatah?Why do certain non-Arab
Governmentsconsort with the Habashes
and the Arafals’!

L

Those are same of the questions that confront the Security
Council and other United Nations organs if they are to act
effectively against international terrorism.

obtain help is entitled to act on his own in self-defence and
to effect what is known as a “citizen’s arrest”-and this
although it may involve crossing into a neighbour’s courtyard where the criminal has found refuge. This is Israel’s
sole objective: to stop the orgy of bloodshed by Arab terror
groups.

97. However, it is clear that the objective of the Arab
convocation of the Council is precisely the very opposite. It
is evident that, having prevented United Nations action
against terrorism, the Arab States-led this time by
Lebanon-seek
to exploit once more the sheer weight of
their numbers in order to demand action against the victims
of Arab terrorism. Nothing could bc more ridiculous and
dangerous than focusing on Israel’s act of self-defence
against the continuous onslaught of terrorism and letting
off Scot free the barbaric murderers of Athens, Lod and
Munich and the Arab Governments which are backing
them. That is what has happened in Security Council
debates on several occasions in the past.

103. Israel will continue to hope that the United Nations
will live up to its responsibilities and strive towards the
same objective. However, self-preservation, self-defence, the
protection of its people are obligations which a Governmcnt must be prepared to fulfil even if it has to act on its
own. The Government of Israel will fulfil them,
104. Israel’s strongest aspiration is to attain peace with its
Arab neighbours. The terrorist organizations are openly
fighting against peace in the most despicable manner-by
indiscriminate murder of the innocent and defenceless.
Those who really want peace in the Middle East will work
together with Israel to put an end to this campaign of
morbid bloodlust.

98. Israel warned at the time that surrender to the Arab
designs in the Council would encourage the terrorist
organizations in their campaign of murder. That is in fact
what has taken place. The terrorist attacks have increased
and their bestiality has intensified.

105. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translation from Russian): Mr. President, before
setting forth the Soviet delegation’s position on the
substance of the matter we are discussing today, I should
like to congratulate you, Mr. Scali, on your assumption of
the high and responsible office of President of the Security
Council.

99. The failure of United Nations organs to take effective
steps against the plague of terrorism sweeping across the
world is grave enough. This failure must not be corn”
pounded by Security Council action that would give further
satisfaction
and encouragement to the carriers of this
plague.
100. It is Israel’s fervent hope that the international
community will overcome the obstacles put in its way and
curb international terrorism. Israel on its part stands
ready to co-operate with all international efforts to stamp
out terrorism,
and in particular to ensure the safety and
security of international air travel. Are the Arab States
also ready to pledge themselves to this objective? Are they
prepared to undertake to act against the hijacking of
aircraft by Arab terrorists, to act against the blowing up
of planes in the air and on the ground, to act against sanguinary attacks on innocent passengers at air terminals?
WiIl Lebanon and Iraq and Egypt give such pledges right
here and now? It is on them and on other Arab
Governments that will depend the security of international
travel and communications. If they decide to abide by their
international obligations, if they terminate terrorist operations, there will obviously be no need for defensive action
against terrorism as on 10 August.

106. The Security Council is obliged once again to
consider a new act of aggression by Israel, unprecedented in
its brazenness and cynicism, committed against the peaceloving sovereign State of Lebanon. From the Security
Council documents which have been circulated, and from
the statements made by the distinguished representatives of
Lebanon and Iraq, Ambassadors Ghorra and Al-Shaikhly,
we have been informed of a new criminal act of air piracy,
carried out by the Israeli militarists on 10 August-an act in
which Israeli military arcraft brazenly invaded Lebanese air
space, drove a peaceful civil aircraft into Israel and forced it
to land at an Israeli military base. This criminal act on the
part of the Israeli militarists constitutes one more link in
the chain of acts carried out by Israel in recent years and
aimed at ensuring that, with the use of terror and air piracy
and banditry, which have been elevated in practice to the
level of State policy, they can implement their predatory
plans for the annexation of foreign territory and the
Israelization of the Arab territories they have seized.

101, In the meantime what is to be done? The international community has thus far been unable to take
Ineasures against the Arab campaign of murder and atrocity. Is Israel to watch passively as the terrorists strike again
and again, shedding innocent blood? Are rules of intcrnational conduct to be twisted in such a way as to protect
tnurderers and brand their victims? Is the supreme right of
seIf-defence enshrined in the Charter to be adulterated by
the distorted concepts used by those who claim that the
killing of Israelis by the Habashes and the Arafats is
understandable and legitimate, but that Israel’s striking
back at its assailants is not?

107. In recent years the Council has repeatedly had to
consider aggressive acts by the ruling clique in Israel against
neighbouring Arab States. In considering today this new act
of international banditry, this gross violation of the norms
of international law, we cannot fail to recall the long list of
aggressive actions by Israel against Lebanon which have
previously been considered by the Council and on which
the Council has taken decisions.
108. Today is the eleventh time in the past four years that
the Council is discussing matters related to criminal acts by
Israel against Lebanon. One can only regret that, so far, the
Council has not been in a position effectively to put an end
to Israel’s aggressive acts, to take effective measures against

102. Even in everyday life a citizen who calls for the
assistance of the authorities against an assailant and fails to
11

them in order not only to stop Israel’s piratical attacks on
neighbouring Arab States but also to eliminate in general
the consequences of Israeli aggression. Not long ago, on 21
April 1973, the Council adopted resolution 332 (1973), in
which it condemned

or exercise control of an aircraft by meansof force are
firmly condemnedin the Convention and declaredto beaa
offence. Similarly, the Montreal Convention of 1971
stresses
that unlawful actsagainstthe safety of civil aviation
are criminal acts.5

“the repeated military attacks conducted by Israel against
Lebanon and Israel’s violation of Lebanon’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty in contravention of the Charter
of the United Nations, of the Armistice Agreement
between Israel and Lebanon and of the Council’s ceasefire resolutions”.

112. It should be stressedthat at a time when those
countries which respect international law are agreeingto
co-operatewith each other in order to prevent the seizure
of civil aircraft-and here I should like to note anddraw
your attention to the fact that, a few days ago, a bilateral
Soviet-Iranian agreement on this matter was signedin
Moscow-Israel is engagingin piracy in the air, usingits
fighter aircraft to stab international air servicesin the back.

Paragraph 3 of that resolution, moreover, calIed on Israel
“to desist forthwith from all military attacks on Lebanon”,
However, with its characteristic contempt for United
Nations decisions, Israel has ignored that appealfrom the
Council-as, indeed, it has ignored many previous appeals.
It has blatantIy ignored world public opinion and flouted
the norms of international law. Not even four monthshave
passedsince the resolution I referred to wasadopted by the
Council, and the Council has once againmet here today to
consider a new crime committed by Israel.

113. The most recent incident involving a Lebanese
passengeraircraft cannot be regarded as an accidental,
isolatedevent. Israel’sentire political history consistsof the
use of methods of massand individual terror, rangingfrom
the bombing of schools and factories to barbarousair
attacks on peaceful settlements in neighbouring Arab
countries and the destruction in the air of civil aircraft with
passengers
aboard. As AmbassadorGhorra hasalreadytold
ushere, the brazennessand unprecedentednature of the act
109. It may well be that this act committed by Israel, in
of air piracy committed on 10 August gave rise to astoml
its flagrant lawlessness,exceeds by far those we have
of indignation throughout the world, and even produceda
witnessedin the past. The Israeli militarists orderedtheir air
negative reaction among certain circles in Israel itself,
force to invade the air space of a sovereign StateHowever, the highly placed representativesof the Israeli
Lebanon-to penetrate almost as far as its capital, to
intercept a peaceful aircraft belonging to the civil airline leadership do not wish to pay any attention either to
international public opinion or to the views of citizens
Middle East Airlines, and to force that aircraft, under the
muzzles of the guns of Israeli fighters, not only to abandon within their own country. They have let it be known that
they will continue in future to commit acts of aggression
its scheduledcourse but also to land at an Israelimilitary
airfield, where the aircraft and its passengers
weresearched. against neighbouring Arab States and to indulge in air
banditry. It wasthat approachwhich was taken by Israel’s
In the caseof this flight, the incident did not result in any
Minister
of Defence, Mr. Dayan, in a statement madethe
human casualties. Evidently the protests of world public
day
before
yesterday, 11 August. All this gives us grounds
opinion against Israel’s destruction of a Libyan aircraft in
for
presuming
that Israel does not intend to changeits
February of this year held the Israeli pirates back from
course,
aimed
at completely disregarding and violating
usingtheir weaponsagainthis time.
Security Council decisions and General Assembly resolutions.
110. As the Soviet delegation has noted, theseactions by
Israel constitute an unprecedentedly brazen act of aggres114. As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, we have
sion against a sovereign State. In this case, Israel has
many
times stated, and we continue to state here, in the
violated Lebanon’s State frontier-an act which in itself
Council, that the USSR resolutely opposesthe “law of the
constitutes the grossestviolation of the norms of international law and of the Charter of the United Nations and jungle” in international relationsand WCtherefore condemn
with the greatestfirmnessthe terrorist methods Israeluscs
is also a threat to the security of the State of I,ebanon. At
in international politics and its practice of State terrorism.
the sametime, this act of aggressionis an act of air piracy
and banditry. The Israeli air force perpetrated what
amounts to an attack on a peaceful civil aircraft which was 115. The Soviet Union firmly opposesall acts of aggression and supportsthe complete and immediate elimination
following its normal route and carrying 83 innocent
of all aggressionand the consequencesof aggression,
passengers.
including, naturally, the withdrawal of forces from the
111. By attacking the aircraft, the Israeli air force
territory of a victim of aggression.On a broader scale,in
threatened the operation of a civil airline and endangered the caseof the Middle East, this impliesthe urgent needfor
the lives of passengers.This constitutes the grossest a just political settlement with a view to eliminating
violation of existing international conventions aimed at
conflict in that area in accordance with the well-known
combating the unlawful seizure of aircraft and unlawful
resolution 242 (1967) and the relevant decisions of the
acts against the safety of civil aviation. 1refer to The Hague General Assembly. The liberation of the Arab territories
Convention of 1970, “unlawful acts of seizure or exercise occupied by Israel in 1967 and the securing of the lawful
of control of aircraft in flight jeopardize the safety of
rights and interestsof all countriesand peoplesin that area,
personsand property, seriously affect the operation of air including the Arab peopleof Palestine,are the fundamental
servicesand undermine the confidence of the peoplesof the
conditions for the establishmentof a lasting andjust peace
world in the safety of civi1 aviation”.” All attempts to seize in that area. The Soviet delegationhas many times stated
4 SeedocumentA/C6/4IS,annex III.

5 Ibid.,

12

annexIV.

.

and continues to state that the root of the evil and of the
persistence of a situation in the Middle East which is
jcopardizing peace is the fact that until now not only have
the consequences of Israel’s aggression against Arab countries not been eliminated but, with the support of imperialist and Zionist forces, Israel’s armed forces continue
to commit new acts of aggression, including the act of air
piracy which we are discussing today.

violation of well-known United Nations decisions, has been
occupying Arab lands, which expelled from their homeland
more than a million Palestinians and is applying a policy of
merciless terror and oppression against the Arab population
of the occupied lands, certainly cannot offer moral or
political justification
for its acts of aggression against
sovereign Arab States by making references of any sort to
the Palestinian resistance movement.

116. Acts such as those which Israel has been committing
over the last few years-with
total impunity, as we have
seen-can
no longer be tolerated. If a body of such
authority as the Council permits Israel to continue with its
high-handed actions, committing acts of aggression, engaging in banditry in the air, threatening the lives of totally
innocent aircraft passengers and ignoring the United Nations, the faith of the world community in the United
Nations may be seriously undermined. For that reason the
Soviet delegation believes that the Council must act quickly
and decisiveIy. We fully support the protests made by the
Governments of Lebanon and Iraq with regard to this new
act of aggression by Israel, and we firmly condemn Israel’s
policy of continuing terrorist acts of aggression against
Lebanon and other Arab States.

120. If we look at the matter seriously and strip away the
hypocritical verbiage in the Israeli representative’s statement, it becomes quite obvious that we arc dealing today
with a situation in which the Israeli militarists are using all
available means, including piracy, so that, by force of arms,
at the point of a gun, by violence and by attacks against
peaceful aircraft, they can strike a blow against the
legitimate resistance movement of an entire people, which
was driven from its lands and compelled to struggle, with
arm in hand, for the restoration of its dignity and freedom.
As all are aware, that struggle has been recognized as
legitimate in decisions adopted by United Nations bodies,
including the General Assembly. The Soviet delegation
firmly rejects the attacks of the representative of Israel
against the leaders of the Palestinian resistance movement.
We give them their due in their heroic struggle, under
clearly unequal conditions, for the liberation of their
homeland and the restoration of their lawful rights.

117. In the view of the Soviet delegation, when considering precisely what the Council should do in this specific
case we must, of course, take into account the fact that the
Security Council has repeatedly condemned Israel for
similar acts in the past. In the past, the Council has warned
Israel that if it continues armed attacks on neighbouring
Arab States, the question of taking the appropriate cffective measures in accordance with the United Nations
Charter will be considered. Is it not time to pass from
warnings to concrete action ? Actually, this is required not
only by the case we are considering today but by the whole
complex of Israel’s actions in the Middle East. As we know,
those acts were correctly assessed by the members of the
Council during consideration of the situation in the Middle
East at the Council meetings not so long ago, in June and
July.

121. One of the most vital tasks of the present day is to
eliminate the hotbed of aggression in the Middle East. We
must no longer permit the Israeli aggressors and adventurists to keep the whole of this huge area in an explosive
state. The rights of the Arab peoples, which are victims of
aggression, must be fully safeguarded. Israeli troops must be
withdrawn from all the occupied Arab territories, “The
peace, security and State frontiers of all countries in the
Middle East”, in the words of the General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, L. I. Brezhnev, “must be guaranteed. For our part,
we shall continue to adhere firmly to that policy”. With
regard to the question under discussion, the Soviet delegation wishes to state that it will support any constructive
proposals which would serve to punish the aggressor and
put an end to its acts of provocation against the Arab
countries of the Middle East.

118. Time presses. The Council must adopt effective
measures to put an end to acts of aggression and piracy by
the Israeli militarists. The Soviet delegation is ready to
support the Council in drafting and adopting effective
measures, including sanctions, against Israel-a State which
is systematically and deliberately violating United Nations
decisions and the fundamental purposes and principles of
the Organization.

122. The PRESIDENT:
Lebanon.

I call on the representative of

123. Mr. GNORRA (Lebanon): I certainly shall wish to
exercise my right of reply to the long statement delivered
this afternoon by the representative of Israel. However, I
should like to make a brief comment at this stage. In a way
I feel sorry for the representative of Israel because he was
carriccl away by a wave of emotionalism and attempted in
his long tirade to heap abuse and accusations at the
Lebanese delegation and Lebanon as well as other Arab
delegations. The reason is very simple. Although there were
no victims in the incident of the day before yesterday,
Israel was caught red-handed. I can understand the anger
and wrath of the Israelis because one of their major
operations has been described as a failure and has been
exposed to international public opinion as an exampleof
the operationsconducted by Israelin different parts of the
world.

119. In connexion with the statement made by the
representative of Israel, the Soviet delegation would like to
state that his attempts to justify acts of brigandage against
Lebanon by slanderous attacks on the leaders of the
Palestinian resistance movement, and also by references to
alleged cases of terrorist acts committed by the Palestinian
organizations, arc hypocritical and groundless. Mere in the
Security Council -or, for that matter, anywhere else-Israel
has no right, under any prctcxt, including the pretext of its
struggle with the legitimate Palestinian resistance movemen;: to commit acts of aggression against neighbouring
Arab States, to engage in air piracy, to threaten the safety
of civil aviation or to interfere with the normal operation of
air traffic between States. Israel, which for many years, in
13

124. Israel is definitely
said :
“Me, miserable!
“Infinite

in a bad way. The poet Milton

Which way shall I fly?

wrath, and infinite despair,

“Which way I fly is hell . . .“.
It is hell for Israel and for the Israeli Government to face
the condemnation of world public opinion. I have cited a
few examples. Ambassador Tekoah attempted to use a
whole list of acts committed by individual Palestinians or
others in different parts of the world as justification of an
act perpetrated by his Government. This particular act of
his Government,
which was exposed the day before
yesterday, is not the only one of its kind. As we were
reminded by the representative of the Soviet Union, not
very long ago the Security Council adopted a resolution
[332 (1973)] condemning the operation conducted by
Israeli units in Beirut when they murdered people in cold
blood in their beds. The agents of the Israeli Government
used falsified passports to penetrate Lebanon in order to
prepare for that abominable attack. The international press
has not yet finished writing about the incident in Lille
Hammer in Norway, the implication of an Israeli agent in
the murder of a Moroccan citizen there. I will leave it to the
Norwegian Government to state at the appropriate time
what kind of involvement the Israeli officials had in that
murder, At the present time the Israeli authorities are
trying a Turk who was kidnapped in a raid on a camp in
Lebanon.
125. At this point 1 should like to cite The Times of
London of 9 August, which contained an opinion on the
kind of legality to which the Israel Government is resorting
in order to uphold international law. Allow me to quote at
some length from that editorial because it is to the point.
The Times of London stated:
“The accusation is that the man belonged to illegal
organization and was training to attack Israel. There is no
suggestion that he committed an offence on Israeli
territory. Even if he had done so there would be no legal
justification for kidnapping him in order to bring him to
trial in Israel.

countries represented around this table. Does Israel hay?
the right to send its aircraft to your airports, int’ringha
upon the sovereignty of your State, breaching your laws in
order to capture that supposed criminal, to bring him
before the courts of justice in Israel, where he is to be tried
under the laws of Israel? As I said in my previous
statement, Israel has arrogated to itself enactment of a law
outside the United Nations and above the law of the United
Nations. It is under that law that Israel is undertaking its
acts of terrorism, of kidnapping, of hijacking, around the
world.
127. Israel is not only resorting to its own laws; it is also
bringing God into the picture. It is sending out squad%,
calling them “God’s wrath” or “The Finger of Cod”-+5
though Israel wanted to implicate God in criminal activities.
128. Ambassador Tekoah has invited me and other Arab
delegations to give, right here and now, pledges to stop thr”
activities of the Palestinian people, to terminate what he
called “their terrorist activities”; in return, Israel will
terminate its defensive actions such as that undertaken on
10 August in Beirut. That is a very tempting pledge to take.
But pledges should really not be one-sided. Here we arc not
dealing with the question of individual Palestinians, We art?
dealing with the hijacking of a whole people-the people of
Palestine. Are we to hear from the representative of Israel.
right here and now, a pledge that the people of Palestine, of
which 350,000 live on the territory of Lebanon, will bc
allowed to return to its ancestral home? Are we to hear
from the representative of Israel that the aspirations and
legitimate rights of the Palestinian peopIe will be respected
by Israel? Are we to hear from the representative of Israel
that the military forces of Israel will withdraw from the
occupied territories of Sinai, of the Golan Heights, of the
West Bank, of Gaza? Are we to hear a pledge from the
representative of Israel that Israel really wants peace and
wants to live in peace with its neighbours? Those are [he
kinds of pledges we should like to hear in the Council.
129. The atrocities Israel has meted out to the PalestKarl
people for 25 years; the massacres of Deir Yassin and
thereafter arc all fresh in the memory of everyone in the
Council. I am not here now to go into the history of the
whole case. We are dealing with a sp’ecific question, a very
precise question: an act undertaken by the Government or
Israel and its armed forces against the sovereignty of
Lebanon, an act by which units of the Israeli air force have
hijacked a civilian aircraft. This is the first example of its
kind in the annals of the history of civil aviation. It is a
matter of concern to the international community. That is
why pilot organizations around the world-even in Israelhave condemned that act. The Israeli pilot association has
condemned it even if-as it said--the objective were to
capture Enemy No. I. It is not merely a legal question; it is
a question of morality. Are States allowed to resort to what
individuals do in violation of morality and international
law? That is the question before the Council.

“Since he has not done so, there is no justification of
any kind, no matter what Israeli law has been made to
say.
“It is difficult to imagine a more blatant affront to
legality than to seize a foreign national in foreign
territory and try him for crimes committed abroad.
“Terrorism,
particuIarly
where it involves Israel, is
indeed an international phenomenon for which ordinary
national laws are not fully equipped, but Israel’s action
opens the precedents to illegality. That is not in the
interests of the Jewish people.”
126. Ambassador Tekoah wanted to justify the action of
his Government by the actions of individuals. He has
resorted to the argument of self-defence. Let us assume that
Mr. X, Y or Z-a Palestinian terrorist, a guerrilla or innocent
of any kind---were to be in any one of the airports of the

130. This is a very clear cast, and on the basis of that case.
we await the verdict of the Council.
13 1. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.
14

I now call on the representative of

.

132. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It should not be surprising
that, of all members of the Security Council, it was the
representative of the Soviet Union who chose to rush, at
this first meeting, to the support for, and protection of,
Arab terrorist organizations. You see, the machine-guns, the
Kalashnikovs, which massacred men and women of various
nationalities at the Lod Airport, the Kalashnikovs used in
the slaughter of the innocent passengers at Athens Airport,
came from the Soviet Union.

141. I call on the representativeof Israel.
142. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President,I wasreacting
to comments made by the representative of the Soviet
Union regarding principles which he suggested
were applicablein connexion with the item on the agenda.

133. I think it would be of interest to the Councilto point
out that the representativeof the Soviet Union hascome
especiaIly to the support of Arab terrorist leaderssuchas
George Habash,the head of the PopularFront. Among the
trainers of the Popular Front appearthe following: Briech
Alten, who today lives under the name of Ali Bellah and
who during the war was an SSCommanderin the western
part of the Ukraine; Willi Brawer, known today as
Boukashir, one of the Nazi commandingofficers of the
concentration camp at Mauthausen; Baumann, today
known asBen Hadad,a former SSofficer,

143. As I was saying, the only appropriatereaction is: Let
the USSR first apply these principles itself in its own
behaviour, and then try to preach them to others. For
instance, an interesting note sent by the Soviet Union to
Japan on 20 November 1931, in answerto Japan’snote of
protest of 19 November 1931144. The PRESIDENT: I recognize the representativeof
the Soviet Union on a point of order.

145. Mr. SAFRONCHUK (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): Mr. President,the
Soviet Union, its relationswith Japanandthe way in which
the Soviet Union applies the well-known principles of
134. I hope the Soviet presswill report the fact that the
international law in its present policies-none of these
Soviet Government is supporting terrorist organizations matters are on today’s Security Council agenda.I do not
whose first organizer and spiritual father is Amin el- understand why you cannot draw the attention of the
Husseini, who spent his war years in Berlin asan adviserof
representative of Israel, whom we have invited to partiHitler and Eichmannin the extermination of Jews.
cipate in today’s meeting, to the need to comply with
accepted rules of debate and strictly adhere to today’s
135. I hope the Soviet press will also report that its
agenda.If the representativeof Israel againresortsto such
representative in the Security Council is expressingsupport methods, we shall be obliged to put to the vote the
for murder groupswhich are being trained by former Nazi
question of whether his participation in our discussionis
officers.
legal. As you know, we did not object to the proposalto
permit the representativeof Israel to participate in today’s
136. When the Soviet representative invokes principles
debate. However, if the representative of Israel has come
such as consideration for the sovereignty of other States,
here
to discussthe foreign policies of the USSRand not to
inviolability of international frontiers, or respectfor the
reply to the accusationswhich have been made against
rights of national-minority communities,then the appropriate reaction to him is: Let the USSR first apply those Israel, then we shall reconsider our agreementto Israel’s
participation in the discussion;and, if there is one more
principles itselfdeparture by the representative of Israel from today’s
agenda,if he doesnot speakon the substanceof the matter,
137. The PRESIDENT: I recognize the representativeof
we shallonce againinterrupt him and requestavote on the
the Soviet Union on a point of order.
question of whether the Israeli representative’spartici138. Mr. SAFRONCHUK (Union of Soviet Socialist pation in today’s discussionis lega1.
Republics) (translation from Russian): We are holding a
146. The PRESIDENT: I againwould like to appealto all
Security Council meeting today in order to considera
those
taking part in the discussionto adhereto the item
complaint by the Government of Lebanon concerningan
aggressive act of air piracy committed by the Israeli that is before us. I wish to note, however, that if one
speakeror another strays far from the point at issue,it can
militarists on 10 August. The representativeof Israelis, in
be
expected that another speakermight object.
Ilis usual fashion and with the aim of distracting the
Council’s attention from the question before us today,
147. I againcall on the representativeof Israel.
seeking to make slanderousattacks on StatesMembersof
the Organization, to interfere in their internal affairsandto
148. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President,asI do intend
bring before us and discussmatters which are totally
to read from this international document of the Soviet
ulxonnected with the agendaof today’s meeting.
Union in order to make a point relevant to the item on the
139. I wish to protest againstthis in the strongestpossible agenda,may I suggestthat the Soviet representativeshould
in fact decide here andnow whether he shouldallow meto
way, and I shall continue to protest. We requestyou,
exercise my right of reply and conclude my statement,or
Mr. President, to draw the attention of the representativeof
Israel to these inadmissiblemethodsand to call upon him whether he would like to apply methods to which
apparently he is accustomedand put my right to freedom
to speakon the substanceof the matter beforeus.
of speechto a vote.
140. The PRESIDENT: I think that all representatives
149. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof the
should adhere to the item on the agenda-andI meanall
Soviet Union on a point of order.
representatives.
15

150. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): Mr. President, the
only request the Soviet delegation is making and urging you
to enforce is that the representative of Israel should adhere
to the agenda of today’s meeting. I repeat once again that
his attempts to introduce matters which have no connexion
whatever with today’s meeting are unjustified and cannot,
needless to say, meet with our approval. We are entitled to
call upon you, for your part, to take any necessary steps,
not excluding that of refusing him permission to speak,
since it is a matter not of freedom of speech but of
observing the Security Council’s rules of procedure.
15 1. The PRESIDENT: We have already agreed to hear all
the interested parties. I believe that members of the
CounciJ, as well as those invited to address us, are all
obligated to adhere to the item on the agenda. I believe the
representative of Israel is treading close to the edges, but he
is only responding to lines that others have opened up.
152. I now call again on the representative of Israel.
353. Mr, TEKOAH (Israel): Had the representative of the
Soviet Union allowed me to conclude my brief observations, he would have seen that I did adhere to the item on
the agenda and did not cross the edges. I shall therefore
revert to a very brief note which makes an important
principle directly connected with the discussion that we are
conducting today. The note in question wa’s sent on 20
November 193 1 in reply to a complaint of the crossing of
the Manchurian border by Soviet armed forces, and stated
as follows:

1.58. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I call on the representative of

159. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I think all of us noticed Illat
at an earlier stage in the discussion the representative of
Lebanon expressed his admiration of and esteem for the
statement of the Soviet representative. But I do not think
he should follow in the representative’s footsteps and
interrupt the statementsof other representativesof Member
States appearinghere. Had he allowedme to conclude my
remarks,he would have seenthat I am replying to all the
points madeby him.
160. I repeat: In answerto the questionis Israelready for
peace,for real peace, for genuinepeacewith Lebanon and
with its other Arab neighbours?, the answeris, yes, we are
prepared at any time, at any place, to enter into peace
negotiationswith the Governmentsof Lebanonand Jordan
and Egypt and Syria, including the just settlement of the
refugee problem, as called for in resolution 242 (19671,
which is the acceptedbasisfor the peace agreementsto be
attainedbetween Israel and the Arab States.
161. 1 regret, however, that in answer to my question
whether the Lebaneseand other Arab Governments are
preparedto pledge to put an end to the barbaric campaign
of murder and atrocities, of killing innocent passengers,
of
blowing up civil aircraft, the representativeof Lebanon did
not give an affirmative answer. And if we speakof peace
and if we ask eachoth‘er whether we areready for peace,let
us rememberat all times that one of the main obstacleson
the road to peaceis precisely the terror warfare which is
being waged in the Middle East with the support of the
Arab Governments and which is spreadingoutside the
region, endangeringinternational peacein general.

“It spite of the gross, absolutely undoubted and
obvious violation of the treaty rights of the USSR, the
Soviet Government did not think of invading Manchuria.
Only after the repeated attacks of the Chinese and
Russian White Guard units on Soviet territory did the
Soviet army cross the Manchurian border in order to repel
the attacks, disarm the attackers and to stop any further
aggressions.”

162. It is interesting that the representativeof Lebanon
found it necessaryto cometo the defenceof a murderer of
Turkish nationality, tried in an Israeli court. The Turkish
Government did not find it necessaryto protect that kind
of criminal. However, as the representative of Lebanon
found it necessaryto make an issueof it and quote from a
British newspaper,allow me to revert to the item on the
agendaand also cite a London daily regarding the Israeli
defenceaction on 10 August.

154. Now allow me, Mr. Representative of the USSR, to
suggest that Israel be permitted to act against Arab terrorist
squads as the Soviet Union did in the past in similar
situations, and as it would undoubtedly do again were it to
find itself in similar circumstances.
155. The representative
of Lebanon asked whether I
would be ready to pledge Israel’s desire for peace, Israel’s
wiIlingness to conclude peace with Lebanon. My reply is
“yes”, “definitely yes”. We are ready at any time to enter
into negotiations
regarding peaceful agreement with
Lebanon156. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
Lebanon on a point of order.

Israel to peace; I asked him several other questions before
that.

163. I read from 77leDaily Telegraphof I3 August 1973:
“Not only Israel, but many other countries have
suffered from repeated murderousoutragesagainst their
citizens and their property, carried out in the air and on
the ground by Palestinian terrorist organizations.
Lebanon is the main country where these groups II~VC
their headquarters,make their plansand do their training.
If Lebanon does not stop this, then lsrael as the
neighbour against whom the terrorist campaignis aimed
hasthe right to take the necessarymeasuresto do so . . .
Lebanon should not allow the terrorists to fly in civil
airliners in the cause of their nefarious business,thus
endangeringother passengers.”

of

157. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): I am sorry to interrupt the
representative of Israel; I do so only to cIarify a point. The
representative of Israel is resorting to the falsification of
what I stated here. I did not ask him only to give a pledge
to enter into a peace agreement with Lebanon or to pledge
16

-

L

164. In recent years Lebanon has, I think, been the most
active among the Arab States to defend in the Security
Council the cause of Arab terrorism and Arab terrorist
organizations,
as Ambassador Ghorra did again today.
Lebanon has been the most avid collector of one-sided
resolutions which ignored the danger of terrorism to peace
in the Middle East and in general and whose only tangible
effect was to encourage Arab terrorist organizations to
pursue their criminal operations.

movement of a people with the individual, rash actsof a
few persons.That is the first thing.
168. The second thing is this: Since you, Mr. President,
permitted Mr. Tekoah to make a long historicaldigression,
blatantly departing from the agenda,I shalltake the liberty
of replying to that digression.

165. This Lebanese policy reminds me of one of Aesop’s
fables: of the snake which entered a smith-shop and found
a steel file and began to lick it with its tongue, It got
bloodier and bloodier, but the snake continued to lick it on
the foolish fancy that it was the steel file that was bleeding
and that the snake had the better of it. When it could no
longer lick the file with its tongue it began to bite it with its
teeth until, completely covered with blood, it fell back
dead. So it is with Lebanon. It seems to be enjoying the
exchange of acrimony in the Security Council and the
one-sided resolutions which encourage the terrorists. It
seems to be sucking at these resolutions with the same
satisfaction as the snake in the fable. IHowever, it would be
wise for Lebanon to bear in mind that the encouragement
of the terrorist organizations resulting from Lebanese
policy, actions and demands in the Security Council is
causing, first and foremost, the bleeding of Lebanon itself.
Indeed, these murder groups are bleeding and undermining
Lebanon, and the sooner this bleeding is stopped the better,
not only for peace in the Middle East but also for Lebanon
itself.
166. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
(translation from Russian): In view of the
lateness of the hour, I shall be brief. 1 listened carefully to
what was said by Mr. Tekoah, and I must say that either he
Reid not listen carefully to my statement or else he
consciously
distorted it. In my statement I in no way
“justified individual acts of terrorism. It is well known that
the Soviet Union opposes individual terror as a matter of
principle.
Furthermore, Soviet public opinion has previously expressed its disapprova1 and condemnation of the
terrorist
act which occurred during the Munich Olympics.
ItI my statement I said that we firmly reject slanderous
attacks on the leaders of the Palestinian resistance movelnent and on that movement itself.

169. The example given here by the representativeof
Israel is quite inappropriate even if the event in fact took
place. The example is, as the English say, a cpseof a
self-defeatingargument.Evenif the Soviet Governmentdid,
in November 1931, addressa note to the Governmentof
Japan, which at that time hadjurisdiction over the territory
then known asManchukuo, a puppet StateunderJapanese
tutelage, that note contradicts Mr. Tekoah’sarguments.In
order to defend their territory and the territorial integrity
of the USSR, the Soviet armedforcesgavea fitting armed
rebuff to the provocative attacks and frontier violationsof
armed bandsof White Guards.The Soviet Governmentmay
have addressed
a note to the Governmentof Japanwarning
that, in fighting armed bands of White Guards,it was
compelled to crossthe border of Manchukuo-I shallhave
to check that point of history. Throughout the history of
the Soviet Union, the Soviet armed forces have always
firmly rebuffed provocative armedattackson its borders.
170. However, I should like to ask you a question,
Mr. Tekoah. Did you senda note to the Governmentof
Lebanon before you invaded Lebanon’sair space?Who
gave you the right to invade its air spacewithout any
warning? That action wasa grossviolation of the rulesof
international law. As you can see,makingsuchreferences
to historical parallels can sometimesplace you in an
uncomfortableposition.
171. Thus we see that we have been faced with an
attempt to distract the Council’sattention from the matter
under discussion,and my delegation wishesto make a
categoricalprotest againstit.
172. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representativeof
Israel.

173. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I must say that in the course
of the last exchangeI felt that we weregettingfurther and
further away not from the item on the agenda,but from
international realities in general.Apparently the represen167. It is the usual practice of the representative of Israel
tative of the USSR is not aware of the state of relations
to put on the same level individual acts of terrorism and the
existing between Lebanonand Israel, and throughno fault
noble goals of a whole movement, a whole people, in this
of Israel’s.I wish the Government of Lebanonwereready
crlse the people of Palestine. I-lowever, such juggling with
to receive any note from the Government of Israel.As a
facts, such distortion of the truth cannot, of course, dismatter of fact, we would be quite happy to transmit such
tract us. We understand perfectly well what this is all about.
notes eventhrough the goodoffices of the representativeof
we expressed solidarity with the Palestinianresistance the USSR.Let him try, and let him seewhat the response
Inovement, and we paid a tribute to the heroic struggleof
of the representative of Lebanon or his Government
its members and to the activities of its leaders.That is our
would be.
official position. We affirm it once again.Jlowever, it in no
way follows that the Soviet Union approvesof senseless 174. I still remember,during the Jarringtalks three years
ago, when the representativeof Egypt, the presentForeign
acts of terrorism by individuals. 1 should like to note,
Minister of Egypt, refusedto receive through Ambassador
incidentally, that yesterday, speakingon television,one of
the leaders of the Palestinian resistance movement, Jarring an Israeli memorandum,the headingof which was
Mr. J-Iabash, alsomade what amounted to a condemnation “A memorandumfrom the Government of Israelto the
Government of Egypt”, and insistedon eliminatingthe
of individual acts of terrorism. Thus, we do not want
any one to equate the goals of the broad and noble heading.
17

United Nations and arrogate to his Government the
freedom of action of invading Lebanon, of trampling on
our sovereigntyandterritorial integrity.

175. But I would like to add to this observation of mine a
statement made by His Beatitude the Patriarch of Antioch
and the Entire East in Lebanon, Head of the Maronite
Church, and reprinted by Al.Jarida on 28 September 1972:
“I have in my possession information which proves that
through international institutions Israel has frequently
tried to explain to those responsible in Lebanon that
Israel wishes Lebanon no harm, provided that the
fedayeen withdraw from the south of the country. But
how does the proverb go? To whom can one read Your
psalms,0 David’! ”
176. So, you see,we have tried by variousmeans,through
different channels, to make our views known to the
LebaneseGovernment. And our views are that we have no
claimson Lebanon or againstLebanon, except the demand
that the LebaneseGovernment abide by its international
obligations and put an end to the use of its territory asa
baseof aggressionagainstIsrael.
177. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Lebanon.
l?S. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): AmbassadorTekoah has
accustomedthe Council to stories,fables and, sometimes,
anecdotes.I do not wish to follow in his footsteps in this
matter, although I could cite a few in point to describe
Israeli policies, in the samefashion as he has likened our
policy to the snakewhich waslicking the steelfile.
179. We do not really relish at all “licking” resolutionsof
the Council. I have made it very plain in my statementthat
many times the Council has given us moral and political
satisfaction by adopting resolutions,given us certain moral
solaceaswe walked out of this Council with thosepapersin
our hands.We do not, however, considerit the role of the
Council just to hand out piecesof paper to victims of Israeli
aggression.The people who are licking their woundsarc the
hundreds of Lebanesefamilies that have fallen victim to
Israeli aggression,We have lost hundreds of our people,
killed by the murderous attacks of the lsraeli forces.
Hundreds of families are licking their wounds. Fablesdo
not hide the crimes of Israel. Do not quote fables,
Mr, Tekoah; quote from the orders of your Government,
which has sent its murder squadsto kill innocent Lebanese
civilians, destroy their homes and spreadterror in many
parts of Lebanon.

182. We do not collect resolutions,and we do not reIish
being here in the Security Council every now and then
defendingour causeagainstthe aggressionsof Israel. We
would be the happiestpeople in the world if we did not
have to appear in the Security Council, if Israel really
wishedto live in peaceand pledgeditself to give justice to a
million and a half Palestinianswhom it haS thrown out of
their homelands,and if it pledgedto return the occupied
lands to the Arab States. Those are the kinds of pledges
that would really work for true peace.
183. The PRESIDENT: I call againon the representative
of Israel.
184. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): My reply to the last statement
by the representativeof Lebanon will be in the words of
the Head of the Maronite LebaneseChurch, His Beatitude
the Patriarch of Antioch and the Entire East, who, in the
sameinterview alreadycited by me, saidasfollows:
“The Israelisdo not want Lebanon. I know them well.
No one knows them better than 1 do. I was in contact
with them over a long period when I was Head of the
Patriarchateof Tyre and the South. The Israelisattack us
in order to drive the fedayeen out of Lebanon because
they have given up all hope of ever seeingthe Lebanese
Stateitself forcing the fedayecn to quit.”
185. May I suggestto the representativeof Lebanon and
to his Government that they follow the views of the
Patriarchof Antioch and the Entire East and not the views
of murdererssuchasthe Habashes
and the Arafats.

186. The representativeof Lebanonspokeof a new order,
of a world that is to live in accordancewith and under the
provisionsof the Charter. Let us then do that. Let Lebanon
at long last begin to abide by the Charter principles and
provisionsin its relations with Israel. All these principles
and provisionsaswell asall the relevant resolutionsof the
United Nations regardinggood-neighbourly relations make
it mandatoryfor the Governmentof Lebanon to put an end
to the use of its territory by the Arab terrorist organizations in armed attacks against Israel, against Israeli
civilians, in sanguinary assaultson innocent defenceless
civilians outside the region. When the Government of
180. The representative of Israel has tried to draw a
Lebanon fulfils the words of its representative, who says
certain parallel between an action which took placein 1931 that he would like to seea world ruled by the Charter, of
and the present case.I shall not go back into history, into
Statesliving in accordancewith their obligations under the
the detailsof what happenedthen. But I want to remindthe
Charter of the United Nations, when his Government
Council that we are under a new order, a new legalorder
follows suit and takes this counselas the guiding line of its
establishedby the United Nations in 1945in San Francisco.
policiesand its actions, thcrc will bc no need for Israelto
That is our law. The Charter, its provisions,the declarations continue to exercise its right under the Charter of the
adopted by the United Nations, the resolutionsadoptedby
United Nations, its right under Article 51 to self-defence.
the General Assembly and this Security Council constitute
Israelwould welcomethe speedyattainment of iI situation
the order under which we are working-the legal andmoral
which would makethe exerciseof this inalienableright of a
order of the new international order.
State underthe Charter of the United Nations unnecessary.
181. Yet Mr. Tekoah, drawing from the Manchurian
incident, wanted to draw the right to breachthis law of the
18
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.2.00 (or equivalent
in other currencies)

73-82001-May

1979-2,200
