S/2002/1305

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 November 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 29 November 2002 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to refer to the letter dated 9 October 2002 from the President
of the Security Council (S/2002/1130), informing you that the Council had taken
note of your intention to extend by one additional year, to 31 December 2003, the
mandate of the United Nations Peace-building Support Office in Liberia (UNOL).
The Council welcomes this extension of the mandate in the difficult context of
peace consolidation in Liberia.
As you are aware, the Council is in the process of elaborating a comprehensive
strategy on Liberia. UNOL will have a role to play in this context.
In particular, UNOL, with the consent of the Government of Liberia, should
work to enhance the implementation of the following tasks:
(a) Offering assistance to the Liberian authorities and to the public for
strengthening democratic institutions and the rule of law, including the promotion of
an independent press and an enabling environment for political parties to operate
freely in Liberia;
(b) Contributing to and monitoring the preparation of free and fair elections
in 2003, especially through the promotion of an independent electoral commission;
(c) Enhancing and monitoring respect for human rights in Liberia, including
through constructive dialogue with the Government of Liberia, with particular
attention to reaching out to local civil society groups and to encouraging the
establishment of an independent and functional human rights commission;
(d) Promoting national reconciliation and resolution of the conflict,
including through support for initiatives on the ground;
(e) Supporting the Government of Liberia in the implementation of peace
agreements to be adopted;
(f) Engaging in an educational campaign to present accurately United
Nations policies and activities regarding Liberia.
These changes to the mandate of UNOL should increase its capacity for
objective reporting on the situation in Liberia. The Office should report on a wide
range of views, including those outside the Government of Liberia (for example,
opposition parties, non-State actors and civil society). The Security Council would

02-71563 (E)

291102

*0271563*

S/2002/1305

be grateful if you could provide it with a report every three months, covering the
following topics:
(a)

The overall situation in Liberia;

(b)

The preparations, conditions and readiness for free and fair elections;

(c)

The human rights situation.

The Security Council would be grateful if you could submit, by 15 January
2003, recommendations for a detailed revised mandate for UNOL, incorporating
these additions if you think it appropriate, for the Council’s approval.
The Council also welcomes Mr. Abou Moussa’s appointment as your new
Representative in Liberia and head of UNOL, and looks forward to his assumption
of the post to ensure that UNOL has strong leadership in place.
(Signed) Wang Yingfan
President of the Security Council

2
