16

General Assembly-Thirteenth Session

siderable portion of the available resources should be
devoted to programmes which make possible the training of high-level national personnel capable of replacing
international technical assistance as soon as possible,

Noting further that a number of Governments have
expressed their desire to obtain temporary assistance
from or through the United Nations to fill executive or
operational posts in their administrative machinery,

Bearing in mind that the Economic and Social Council, in its resolution 699 (XXVI) of 31 July 1958,
noted with regret that there had been a certain decrease
in technical assistance activities in connexion with fellowships in 1956 and again in 1957,

1. Takes note with satisfaction of the results already
achieved by the United Nations technical assistance
programmes in the field of public administration;

Recognizing that, under the country-programming
procedure, the decisions of the recipient Governments
determine the distribution of funds by types of assistance,
Recalling the advantages which Governments benefiting by the United Nations technical assistance programmes could obtain by making wider use of the
fellowship facilities afforded them under those programmes,
Believing that the training of high-level national personnel would be greatly facilitated if the countries in
the process of development could, with the help of international co-operation, have at their disposal a greater
number of national or regional centres for the training
in the country or region concerned of the qualified
specialists needed in economic development,
1. Expresses its conviction that the award of fellowships is one of the most effective means of training
high-level national personnel capable, inf.er alia, of continuing and developing the work accomplished by experts;
2. Draws the attention of Governments to the desirability, for countries in the process of development,
of establisliing or developing national or regional centres
for the training of the qualified specialists needed in
economic development;

3. Requests the various services responsible for the
administration of technical assistance programmes to
give due attention to requests for prcjects relating to
fellowships and to the establishment or development of
such national or regional centres.
780th plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.
1256 (XIII). United Nations technical assistance
in public administration

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the important role ot public administration in the implementation of programmes of economic
and social development,
Noting the memorandum of the Secretary-General3
an<J the report of the Economic and Social Council on
the technical assistance programmes of the United Nations/' as well as Council resolution 681 (XXVI) of
16 July 1958,
"Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 29, docu-

ment A/C.2/200.

'Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/3848),

chap. III, part B.

2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to supplement
these programmes with a view to :
(a) Assisting Governments participating in these
programmes, at their request, to secure on a temporary
basis the services of well qualified persons to perform
duties of an executive or operational character as may
be defined by the requesting Governments, and as servants of such Governments, it being understood that
such duties shall normally include the training of nationals to assume as early as possible the responsibilities
temporarily assigned to these internationally recruited
experts;
( b) Assisting the interested Governments, as necessary, to meet the expenses which the employment of
these experts will involve ;

3. Decides that any Government requesting such assistance should contribute towards the total cost of employment of each expert an amount not less than the
total emoluments of one of its nationals performing
similar duties;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to negotiate
agreements defining the relationship to be established
between the United Nations, the experts and the Governments concerned, including the terms and conditions
of employment of the experts ;
5. Recommends further that, whenever requests for
assistance fall within the competence of a specialized
agency, no action shall be taken without prior consultation and agreement with that agency ;
6. Decides that this assistance shall be provided on
a modest scale and on an experimental basis, using the
existing machinery of the United Nations Secretariat
and without any increase in administrative costs ;

7. Invites the Secretary-General to report in detail,
to the Economic and Social Council at its twenty-eighth
session and to the General Assembly at its fourteenth
session, on the progress of this experiment.
780th plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.
1303 (XIII). Question of assistance to Libya

The General Assembly,
Recalling the part played by the United Nations in
the creation of the independent State of the United
Kingdom of Libya, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 289 A (IV) of 21 November 1949 recommending that Libya should be constituted as an independent and sovereign State, and recalling that this
independence was achieved on 24 December 1951, in
accordance with that resolution,
Recalling its resolution 515 (VI) of 1 February 1952,
by which it requested the Economic and Social Council
