S/2018/1041

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 November 2018
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017) and 2401 (2018)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the fifty-seventh submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017) and
paragraph 12 of resolution 2401 (2018), in which the Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by all
parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to agencies of the
United Nations system and obtained from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and other relevant sources. Data from agencies of the United Nations system
on their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for October 2018.

II. Major developments
Box 1
Key points: October 2018
1.
Following a period of relative calm in the second half of September, October
saw increased hostilities in several locations in and around Idlib Governorate in the
north-west of the country. While air strikes were not reported in the area in October,
numerous incidents of shelling involving Government forces and non -State armed
opposition groups took place. Civilians in the north-west also continued to be
impacted by hostilities and tensions involving non-State armed opposition groups and
Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham (Levant Liberation Organization), and continued to face a
range of protection threats.
2.
Thousands of civilians were affected by an escalation of hostilities in south eastern Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, where military operations against Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continued in the Hajin enclave. Military operations

18-19394 (E)

231118

*1819394*

S/2018/1041

continued to result in injury, death and displacement among the civilian population
and the destruction of civilian infrastructure.
3.
Efforts to deploy an inter-agency aid convoy to the Rukban camp on the SyrianJordanian border, where up to 50,000 people faced an increasingly dire humanitarian
situation, continued. A convoy planned for 27 October was postponed due to reported
security threats. At least four children were reported to have died in the camp in
October owing to a lack of access to adequate health care.
4.
United Nations humanitarian agencies and their partners continued to reach
millions of people in need. From inside the country, the United Nations reached more
than 2.63 million people with food assistance. No inter-agency humanitarian convoys
were deployed in October and the bimonthly inter-agency convoy plan for September
and October was not approved by the Government of the Syrian Arab Rep ublic.
However, United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners continued to reach
people across the country through regular programming, including in several locations
under Government control categorized as hard-to-reach. Cross-border assistance also
remained an indispensable part of the response, with food assistance for some 583,000
people delivered by the United Nations from Turkey during October.

3.
Since 24 February 2018, when the Security Council adopted resolution 2401
(2018), demanding a cessation of hostilities, military conflict has continued in parts
of the Syrian Arab Republic. During the month of October, air strikes, artillery
shelling or ground fighting were reported in the Governorates of Aleppo, Idlib, Hama
and Dayr al-Zawr.
4.
Following a period of relative calm in the second half of September, October
saw an increase in hostilities in several areas in Aleppo, Hama and Idlib Governorates
in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic. While air strikes remained suspended,
numerous incidents of shelling involving Government forces and non -State armed
opposition groups were reported, with some taking place inside the demilitarized zone
established under the agreement announced by the Russian Federation and Turkey on
17 September, in Sochi, Russian Federation (see S/2018/852). Civilian casualties
were reported both in areas under the control of the Government and in areas under
the control of non-State armed opposition groups. Areas affected included Aleppo
city, Mari‘ and I‘zaz in rural Aleppo Governorate, parts of southern and south-eastern
Idlib Governorate and several locations in north-western Hama Governorate. Civilian
displacement was reported following clashes between Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham (HTS)
(Levant Liberation Organization) and a non-State armed opposition group in and
around Kafr Halab village in western rural Aleppo on 5 and 6 October, with some of
the fighting taking place near a reception centre housing some 600 internally
displaced people. Tensions between HTS and a non-State armed opposition group in
Darat Izzah town on 26 September resulted in the closure of roads in the area.
5.
A range of broader protection concerns persisted across the north-west of the
country, including: kidnappings, several of which involved humanitarian and health care workers; attacks involving improvised explosive devices; and other threats to
civilians. The Syrian Arab Red Crescent reported that more than 1,600 internally
displaced people returned to areas under Government control through the Abu
al-Duhur crossing point between 23 and 29 October.
6.
Thousands of civilians were impacted by an escalation of hostilities in sou theastern Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, where military operations against ISIL continued
in the Hajin enclave. More than 10,000 civilians are estimated to remain in the
enclave, where they faced growing needs and heavy movement restrictions. Women

2/14

18-19394

S/2018/1041

and girls were reported to be most severely affected by a lack of basic services,
including health care, water and sanitation. Living conditions for many of the 27,000
people estimated to have been displaced in the area since June also remained dire,
with insecurity impeding efforts by humanitarian organizations to further scale up
assistance, in particular in areas close to frontlines. Despite the challenges, assistance
continued to be provided by United Nations partners in Kharayij and Bahrah during
the reporting period.
7.
Large numbers of civilian casualties due to air strikes were reported within the
Hajin enclave, specifically in Hajin, Albu Badran and Susah towns, with women,
children and Iraqi refugees among those killed. On 12 October, ISIL forces reportedly
attacked a settlement of internally displaced persons in Hajin town. Subsequent
satellite imagery indicated that more than half of the shelters at the site were
destroyed. Satellite analysis also indicated that a total of 239 buildings appeared to
have been damaged in Susah town between 10 September and 27 October, of which
54 were severely damaged and 90 were destroyed. Across Dayr al -Zawr Governorate,
explosive hazards continued to pose a serious threat to civilians, with multiple injuries
due to landmines and unexploded ordnance, of which several involved children.
8.
Serious protection concerns relating to high levels of explosive hazard
contamination also persisted in Raqqah city. An estimated 152,000 civilians have
returned to the city since the end of major hostilities in October 2017, despite the
risks. Humanitarian assistance in Raqqah has continued to be scaled up, through
international and Syrian non-governmental organizations. During the reporting
period, a mass grave containing more than 1,000 bodies was uncovered in Raqqah
city.
9.
The humanitarian situation of up to 50,000 people in the Rukban camp, on the
Syrian-Jordanian border, continued to deteriorate during the reporting period. Food
and other supplies became increasingly scarce. Health c are remained a critical
concern, with reports that at least four children died in the camp from 8 to 27 October
of preventable conditions, owing to a lack of access to adequate health care. On
11 October, community leaders issued a public statement alleging constraints on the
freedom of movement of displaced people in Rukban out of the camp, while several
protests against conditions in the camp were also reported.
10. Following extensive discussions with representatives of the Governments of the
Syrian Arab Republic, Jordan, the Russian Federation and the United States of
America, local communities and other interlocutors, agreement was reached that an
inter-agency convoy would be deployed to the Rukban camp on 27 October to deliver
aid and support the vaccination of children. However, on 26 October, it was deemed
necessary to postpone the convoy owing to reported security threats. As at 31 October,
discussions on the deployment of life-saving assistance to the area continued.
11. Internally displaced people continued to return to eastern Ghutah from sites in
rural Damascus, which were reported to host just over 5,000 people as at late October.
A large majority of the population remaining in the sites were men. The United
Nations continued to provide food and other assistance at the sites and in eastern
Ghutah itself, through the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and other partners. United
Nations personnel continued to have limited access to eastern Ghutah.
12. Following concerns raised by humanitarian donors about charges being levied
on empty vehicles travelling to pick up humanitarian supplies on the Syrian side of
the Bab al-Hawa border crossing between Turkey and the north-west of the Syrian
Arab Republic, and subsequent engagement by the United Nations with par ties on the
ground, on 1 October, the local administration in the area confirmed issuance of a
waiver from road fees for all trucks supporting humanitarian deliveries. The so -called
National Salvation Government issued a circular on 10 October prohibiting the
18-19394

3/14

S/2018/1041

charging of fees against non-governmental organizations or transportation companies
moving humanitarian commodities. No reports of such fees having continued were
received following issuance of the circular.
13. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World
Food Programme (WFP) issued a special report 1 on 9 October, following a crop and
food security assessment mission to the Syrian Arab Republic undertaken in June and
July. The Mission reported a sharp decline in wheat prod uction, with levels at their
lowest since 1989 and around 30 per cent of the pre -conflict average of 4.1 million
tonnes. The Mission estimated that 5.5 million Syrians remained in need of some form
of food assistance. This figure did not include Idlib, whe re the Mission estimated that
an additional 500,000 to 800,000 people may be food insecure.
14. Despite an escalation of hostilities in some locations in and around the so -called
Idlib de-escalation area over the course of October, the 17 September memora ndum
between the Russian Federation and Turkey to establish a demilitarized zone in the
area remained in place. In Istanbul on 27 October, the leaders of France, Germany,
the Russian Federation and Turkey jointly emphasized the importance of
implementing confidence-building measures to contribute to the viability of the
political process and a lasting ceasefire. The deadline of 15 October in the
memorandum for the withdrawal of “radical terrorist groups” from the demilitarized
zone was reportedly extended by the signatories.
15. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria continued his efforts to
convene a United Nations-facilitated, constitutional committee in Geneva, in line
with the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process mandated by Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015). The Special Envoy engaged with senior government officials
in Damascus on 24 October, with the leaders of France, Germany, the Russian
Federation and Turkey at their summit in Istanbul on 27 October and with
representatives of the “Small Group” comprising Egypt, France, Germany, Jordan,
Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States in London on 29 October. During the meetings, the Special Envoy
continued to emphasize that the United Nations would convene only a committee that
was inclusive, credible and balanced. He also noted the convening role of the United
Nations, as mandated by resolution 2254 (2015) and reaffirmed in the final statement
of the Congress of the Syrian national dialogue, held in Sochi, Russian Federation, in
January 2018 (S/2018/121).
Protection
16. Despite a relative decrease in the intensity of violence, civilians across the
Syrian Arab Republic continued to be severely affected by the direct and indirect
consequences of hostilities. Air and ground-based strikes continued to kill and injure
civilians and damage and destroy civilian infrastructure. The number of civilian
casualties and the scale of the destruction of civilian infrastructure remained a strong
indication that the fundamental rules of distinction, proportionality and precaution
and, in particular, of the prohibition on the launching of indiscriminate attacks may
not have been respected.
17. Explosive weapons continued to be fired into populated areas, killing and
injuring civilians and destroying and damaging vital infrastructure. Explosive hazard
contamination in populated areas killed and injured civilians and impeded
humanitarian access. The use of improvised explosive devices in some areas added to
__________________
1

4/14

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Special Report: FAO/WFP Crop and
Food Security Assessment Mission to the Syrian Arab Republic (2018), available at www.fao.org/
in-action/kore/news-and-events/news-details/en/c/1156568/.
18-19394

S/2018/1041

the complexity of the explosive hazard threat and continued to hinder the work of
humanitarian actors.
18. In Idlib Governorate and surrounding areas in Hama and Aleppo Governorates,
numerous incidents of shelling by Government and allied forces and non -State armed
opposition groups seriously affected civilians and their well-being. Ground-based
strikes on 26 October hit a number of villages, killing at least seven civilians and
injuring at least five others.
19. Infighting between various non-State armed opposition groups in areas in Idlib
and Aleppo Governorates continued to result in death and injury to civilians,
including several children. Lawlessness and criminality that included threats,
intimidation, kidnapping and killing continued to be reported in Idlib Governorate
and other areas in the north-west under the control of non-State armed opposition
groups. Civilians also continued to be killed and injured by air strikes and ground based strikes launched against ISIL-held areas in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate. In one
incident, on 19 October, civilians were killed when a mosque was hit by air strikes.
20. In Suwayda’ Governorate, ISIL continued to hold hostage civilians abducted
from Shubayki village in the east of the Governorate in July. A second of the 27
hostages was reportedly executed on 1 October. On 19 October, ISIL released six
hostages — two women and four children.
21. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) continued to document numerous incidents of human rights abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law committed by non-State armed
opposition groups against civilians. Activists continued to be targeted and abducted
for speaking out against abuses committed by various non-State armed opposition
groups, while other civilians were abducted in order to extract ransoms. In one
incident, the family of a head of a charity organization, originally abducted on
18 September, were sent pictures of him apparently being tortured after the family
was unable to pay a ransom. Tens of men have been abducted since August, ei ther for
ransom or because of accusations of promoting reconciliation with the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic. The whereabouts and condition of many of these people
remain unknown. In one incident, on 15 October, HTS fighters raided a village and
reportedly abducted 12 civilian men from the same family. During the abduction, a
70-year-old man and his son were injured by gunfire, with the older man later dying
of his injuries.
22. The United Nations received reports of multiple attacks on health -care
personnel and facilities during the reporting period. On 10 October, the head of the
Central Surgery Department of the Idlib Health Directorate was killed when an
improvised explosive device detonated near his vehicle on the Kafraya road in Fu ‘ah,
in central Idlib Governorate. On 31 October, the Health Directorate and a
non-governmental organization announced the suspension of services in the Amal
hospital in Huraytan, in northern rural Aleppo Governorate, for a three -day period,
owing to repeated attacks on medical facilities in the area. In addition, the United
Nations received reports of the detonation of an improvised explosive device under
an ambulance parked near Basirah Hospital, in Dayr al-Zawr city. No casualties were
reported in the incident.
23. Several verified reports were also received by the United Nations of attacks on
schools and other interference with education during the reporting period. The
Kurdish Self Administration in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic banned
education through Arabic in more than 250 government schools from late September
onwards. Some families were reported to have relocated or sent their children to other
locations to ensure continued access to education through Arabic. From 8 October
onwards, Kurdish Self Administration police at checkpoints prevented vehicles
18-19394

5/14

S/2018/1041

transporting children to schools in areas controlled by the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic in Qamishli city from doing so.
24. On 24 October, a United Nations-supported school in Kafr Hamra in Aleppo was
shelled. As the incident took place at night, no casualties were reported, but the
resulting damage meant that the school remained closed for several days. On
21 October, Sana Al Rabis school in Idlib was impacted by a vehicle -borne
improvised explosive device detonation in a nearby neighbourhood. As the incident
took place at night it resulted in material damage only. The United Nations also
received reports of the alleged targeting of a primary school in Jarabulus district in
Aleppo Governorate in an improvised explosive device attack. No casualties were
reported.
Humanitarian access
Box 2
Key points
1.
United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to reach millions
of people in need, including from within the Syrian Arab Republic. Humanitarian
assistance provided from within the Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies
based in the country to regularly accessible locations in Government -controlled areas
reached more than 2.63 million people with food assistance.
2.
Although 1.16 million people remained in hard-to-reach areas, no inter-agency
convoys have been approved since 16 August, and the September–October convoy
plan was not approved by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic during the
reporting period.
3.
Cross-border assistance, authorized under Security Council resolutions 2165
(2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2393 (2017), remained a vital part of the
humanitarian response. In October, 375 trucks (14 consignments) delivered lifesaving assistance to more than 1.3 million people through cross-border deliveries,
including food assistance for some 583,000 people. United Nations humanitarian
cross-border operations through Jordan remained suspended in October.

25. United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners reached millions of people
in need, including women and children, through all available access routes, including
(a) humanitarian operations from within the Syrian Arab Republic, whereby
humanitarian deliveries reach those in need without crossing conflict lines; (b) crossline convoys, whereby assistance from within the country is delivered across conflict
lines; and (c) cross-border deliveries, whereby assistance is provided to those in need
from neighbouring countries (see table 2). In addition to the United Nations and its
partners, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and non-governmental
organizations continued to deliver life-saving assistance to people in need. Local
authorities in many areas controlled by non-State armed opposition groups also
continued to provide services where possible.
26. The Syrian authorities have stated that areas under the control of the
Government should now be reached through regular programming modalities. At the
same time, they have indicated that they would facilitate a greater number of missions
and authorize increased deployment of United Nations personnel with convoys to
these areas. The United Nations is ensuring that locations that have recently come
under Government control are included in monthly regular programme requests,
while maintaining that some hard-to-reach locations should continue to be targeted
through the inter-agency convoy modality. On 31 October, the United Nations
6/14

18-19394

S/2018/1041

submitted its plans for access via inter-agency convoys to six hard-to-reach locations
in November and December, with a view to reaching 352,400 people in need in these
areas.
27. Individual agencies continued to submit requests for single -agency deliveries to
locations across the country. Such deliveries are undertaken by United Nations
agencies based in Damascus to regularly accessible areas. In October, all 1,969
official requests submitted by WFP to the Syrian authorities to obtain facilitation
letters for the transport of food assistance to locations across the country were
approved. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) submitted 54 requests for facilitation letters for the movement of core relief
items and livelihood kits, all of which were approved. UNHCR reached more than
2.8 million people with multisectoral support. The United Nations Children ’s Fund
(UNICEF) reached more than 1.1 million children and mothers with primary health care and immunization services. In addition, an estimated 248,700 children a nd
pregnant and lactating women were provided with complementary feeding and
micronutrient supplementation. Some 171,600 children benefited from education
supplies and services, school rehabilitation and textbooks, and 176,500 children
benefited from protection and psychosocial support services. Nearly 290,000 people
were reached with reproductive health and gender-based violence services supported
by the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and its partners. Approximately
3.2 million people received food assistance through both cross-border and regular
deliveries, and around 805,500 people benefited from water, sanitation and hygiene
services and supplies.
Table 1
People reached by the United Nations and other organizations through all
modalities, October 2018
Organization

Number of
people reached

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

4 500

International Organization for Migration

32 000

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

2 825 000

United Nations Children’s Fund

2 200 000

United Nations Development Programme

1 291 000

United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

285 400
171 700

World Food Programme

3 205 100

World Health Organization

865 000

28. Cross-border deliveries continued under the terms of Security Council
resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and 2393 (2017) (see
figure and table 2). In line with those resolutions, the United Nations notified the
Syrian authorities in advance of each shipment, including its contents, its destination
and the number of beneficiaries expected to be reached.
29. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations as authorized under resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014),
2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and 2393 (2017). During the reporting period, the
Mechanism monitored the delivery of 14 consignments by seven United Nations
agencies, consisting of 375 trucks, from three border crossings: eight from Bab
al-Hawa (329 trucks), five from Bab al-Salam (42 trucks) and one from Ya‘rubiyah
(4 trucks). There were no concerns or questions about the humanitarian nature of the
18-19394

7/14

S/2018/1041

consignments sent. The United Nations provided 48-hour notice to the Government
regarding all shipments. Once in the country, United Nations partners ensured that
shipments arrived at the designated warehouses. Independent third -party companies
contracted by the United Nations ensured independ ent verification of the assistance
arriving at the warehouses and monitored the distribution and/or service provision.
The Mechanism continued to benefit from the excellent cooperation of the
Governments of Iraq, Jordan and Turkey.
30. Since cross-border operations began in July 2014, following the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014), the United Nations has conducted more than 888 cross-border
consignments, with more than 22,438 trucks (15,436 through Bab al-Hawa and 2,349
through Bab al-Salam from Turkey; 4,605 through Ramtha from Jordan; and 48
through Ya‘rubiyah from Iraq). Those operations complement and support the aid
provided by international and Syrian non-governmental organizations that provide
services to millions more from neighbouring countries.
31. During the reporting period, humanitarian cross-border operations through
Jordan remained suspended. However, WFP and its implementing partners delivered
food assistance to some 583,000 people from the two authorized cross-border entry
points with Turkey. The World Health Organization also conducted health and
medical deliveries, providing treatment for more than 273,000 people through the
cross-border mechanism. In the northern part of the Syrian Arab Republic, UNICEF
delivered winter kits, child protection assistance, nutrition, education, health and
water, sanitation and hygiene supplies through a number of cross -border shipments.
Around 215,000 health supplies were distributed, reaching over 1.8 mi llion people.
Over 16,000 children under the age of 5, as well as pregnant and lactating women,
were reached with micronutrient supplies. More than 16,000 children under the age
of 5, as well as pregnant and lactating women, were screened for acute malnutr ition;
of them, 374 severely malnourished children received appropriate treatment.
32. UNHCR and its partners continued to enhance the response to the protection
needs of internally displaced persons, returnees and other crisis -affected populations.
By the end of October, 1,516,810 individuals were reached through protection
interventions, including 1,129,283 individuals reached with general protection
activities, 226,127 individuals reached with child protection activities, and 161,400
individuals reached through awareness-raising campaigns on prevention and response
activities relating to sexual and gender-based violence in 12 governorates. As at the
end of October 2018, the total number of functioning UNHCR -funded community
centres and mobile units stands at 97 community centres, 14 satellite centres and 92
mobile units, supported by 2,340 outreach volunteers. This network provided
protection-related services, including community mobilization, child protection, legal
aid, the prevention of and response to sexual and gender-based violence, livelihood
services and services for persons with specific needs, to benefit some 2.6 million
internally displaced persons, returnees, members of host communities and other
crisis-affected people across 12 Syrian governorates. As at October, 53,192 internally
displaced persons in Damascus, Rif Dimashq, Suwayda ’, Dar‘a, Qunaytirah, Tartus,
Ladhiqiyah, Homs, Hama, Aleppo, Hasakah and Dayr al-Zawr Governorates
benefited from the UNHCR legal assistance programme, including some 2,000
internally displaced persons from eastern Ghutah (Rif Dimashq) and 581 from Afrin
(Aleppo Governorate). Moreover, UNFPA reached more than 285,000 people,
carrying out activities relating to reproductive health and the prevention of and
response to gender-based violence and youth-related violence. Also during the
reporting period, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) launched the third round of cash distributions. A total of
279,116 Palestine refugees each received $46. This third round of cash distributions
is expected to be completed in early December. Owing to the financial crisis faced by
8/14

18-19394

S/2018/1041

the Agency, the number of rounds of cash distribution has decreased to three rounds
over 2018 as opposed to the six rounds planned in the UNRWA Emergency Appeal.
Figure
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners
through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, by cluster, October 2018
(Thousands)

1,364
582.7
0

Nutrition

0

Education

15

49.6

Water,
Non-food
sanitation items/shelter
and hygiene

Food

Health

Table 2
Number of beneficiaries targeted through cross-border deliveries, by sector and
by district, October 2018

Nutrition

Water,
sanitation
and
hygiene

Education

Food

Health

Non-food
items/
shelter

I‘zaz

–

78 635

83 750

4 500

–

–

Aleppo

Jabal Sim‘an

–

247 880

35 910

6 600

–

–

Hasakah

Quamishli

–

–

53 733

1 200

–

–

Hama

Muhradah

–

–

–

–

–

–

Idlib

Ma‘arrah

–

72 500

26 710

5 160

–

–

Idlib

Ariha

–

30 000

32 010

5 000

–

5 000

Idlib

Harim

–

95 255 1 085 942

17 152

–

–

Idlib

Idlib

–

58 385

44 620

10 000

–

10 000

Idlib

Jisr al-Shughur

–

–

1 500

–

–

–

Governorate

District

Aleppo

33. The Russian Federation sent informational bulletins to the United Nations from
the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic, which
outlined the provision of bilateral relief assistance. Other Member States also
continued to provide bilateral and other forms of humanitarian assistance.
Visas and registrations
34. A total of 73 new United Nations visa requests were submitted to the
Government in October. Of those, 43 were approved, 29 remained pending as at
31 October (it being noted that some were submitted late in the reporting period) and
one was rejected. Of the 47 previously submitted visa applications that remained
pending at the beginning of the reporting period, 42 were approved in October, 3
remained pending and 2 were rejected. A total of 83 United Nations visa renewal
requests were submitted in October, of which 47 were approved and 36 remained
pending as at 31 October (it being noted that some were submitted late in the reporting
18-19394

9/14

S/2018/1041

period). Of the 50 previously submitted visa renewal requests that remained pending
at the beginning of the reporting period, 48 were approved, 1 was rejected and 1
remained pending.
35. A total of 24 international non-governmental organizations are registered with
the Government to operate in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
36. Agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system continued to
implement programmes in areas affected by frequent clashes among parties to the
conflict, air strikes, the regular exchange of indirect artillery fire and asymmetrical
attacks. As a result of activities relating to the armed conflict, significant populated
areas became highly contaminated with unexploded ordnance, explosive remnants of
war and landmines, which pose an elevated risk to the implementation of
humanitarian activities in those areas.
37. Since the beginning of the conflict, dozens of humanitarian workers have been
killed, including 22 staff members of the United Nations and organizations of the
United Nations system, 18 of whom were staff members of UNRWA; 66 staff
members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and 8 staff members and
volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members of internation al
and national non-governmental organizations have also reportedly been killed.
38. A total of 28 staff members of agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system (1 staff member of the United Nations Development Programme, 1 staff
member of the United Nations Population Fund and 26 UNRWA staff members) were
detained or missing as at the end of the reporting period.

III. Observations
39. I am alarmed by the increase in hostilities and their impact on civilians in the
north-west of the country during the current reporting period, including in areas
understood to lie within the demilitarized zone established under the 17 September
agreement by the Russian Federation and Turkey. The lives and well-being of millions
of civilians continue to depend on the parties’ respect for the rules of war and on
efforts to ensure de-escalation in Idlib and the surrounding areas. I urge all parties to
redouble their efforts to avoid a military battle in Idlib, which would risk setting off
a spiral of human suffering at a scale not yet seen in this terrible conflict, with
potential implications across the region.
40. I am extremely concerned at reports of civilian casualties due to air strikes in
eastern Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, where more than 10,000 people remain effectively
trapped in areas controlled by ISIL.
41. I also condemn continued attacks and threats against civilians, as well as
restrictions imposed on their freedom of movement, by ISIL, HTS and other non -State
armed opposition groups in Dayr al-Zawr, Idlib and elsewhere. All parties to the
conflict must respect international humanitarian law, including the fundamental duty
to respect and protect civilians. Violations cannot be tolerated. Human rights must
also be respected, protected and fulfilled.
42. I have frequently highlighted the importance of humanitarian access to the
Rukban camp and am hopeful that discussions on further deployments of an aid
convoy to the area, in addition to the convoy that delivered assistance in early
November, will also lead to more sustained humanitarian support for people in this
remote area. I reiterate that safe, rapid, unhindered and sustained humanitarian access

10/14

18-19394

S/2018/1041

is critical, for people in need in Rukban and across the Syrian Arab Republic. Reports
of the deaths of children in Rukban in recent weeks are an unacceptable result of
limited humanitarian access.
43. In the north-west of the country, life-saving humanitarian aid has continued to
be delivered across the Syrian-Turkish border, allowing humanitarian organizations
to respond to current needs and to prepare for the continuing risk of a further
deterioration in the humanitarian situation. Many people also continue to be reached
in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic from Iraq with life-saving items that
would not otherwise be available. The humanitarian nature of cross-border assistance
continues to be verified by the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian
Arab Republic, and its deliveries are confirmed on the ground by third -party monitors
and through other means. The importance of the renewal of the modalities set out
under resolution 2165 (2014) and subsequent resolutions, which support the provision
of assistance to those in need through the most direct routes — including across
borders — cannot be overstated at the current juncture. The United Nations does not
have an alternative means of reaching people in need in these areas.
44. Continuing impunity for alleged violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights violations and abuses by all parties to the conflict remains of grave
concern. I call upon all parties to the conflict, all States, civil society and the United
Nations system to cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, in particular by providing relevant information and
documentation. I reiterate that accountability for serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law is also central to achieving sustainable peace in
the Syrian Arab Republic. I reiterate my call for the situation in the country to be
referred to the International Criminal Court.
45. In view of serious ongoing concerns repeatedly raised by OHCHR with regard
to the protection of civilians and other human rights issues in the Syrian Arab
Republic, I continue to strongly urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, in
line with Human Rights Council resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with
OHCHR, including through the establishment of a field presence with the mandate to
protect and promote human rights.
46. I fully support my Special Envoy in his efforts to verify the feasibility of
convening a credible constitutional committee that could provide a cornerstone for
implementing the inclusive political process mandated by resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012. I count on all parties to support my Special
Envoy as he pursues this effort. I reiterate that the goal of the United Nations is to
end the suffering of the Syrian people and to find a sustainable and peaceful solution
to the conflict through an inclusive and Syrian-led political process that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.

18-19394

11/14

S/2018/1041

Annex
Reported incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
October 2018 *
Suwayda’ Governorate
• On 1 October, ISIL reportedly executed a second hostage from among the 27
civilians abducted from Shubayki village in eastern Suwayda ’ Governorate on
25 July. Video footage circulated on social media on 2 October, depicting two
members of ISIL shooting and killing a woman believed to be the hostage from
Shubayki. Local sources confirmed the execution and identity of the woman.
The execution was reportedly in retaliation for the ongoing Government
offensive against ISIL positions in the area of Tulul al -Safa, east of Suwayda’.
• On 19 October, ISIL released six hostages — two women and four children —
reportedly in exchange for the release of 17 ISIL women who were in the
custody of the Government.
Aleppo Governorate
• On 5 October, heavy clashes took place in the early morning in the village of
Kafr Halab in Atarib district in south-west Aleppo Governorate, killing a girl
and injuring a boy from the same family in their home. The same day, HTS
opened fire on civilians protesting the killing of the two siblings, killing one
protester and leaving seven others injured.
• On 19 October, a male civilian was reportedly killed and at least 10 others,
including children, were injured as a result of what were alleged to be ground based strikes on several neighbourhoods in Government-controlled Aleppo city,
including Zahra’, Halab al-Jadidah and Sabil neighbourhoods.
• On 22 October, four male civilians were reportedly injured as a result of ground based strikes on opposition-controlled Bab city, in north-east Aleppo city.
• On 23 October, at least seven civilians were injured as a result of what were
alleged to be ground-based strikes on A‘zamiyah, Akramiyah and Sayf
al-Dawlah neighbourhoods in Government-controlled areas of Aleppo city.
• On 24 October, a five-year old girl was killed and at least three other civilians
injured in opposition-controlled Kafr Hamra in western rural Aleppo, as a result
of alleged ground-based strikes.
Idlib Governorate
• On 1 October, a civilian man was injured by what was reported to be a roadside
improvised explosive device that detonated in Saraqib city, in eastern Idlib
Governorate. The device was reported to have targeted a local HTS leader.
* In line with Security Council resolution 2258 (2015), the present description of incidents that
are reported to have occurred during the month relates to compliance with Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) by all parties in the Syrian Arab Republic. The
information is provided without prejudice to the work of the Task Force on the Ceasefire of the
International Syria Support Group. The list of incidents gives examples of human rights issues
of concern raised in the report. However, owing to the changing patterns of conflict and the loss
of networks of credible and/or reliable sources in many confli ct-affected areas, verifying
incidents is increasingly difficult. The list contains only those incidents that were reported to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and have been verified
according to its methodology, and should not be considered comprehensive.
12/14

18-19394

S/2018/1041

• On 2 October, HTS fighters raided the homes of two activists from Kansafra h
in Ariha district, in rural eastern Idlib Governorate, and detained them. Sources
on the ground reported that the activists were detained for their active role in
organizing demonstrations and for being critical of HTS. One of them was
released on 9 October. The whereabouts of the second remain unknown.
• On 10 October, a civilian man was killed and two others were injured after Ahrar
al-Sham fighters raided a house in Tah town in Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man district,
Idlib Governorate. They were reportedly looking for a man alleged to be
collaborating with the Government forces.
• On 11 October, an activist was detained by HTS fighters in Idlib city following
a series of posts on social media criticizing restrictive measures imposed by the
“Salvation Government” as well as HTS targeting of activists. The activist was
released the same day after signing a paper committing him to refrain from
spreading “false accusations” against HTS.
• On 12 October, an activist working with a local non-governmental organization
in the village of Atimah, in, northern rural Idlib Governorate, was abd ucted by
armed men believed to belong to HTS while on his way to a mosque. The
organization reportedly decided to suspend its activities in Atimah until he is
released. His whereabouts remain unknown.
• On 13 October, unidentified masked armed men reportedly abducted a civilian
man at the gate of his house in the centre of Idlib city. The abductee was released
on 15 October, reportedly in exchange for a ransom.
• On 13 October, an unknown armed group claiming to be part of HTS security
reportedly raided a shop in Thabit neighbourhood in Idlib city and abducted its
owner. The whereabouts of the abductee remain unknown.
• On 15 October, a group of HTS fighters raided Ayn al-Arus village in Ariha
district, west of Jabal al-Zawiyah, and reportedly detained 12 civilian men, all
from the same family. During the raid, the HTS fighters reportedly fired
gunshots, injuring two of those detained — a 70-year-old man working as a
farmer, as well as his son. The older man died as a result of his wounds shortly
after the raid and his body was then returned to the family. His wife was also
injured when she was hit by one of the fighters.
• On 21 October, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device exploded in the
vicinity of the Rawdah Mosque in Qusur neighbourhood in Id lib city, reportedly
killing three civilians, including an 8-year-old child, and injuring 13 others,
including one woman. The explosion occurred near a mosque in a heavily
populated area and caused significant structural damage around the area,
including to some shops and residential buildings.
• On 21 October, the head of a Syrian charity abducted by unknown armed male
fighters in Sahyan village, Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man, on 18 September (previously
reported), was released. The kidnappers had demanded a ransom from his
family. The circumstances surrounding his release remain unknown.
• On 23 October, 2 civilian men were killed and 10 others were injured as a result
of armed clashes which broke out between HTS and the National Liberation
Front around the village of Jarjanaz, east of the town of Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man, in
southern Idlib Governorate.
• On 26 October, Government forces and their allies resumed ground -based
strikes on villages across Idlib. Seven civilians were reportedly killed in the
strikes and at least five others injured. The strikes mainly affected the village of
Ruffah, in eastern rural Idlib, where six civilians, three children, two women
18-19394

13/14

S/2018/1041

and one man, were killed, and the village of Bdama, in Jisr al -Shughur, western
Idlib, where one civilian man was killed.
Homs Governorate
• On 6 October, a 58-year-old woman, internally displaced from Tadmur
(Palmyra), reportedly died in the Rukban camp near the Syrian-Jordanian border
owing to a lack of access to adequate health care.
• On 8 October, a 16-month-old boy from Qaryatayn in Homs died in the Rukban
camp as a result of complications caused by severe malnutrition.
• On 27 October, an eight-month-old boy in the Rukban camp suffering from
hepatitis A died after his medical condition deteriorated.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 19 October, the Othman Ibn Affan mosque (previously called the Abu Bakr
al-Siddiq mosque) in Albu Badran village in Susah town, eastern rural Dayr
al-Zawr Governorate, was allegedly hit with what were reported to be airstrikes,
resulting in dozens of casualties. According to interviews conducted by
OHCHR, the airstrikes hit the mosque after the sunset (Maghrib) prayer,
reportedly killing dozens of people, including a number of men believed to be
ISIL affiliates. OHCHR was able to obtain the names of six civilians, including
two women who were reportedly killed while walking in close proximity to the
mosque. OHCHR is not currently in a position to confirm the total number of
civilians killed in these air strikes and whether or not the rest of reported
casualties were affiliates of ISIL. OHCHR continues to gather information
concerning the airstrikes on Albu Badranand other parts of Susah town.
• On 19 October, ground-based strikes hit Susah town, reportedly injuring thr ee
civilians.
• On 21 October, airstrikes hit a house in Susah town where ISIL fighters were
allegedly present, reportedly resulting in the killing of five civilians, four
(including two women) who lived in a nearby house, and another woman who
was reportedly passing by on the street with her child. The woman’s child was
injured.

14/14

18-19394
