277tb

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
(OPENING MEETING)
Tuesday~ 19 Septem,ber

FIFTH SESSION
Official Records

1950, at 3 p.m.

FlIts/ling Meadow, New York

CONTENTS
Page

Opening of the fifth session of the General Assembly. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . .

1

Minute of silent prayer or meditation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . • . . . .

2

Question of the representation of China in the United Nations. . . . . . . . . . . • .

2

Appointment of the Credentials Committee... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . .

16

Election of the President ....,..........................................

16

President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEZAM (Iran).
Temporary President: General Carlos P. R6MULO

victory, the General Assembly is now called upon to
establish that authority on the solid foundation of the
moral force of world opinion backed by adequate military
power. We have the means to do this by a creative
constitutional act within the franlework of the Charter.
6. The Assembly's practically unlimited power of
debate can be transmuted into effective action in
moments of crisis whenever the organ having prim:~ry
responsibility for dealing with them is paralyz-ed.
Though there have been precedents for such development of the power of the General Assembly, the
greatest of them now actually confronts this body.

( Philippines) .

. Opening of the fifth session of the General
Assembly
.
1. The TEMPORAR'Y' PRESIDENT: I declare
open the first meeting of the fifth session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations.
STATEMENT BY GENERAL CARJ,.OS P. R6MULo,
PRESIDENT OF THE FOURTH SESSION .
2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Fellow rep,resentatives, I welcome you to this fifth session of the
General Assembly.
3. Custom has decreed that the outgoing President of
the General Assembly should present an extended
report on the world situation as a background for the
tasks of the current seBsion. I· shall break with that
custom, for no words of mine can possibly add to the
terrible, eloquence of recent events. Heretofore, despite
many fears, we have come together hopef'ully to build
for peace. Today we are gathered at a desperate hour
to save the peace of the world.
4. Men will hang upon the words we speak here. Yet
experience will have taught them that mere words are .
a cruel mockery while men are dying for the sake of,
peace and the United Nations. They have, a right to
expect more, much more than words. Not by what we
say but by what we do here shall their anxiety be allayed
and their faith restored.
5. The present session is the political equivalent of
the military action which the United Nations forces
are carrying out in Korea. The victory of those forces
will eliminate the gravest challenge yet hurled against
the authority of the United Nations. In anticipation of

The printed Official Records of the fifth session of
the General Assembly are being published in fascicule .
form. that is, the record of each meeting will be issued
separately os' soon as possible. These will be so produced
that they may eventually be bound into volumes, by
organ and session. Pagination will therefore be continuous throughout each series of fascicules representing the
records of a single body. and at the end of the session
there will be issued. for each series, a prefator~ fascicule
co.ntaining a title page. table of contents. list of members
attending. initial agenda. and other prefatory material.
This prefatory fas,cicule should be placed in front of the
. record of the opening meeting. before binding. For ease
of recognition the. fascicules of the opening and closing
meetings will be clearly identified as such in the masthead.
After the close of the session. sets of fascicules. col..
lated and bound. will be placed on sale for the general
public.

..

1
A/PV.277

2

General Assembl)·-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

This Assembly, often described in the past as a mere
international debating society, has the chance to grow
into a virtual parliament of man. It has the chance to
save the United Nations and the peace of the world.
Let us pray to almighty God to grant us the vision and
the courage to discharge this awesome responsibility.
Minute of silent meditation

7. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I invite the
representatives to rise and observe one minute of
silence dedicated to prayer or meditation.
The representatives stood in silence.
Question of the representation of China in the
.
United Nations

8. Sir Benegal N. RAU (India): My delegation has
given notice of a draft resolution, copies of which have,
I believe, already been circulated to all Members of
the United Nations. The draft resolution [A/1365]
reads as follows:

((The General Assembly,
((Noting that the, Republic of China is a Member
of the United Nations and of various organs thereof,
((Considering that the obligations of a Member
under the Charter of the United Nations cannot be
carried out except by a government which, with a
reasonable expectancy of permanence, actually exercises control over the territory of that Member and
commands the obedience of its people,
((Recognizing that the Central Government of the
People's Republic of China is the only such government functioning in the Republic of China as now
constituted,
((Decides that the aforesaid Central Government
through its Head, or its Minister for Foreign Affairs,
or its accredited representatives, as the case may. be,
shall be entitled to represent the Republic of China
in the General Assembly and
((Recommends that the other organs of the United
Nations adopt similar resolutions."
9. I am well aware that it is unusual, not to say
unprecedented, for the General Assembly to deal with
a resolution at so early a stage, but the circumstances
are also unpreCed(~ll1ted.
10. I understand that two sets of credentials have been
received from two different authorities in respect of
the Republic of China. As you all know, we have to
appoint at the be!~inning of each session a Credentials
Committee to examine the credentials of the representa.tives and to report without delay. I emphasize the words
"without delay" as showing that questions relating to
credentials are regarded as urgent matters. The two
sets of credentials which I have just mentioned will
thus go before the Credentials Committee, which will
have to report to the General Assembly the result ot
its examination, but the question involved in this
particular case is of unusual and perhaps unprecedented'
difficulty.
11. Which of the two governments claiming to represent the Republic of China is the government entitled

to issue credentials? This is a question which has been
engaging the attention of various organs of the United
Nations for the last eight or nine months without
receiving a final answer, and it is not to be. expected
that the Credentials Committee would be able to answer
it. In all probability the Credentials Committee would
report that this important and difficult question had
arisen and then leave it to the General Assembly to
decide under rule 29 of our rules of procedure.
12. Here, then, is a question which, unless we deal
with it at once, will in all probability come before us
in the. very near future in conllexion with the report
of the Credentials Committee. I venture to suggest that
the General Assembly should deal with the matter at
once, or at least when the report of the Credentials
Committee is before us, but not later because, as I
have said, the question is one relating to credentialsthat is to say, whether the credentials emanate from the
proper source, from the right government - and should),
therefore, be disposed of without delay. In the view of
my delegation it should be dealt with as early as
possible and a decision arrived at while the atmosphere
of the General Assembly is calm and the temperature
not too high. Experience has shown that the temperature is apt to rise with the progress of the se.ssion, and
then a decision on the merits becomes very difficult. I
leave it to th~ President to decide, either as a point of
order or, if he prefers, after taking the sense of the !
General Assembly, whether the draft resolution is to
be discussed and voted upon at once, that is to say,
in a:dvance of the report of the Credentials Committee,
or whether it is to be disposed of in connexion with
that report. I shall speak on the merits of the draft
resolution in due course after this preliminary point
has been settled.
.
13. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: The representative of India has raised a question which bears
a certain relationship to the organizational steps which
the General Assembly takes during the early part of
its session. Although it appears to the Chair proper that
such a question should be raised at this time, the introduction of a draft resolution of this character at the
first meeting of a session raises a procedural problem
which is not specifically covered in the rules of procedure. Indeed, the situation which has given rise to the
presentation of the Indian draft resolution is one on
which the rules of procedure give no specific guidance.
I believe, therefore, that it would be inappropriate for
the President to make any ruling upon the application
to be given to the rules of procedure in the present
circumstances.
14. I wish to point out, however, that the General
Assembly is the master of its own procedure, and I
therefore invite the Assembly to consider what procedure it wishes to adopt with regard to the proposal
which has just been made by the representative of
India.. .
15.. Mr. VYSHINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republic§!) (translated from Russian) : The delegation
of the Soviet Union has authorized me to speak, before
the General Assembly proceeds to its regular work,
on the question raised here by the represelltative of
India, Sir Benegal N. Rau. The USSR delegation deems
it necessary to raise two points within the framework
of this question.

lIIIII't"'.'''-~

2'Tth Meeting-19 September 1950
16 The first point concerns the presence here in the
. G~neral Assembly of the representative of the Kuomintang group, purporting to represent China.
17. The second point concerns the need to invite to
the present session of the General Assembly a representative of the People's Republic of China.
18. I should like to begin with the first point. It is
indisputably in the vital interest of all States Members
of the United Nations that the General Assembly should
be correctly constituted, that the plenum of the General
Assembly should consist of persons who are, entitled
to represent their respective countries, and do not
represent som~ sort of group, particularly one which
has lost its real significance, as is the case in the socalled Chinese question. Only a State Member of the
United Nations is entitled to appoint its representatives
to the Organization and to provide them with the
ne,cessary credentials. This is clearly provided for under
rule 27 of the General Assembly's rules of procedure
which, as I venture to recall, states that "the credentials
shall be issued either by the head of the State or
government or by the Minister for Foreign Affairs".
19.' This rule gives expression to a postulate which
admits of no dispute and which is determined by such
important basic principles of .the United Nations as
the principle of the sovereign equality of all States
Members of the United Nations, the principle of their
political independence and, lastly, the principle of nonintervention by the United Nations in the essentially
domestic affairs of a State.
20. These principles are universally accepted in international law and the General Assembly must be guided
by them in determining its relations with the delegations of each country or State. The faithful and unconditional observance of these principles here is, in the
view of the Government of the USSR and its delegation, a vital condition for the success of the United
Nations and a fundamental duty of all its Members.
It is' therefore inadmissible that the General Assembly
should be attended by persons who do not represent
their country, who belong to the remnants of a political
~egime which has been overthrown in the country.
21. However, an attempt is being made to place China
into just such a position, a great country with almost
500 million inhabitants, who have shaken off the
reactionary Kuomintang regime and have set up their
own people's republic. It is quite indisputable that the
remnants of the Kuomintang group have not the
slightest political, legal or moral right to represent
China.
.
I

22. In its communication to the Secretary-General of
our Organization, the Central People's Government of
the People's Republic of China rightly pointed out that
circumstance and demanded the removal of the Kuomintang representative from the General Assembly. The
USSR .delegation, on its Government's instructions,
wishes to state that it fully supports the demand of the
.Central People's Government of the' People's Republic
of China.
23. 'The Soviet Union delegation, for its part, is submitting a proposal for the exclusion of the representative
. of the Kuomintang from the General Assembly, as

s

having no right to represent China,the sole legal,
authorized and sovereign representative of which is the
Central People's Government of the People's Republic
of China.
24. In accordance with the foregoing, the USSR
delegation submits to the General Assembly for adoption a draft resolution [A/1369] which consists literally
of two and a half lines and reads:

((The General Assembly ~
((Decides that the representatives of the Kuomintang group cannot tal<e part in the work of the
General Assembly and its organs because they are
not the representatives of China."
25. This is, in my opinion, the first point which the
General Assembly ought to settle in connexion with the
draft resolution already submitted by the Indian delegation, and in view of the actual situation which has
arisen with respect to China, a Member of the United
Nations and a permanent member of the Security
Council- that most important organ which has been
entrusted with full responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. I ask that this
proposal should be considered.

.

26. I should like to add a few words more. Sir Benegal
Rau - of course he did not yet have the USSR proposal in mind, but his own has a direct bearing on itpointed out that the proposal he had submitted was
without precedent. I do not think that this fact shn~jld'
in any way impede the solution of this question. The
Temporary President was quite right in saying that
the General Assembly was master of the situation. If
the rules of procedure are silent on some particular
point this cannot, in any circumstances, serve as a
reason for leaving the question raised by the USSR
delegation and the Indian delegation unconsidered.
27.. Sir Benegal Rau raised the question of inviting
a representative of the Chinese Government; I shall
ask the General Assembly to be allowed to make a
separate statement on that point, after the first point
has been examined.
28. As I have said, the first point is that the General
Assembly must be legally constituted, which means
that there must be no persons in it who have no right
to represent their country, to claim a representation to
which they also have no legal or moral right.
29. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: The draft
resolution of the Soviet Union will be circulated.
30. Mr. KARDEL] (Yugoslavia) (translated from.
Russian) : The Yugoslav delegation, true to the position
which it has always taken, very strongly supports the
Indian delegation's proposal for inviting the People's
Republic of China to take its place in the United Nations. I shall not enter into a discussion of the obvious
right of the Government of the People's Republic of
China to this place, since in my opinion that is clearly
brought out in the Indian draft resolution.

'31. . It is selfMevident that to recognize as the government of China a political group which in reality does
not hold power in that country is both illegal and politically inexpedient. It is really tantamount to preventing

General Assembly-""'Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings
a great State like China from taking part in th(; work of
the United Nations. I particularly wi.:lh, how~ver, to
dwell on the specific political aspect of this question.
32. There can hardly be any doubt that the delegation
of the People's Republic of China must take its place
in the United Nation$. The real difference of opinion
bears on whether this should occur now or later.
33. To postpone the matter is to link up the question
of China's representation with all the other controversial
questions of the day and hence to aggravate the whole
international situation. On the other hand, to solve this
problem would, in present circumstances, constitute one
of the first real signs that nations are willing to seek
the road to peace, to lighten the atmosphere of imminent
war which hangs over the world today, and-most important-it would strengthen the United Nations, revive
men's faith in it as the peacemaker of the world and
encourage their hopes of peace. To leave the question of
the representation of China unsolved, however, may provide a basis for attack upon the United Nations and
may help to weaken the Organization still further.
34. The Yugoslav delegation's position on this question is, of course, entirely independent of its attitude
towards the foreign policy of the Government of the
People's Republic of China or its policy with regard to
Yugoslavia. As I have already emphasized, my delegation holds the view, in the first place, that every Member Nation of the United Natlons should be represented
by a government which is actually in power; moreover,
it is concerned with the concrete task of the strengthening of peace throughout the world. On both those
grounds the delegation of the ~eople's Republic of China
should at once be invited to take part in the work of
the United Nations.
35. For all these reasons, the Yugoslav delegation supports the Indian proposal that the Indian draft resolution should be examined without delay.
36. Mr. TSIANG (China): Since it is the set purpose of certain delegations to force upon the United
Nations the puppet regime of Peiping, my delegation is
ready to meet the challenge and to meet it as early as
possible in this session of the General Assembly.
37. I represent the only legal government in China.
My Government is based on a Constitution passed by
the representatives of the Chinese people only three
years ago. My Government is headed by a President
elected by the representatives of the Chinese people.
The political responsibility of the Government resides
in a legislature elected by the representatives of the
Chinese people. To this legislature the executive is
responsible.

38. The representative of the Soviet Union referred
to my Government as that of the Kuomintang gro~lp.
That description is grossly inaccurate. My Government
is a coalition government. It has within its ranks three
political parties. The so-called Kuomintang means the
people's party. It is the largest single political party in
the Government. The representative of the Soviet Union
called this Kuomintang reactionary. Well, this Kuomintang was founded by Sun Yat-sen. It stands for
democracy. It stands for people's livelihood, or what is
more commonly called in western cmmtries welfare.
It stands for nationalism, that is, nation~l. independence.

39. This challenge, this slanderous imputation of reaction has been used time and again. At the third session of the General Assembly, held in Paris in 1948,
Mr. Vyshinsky used that very word to characterize my
Government, and I challenged him at that time to have
an international investigation into that problem. I said
then 1 that if the United Nations constituted a commission to investigate the degree of reaction in the different
countries of the world, my Government would. be glad
to accept the judgment of such a commission. Furthermore, I stated that I should be glad to accept certain
standards in favour of the USSR. I said, for one thing,
that if such a commission found that the number of
people who had lost their lives because of their political
opinions was only one man in the Soviet Union to one
in China during the previous twenty-five years, I should
gladly acknowledge my Government to be reactionary,
40. Is not the observation of human rights one of the
most important standards of progress or rea~tion in this
world? It was this government that instituted in China
the first national health service. I do not need to go into
details, but I should like to call the attention of the
General Assembly to the fact that, during the eight long
years of war with Japan, this national health service
prevented any outbreak of epidemics in my country.
My' Government was the first government in the history of China during the last thousand years to promote
agriculture, to organize a Ministry of Agriculture. The
scientific work promoted by my Government made it
possible for the farmers of China to cultivate new varieties of rice and wheat which increased the yield of the
farms by 11 to 13 per cent.
41. On the eve of the Second World War, when we all
-the free nations of the world-combined to fight
against aggression, even USSR newspapers, such as
Pravda and Izvestia} regarded my Government as the
only government in China which could possibly.lead the
Chinese people to meet the aggression of Japan.
42. This draft resolution states that the puppet regime
should occupy the seat of China in the Unned Nations.
Let us consider the puppet regime. The Chinese Communist Party was organized in 1921. Its very first meeting of organization had the participation and direction
of the Third International. Its first constitution provided
that the Chinese Communist Party must accept the directives of the Third International. During the last
twenty-nine years of its existence, that party has not
deviated once from the line laid down by Moscow. There
was a time when the Chinese communists denounced
Hitler as a mad dog. Then, suddenly, Hit1~J7 became a
decent fellow, and then again, suddenly, Hitler became
a mad dog. All the zigzags of world policy decreed by
Moscow were faithfully followed by this party.
43. Last year, at the fourth session of the General
Assembly, on behalf of my Government, I placed an item
on the agenda called: "Threats to the political independence and territorial integrity of China and to the
peace of the Far East, resulting from Soviet violations
of the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance of
14 August 1945, and from Soviet violations of the Charter of the United Nations."
44. On that occasion I told the First Committee of the
General Assembly about the origin of this puppet regime
1 See the verbatim record of the 197th meeting of the First
Committee.

5

277th Meeting-19 September 1950
- -.,----------------_-.::::..-_---=------------------..
47•. Now the United Nations is faced with its first
in Peiping. 2 I shall not recapitulate that story. Briefly,
great
crisis, namely, the Korean question. From the first
it is the following. The Soviet army of occupation in
day of the North Korean question on 25 June, the radio
Manchuria prevented my Government from re~establish~
and Press under the control of the puppet regime have
ing its authority in Manchuria. That army of occupation
not ceased to tell the Chinese people, and have tried to
denied to us the use of the chief port of Dairen for the
impose on the Chinese people, their idea that this is a
movement of troops. It hampered our use of the railwar of aggression on the part of the United States. The
ways; it limited air transport. At the same time, it
fourth report of the Unified Command,s as read out to
provided all the facilities for the movement of commuus by the United States delegation yestet'day in the
nist troops into that important region. Then the Soviet
Security Council, 4 established beyond doubt that the
army of occupation turned over to that insurrectionary
Chinese communist regime has given substantial help to
force the arms left there by the Japanese. That is the
origin of this puppet regime in Peiping. What that
North Korea.
regime stands for in world affairs is, or should be, very
48. This is the choice before the Ger,\eral Assembly:
well known to the General Assembly .
do you want to seat the legitimate democratic regime,
45, Let me tell you what that regime itself said it stood
which my Government is, or do you wish to have in your
for in international affairs. On 16 July 1949, when the
midst a regIme which is un~Chjr... de in its origin a.nd
so-called Sino-Soviet Friendship Associations were
character, ar,\d which in no way represents the Chinese
started in China, the communist commander-in~chief,
people?
Chu Teh, said the following:
49. One argument advanced for the recognition of the
UIt can be easily seen that the victory of the Chinese
Chinese communists is that of effective control. We have
had that doctrine of effective control or power expeople's democratic revolution .is inseparable from
pounded to us from time to time. The puppet regime
the friendly aid of the Soviet Union. If the Soviet Union
had not existed, there would have been no victory
does not have effective control of China. At this moment
of an anti~fascist Second World War under the leadone million guerrillas are fighting the communists on
the mainland. But is effective control the only criterion,
ership of the Soviet Union. 1£ there had been no such
or is it the most important criterion for the United Nadevelopment as the unprecedented growth since 1944
tions in deciding a matter of this kind? If effective conof the world democratic peace front under the leadertrol is the most important criterion, then the country
ship of the Soviet Union, the rapid and quick victory
of our Secretary~General should have accepted the Quisof the Chinese revolution as it is today would have
been impossible. Even if we were to succeed, it would
ling regime. If effective control were the only criterion,
then France would not be where it is. It was the men
have been impossible to consolidate our gains. Is this
not clear P"
of the resistance movement in France who refused to
accept
effective control. It was those people who re46. What the boss of the puppet regime, Mao Tse-tung,
deemed
the honour of France. I am surprised that in this
said on 1 July 1949 on this subject was the following:
General Assembly we should have advocates of simple
uIt is to be the policy of the Chinese communists to
power in a question of this nature.
unite in a common struggle with those nations of
50. I cannot finish my statement without reading to
the world who treat us on the basis of equality with
this Assembly an authoritative expression of opinion not
the peoples of all countries. This is to ally with the
from my Government and not from a reactionary group.
Soviet Union, with the new democratic countries of
It is the unbiased, unsolicited opinion of a labour organiEurope and to ally with the proletariat and masses of
zation. In a letter addressed to the Secretary-General
the people in other countries to form an international
by Mr. Matthew W 011, President of the Free Trade
united front.
.
Union
Committee of the American Federation of Labor,
uThe forty years' experience of Sun Yat~sen and
dated
7
April 1950, we have this clear statement of the
twenty~eight years' experience of the Communist
issue
which
we are discussing. I shall now read two
Party have made us firmly believe that in order to
paragraphs from that letter:
win victory and to consolidate victory we must lean to
"You know as well as we do that without Russian
one side. The experience of forty years and twentyintrigue,
finance, direction, subversi.on and active milieight years shows that without exception the Chinese
tary support, the Mao Tse-tung hordes could never
people either lean to the side of imperialism or to the
have overrun the Chinese mainland. You would never
side of socialism. To sit on the fence is impossible.
have proposed that the Quisling regime, once imA third road does not exist. We oppose a Chiang Kai- .
posed by the Nazis on the Norwegian people, should
shek reactionary clique which leans to the side of
be recognized by the free community of free nations
imperialism. We also oppose the illusion of a third
as the government entitled to represent the people of
road, not only in China, but also in the world. With..,
Norway. You would never have proposed such a polout exception, one either leans to the side of imperialicy, though Hitler's Quisling government in Norway
ism or to the side of socialism. Neutrality is the
camouflage and the third road does not exist."
had a far firmer and much more complete control
over
Norway than Stalin's puppet government has
Then he went on to say:
over China.
"Internationally, we belong to the anti-imperialist
"We are therefore completely at a loss to underfront. headed by the Soviet Union, and we look for
stand on what basis you now propose to have the
genulOe aid from that· front and not from the impe.rialist front."
2 S~e

Official Records of the fourth session of the General
A.ssemblYI First Committee, 338th meeting.

/

8 See document 5/1796.

~ See Official Records of the

No. 44.

Security Council, fifth year,

6

General AS~lembly-Fif.h Session-Plenary Meetings

_."..,..........------------_._----.;~----------...;.---------------

Chinese quislings seated in the Security Council of
the United Nations as the representatives of the Chinese people. There is, of course, one difference between the N orwegi~n quislings and the Chinese quislings: the former were followers and tools of Nazi
totalitarianism; the latter are the followers and tools
of communist totalitarianism."
51. We simply cannot lead ourselves to conclude that
this difference in the type of totalitarianism warrants
the seating of Mao Tse-tung and company in the
United Nations as the representatives of 450 million
Chinese people. For the United Nations to act on this
basis would be to express a political view by endorsing
totalitarian despotism. That would be in conflict with
the very aim the Temporary President expressed in his
reply, the aim of submitting this issue to the United
Nations without regard to the political issues involved
in the contrasting characters of the two Chinese governments. Moreover, that would also be a most flagrant
violation of the Charter and ideals iDf the United
Nations.
52. Everything that has transpired since this matter
came up has strengthened our convktion that this
Chinese issue before the United Nations can be settled
fairly and soundly only on the basis of adhering faithfully to the provisions of Article 4 of ·the Charter. It
is particularly on this basis that we respectfully reaffirm
and resubmit to the General Assembly our position that
the present clique, hated by the Chinese people, is unfit
for and unworthy of membership in the United Nations
and entirely unqualified to represent the 450 million
people in China. The motive of the USSR delegation
is clear. The Soviet Union Government wishes to complete the conquest of China by winning for its puppet
regime the valued moral and political recognition of
this body. I make bold to believe that this body will not
co-operate with the Soviet Union in advancing that
country's plan for world conquest.
53. Mr. ACHESON (United States of America):
I have risen to oppose the draft resolution presented by
the representative of India which is before the General
Assembly. I wish to urge upon this General Assembly
first, that it should vote upon this draft resolution at
once and, second, that it should vote it down. There are
many reasons which I might give for opposing the
draft resolution, but I shaH be very brief and shall put
the opposition on what I think is the sound and
unanswerable ground: the need for orderly procedure
and the overwheltning necessity of getting on to the
organization 0f this General Assembly and the transaction of the vital business which lies before it along
the lines which the Temporary President has indicated.
54. Now, what is this draft resolution which has been
placed before the Assembly? It is that the Assembly
should eject from represP"Ltation here representatives of
the Goverument·,..1: China which participated in the
founding of the ...·ated Nations and has represented
China ever since, a,.:d that the Assembly should substitute for that representation the representatives of
another regime in China. Some measure of the consequences and difficulty of the question proposed is shown
by the fact that, of" the membership of this Assembly,
forty-three of the nations recognize the government
which it is proposed to eject and sixteen recognize the
regime which it is proposed to seat.

55. This is a matter of the very greatest importance,

not merely to the government and the regim~ directly
concerned, but to all of us, to the United Nations, and
to representatives of many of the governments seated
here, because this will create precedents. In taking a
step of this magnitude, it is most important that we
should look very carefully into what is proposed and
how it is proposed to be done and should understand
exactly what we are doing before we decide. To do that
will take some time-a long time if we do it carefullyand that will impede the organization of this Assembly;
that will delay the transaction of important business.
56. What, therefore, in my judgment seems to be the
orderly and the sensible thing to do is to vote down
this draft resolution and do it quickly, to organize this
Assembly and get on with its work. During the course
of this session there will be ample opportunity to con..
sider the criteria which should be used in determin.ing
which of the two claimant regimes to seat in the United
Nations. The Cuban delegation has put on our agenda
a proposal for doing exactly that. There are many
orderly ways for adding to that investigation, if the
Assembly wishes so to d." In that way, the matter can
be carefully considered; it can be considered without
days and days or weeks of debate elapsing before we
can get on with our other business; and a proper and
well-considered decision can be made later. o.ti.
57. Without, therefore, taking any further time, let
me urge two courses upon my fellow representatives:
let us vote upon this draft resolution now; let us not
postpone it and drag the matter out. Vote it now, and
vote it down.
58. Mr. WIERBLOWSKI (Poland) (tr(j,nslated
from French): 011 !I~suming its seat in this hall, the
Polish delegation was utterly astounded to find itself
compelled to note the presence of persons belonging to
no delegation and representiti.g no one; my' words
plainly refer to the envoys of the Kuomintang clique,
these men who, in defence of a bad cause, dare to
usurp the title of "representatives of the Chinese
people."
59. This sinister farce, this dangerous pretence of
Chinese pseudo-representation has lasted for more than
a year. A handful of bankrupt politicians, of sabrerattlers expelled by their own people, arrogate to themselves the right to speak in the name of a great country,
in the name of a people 450 minion strong. None of us
are any longer in doubt as to the real character of this
clique, both now and in the past. Was the United States
Government itself, which so obstinately supports this
clique of adventurers, in any doubt when, not so long
ago, it published its White Paper, prepared by .Mr.
Acheson himself, and was obliged to admit that the
agents of the Kuomintang, far from enjoying . any
support from the Chinese people, were one and all
discredited and corrupt?
60. Let us consider more closely the qualities which,
according to the United Nations Charter, the representatives here prese\'ltspould possess.
61. Does the Kuotrtintang group constitute a government? Of course it docs not, inasmuch as it is nothing
l.<lote than an association of adventurers expelled by
their people, a faction clinging to a fragment o'f Chinese
territory, thanks to intervention ana. support from
.•111:,,''£:1-'

'.\

277th Meeting-19 September 1950
abroad. It does not, in fact, exercise any authority
whatsoever in that scrap of land. Since the military
occupation of the island by the United States, the
Kuomintang clique is not entitled to assert, even men..
daciously, that it enjoys a vestige or a semblance of
power.
62. Can this clique validly accept any obligations
whatsoever? Certainly not. As it does 110t exercise any
power, it cannot assume any obligations.
63. Lastly, does this clique possess the necessary
qualifications for the effective assumption of the fundamental obligations arising out of the United Nations
Charter? Is it capable of defending peace? And does
it wish to do so? "The reply must necessarily be in the
negative because it is dictated by the very nature of the
Chiang Kai-shek clique. By definition, that clique has
an intel'est in the pursuit. of military adventure. It has
shown on many occasions, and Chiang Kai-shek has
several times confirmed the fact, that its object remains
war and hence the negation of the aims which still constitute the essential purpose of our Organization.
64. Why then do these men who represent no one and
who flout the rules of our Organization continue to
remain in our midst, contrary to the requirements of
the Charter?
65. You have heard the Kuomintang delegate attempt
to slander the legal government of China by requesting
that he should himself be recognized as the representative of the only legal government. It is obvious that he
has not read the White Paper published by his patrons
in the United States, which admits that the Kuomintang
is corrupt. You have heard a man who represents no
one but himself but who slanders his own nation. Is it
not a: pity to waste our time? Is not our Organization
being derided?
66. Since it was the United States representative who
preceded me on this rostrum, I should like to add a few
words. What are the facts which have permitted such
an outrageous spectacle, so dire in its effects? The
cause of this state of affairs lies solely in the policy of
the United States. It is thanks to and on behalf of the
United States that the Kuomintang group is operating
against the wish and interests o{ the Chinese people.
67. When the Chinese people expelled Chiang Kaishek and his entourage of military and political adventurers, following the failure of United States imperialist
intervention in China, it was their American patrons
who provided them with shelter and protection in
Taiwan. The Chinese people has already passedjudgment upon them. The United States alone, under cover
of guns, is attempting to revive the dead body of the
Kuomintang clique. The United States is doing so in
order to be in a position to continue its imperialist
interference in Chinese affairs. It is clear to everyone
that this United States plan, which is contrary to the
will of the Chinese people, cannot be carried into effect
by peaceful means and that the continued existence of'
the Kuomintang clique is closely bound up witIi the
war plans prepared by the imperialist warmongers of
the world.
68. In his annual report~5 the Secretary-General has
described the question of Chinese representation in the
IS

See Official Records of the fifth s.ession of the General

Assembly~ Supplement No.!..

7

United Nations as a legal and constitutional question
which has provoked a serious crisis within the Organi..
zation. The question has other and infinitely more farreaching consequences. It must be. admitted that the
result of maintaining the fiction of the representative
character of the Kuomintang delegation is to deprive
a people 450 million strong, with its own legal government, of representation in the United Nations. The
absence of the representatives of China is prejudicing
the work of the General Assembly, is seriously undermining the structure of the United Nat.ions as defined
in the Charter and is paralysing its activities. A General
Assembly without Chinese participation cannot be
regarded as legally constituted under the terms of
Article 9 of the Charter. Our discussions and decisions
are thus deprived of the participation of representatives
of one-fifth of mankind.
69. In the opinion of the Polish delegation, the first
step to be taken towards the elimination of this obstacle
to the normal and productive functioning of our Organization is to expel the delegate of the Kuomintang from
this hall. It is high time, that the puppets, whose strings
are manipulated by the UJ;lited States, were thrown
out. When these phantoms have disappeared from our
sight, when we see the true, representatives of the
Chinese people take their places among us, then and
then only will the conditions for the normal functioning
of the General Assembly be restored.
70. The Polish delegation protests most solemnly
against the presence of the representatives of the
Kuomintang clique in the Assembly hall and supports
the USSR delegation's proposal for their immediate
expulsion.
71. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: As this
session of the General Assembly begins its work, may
I appeal to all the representatives to be more restrained
in their language.
72. Mr. VYSHINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I explained at
the very outset, when stating the position of the Soviet
Union, that there were two points to .be considered in
the case before us: the presenc~ of the representative
of the Kuomintang group in the General Assembly and
his participation in ite work, and the invitation 01 the
representative of the JPeople's Republic of China. As the
discussion has showr,1 both questions to be closely connected, I shall have to touch now upon the second point
as well so as to limit any further statements I may make
on these matters.
73. 111 the first place, the representative of the Kuo~intang group objected to my caning him a representative of the Kuomin~ang group; "'.It he himself admitted
nt position in that
that the Kuomintang held a du
~roup. The group i~, therefore, a Kuomintang group
m that sensu. He demed that the group was reactionary
said that it stood for true democracy and talked about
democracy and the constitution. Do the real facts coincide with his description? I think not.
74. Mr. Acheson, who supported the Kuomintang representative, did not discuss the substance of the matter,
apparently because he feared that were he to do so he
might suddenly find himself in an awkward position.
75. It is of cour.se quite natural that Mr. Acheson
should not desire to .find himself in an awkward posi-

8

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

tion. He therefore simply said that the Indian draft resolution should be rejected. True, he did not say anything
about the USSR draft resolution. It might be thought
that he was not against the USSR proposal since he
merely suggested that the Indian proposal should be
rejected. I think, however, that that was tactfulness on
his part, and that he did not wish to cross swords with
the delegation of the Soviet Union f'om the very start.
I appreciate his attitude.
76. But let us see what Mr. Acheson had to say on the
substance of the question which has been raised here
and which is surely of vast and grave importance. This
question, I might say, is of vital significance, of thrilling significance for the Chinese people whose interests
should be dear to you, a great people which, after decades of fighting for its freedom, has at last attained that
freedom, has set up its own people's republic and has
every right to be represented here in the General Assembly of the United Nations by its own representatives,
and not by the representatives of some particular group,
especially if it is of the Kuomintang kind. Only representatives of nations may be present here. But does not
Mr. Acheson know that the Kuomintang group is not
representative of the Chinese people? Mr. Acheson himself has furnished the best proof of that fact.
77. I should like to remind Mr. Acheson of a statement he made not so long ago, on 12 January 1950 to
be exact, in which he recognized that the Chinese people had completely withdrawn its support from that
government. I should like to remind him that earlier
still-about a year ago, in August 1949-in his letter of
transmittal of the famous White Paper which came out
at that time, he said about Kuomintang China: "In the
opinion of many observers they had sunk into corruption, into a scramble for place and power." 6
78. Mr. Acheson apparently has forgotten those two
statements-one included in his letter of transmittal,
from which I have just quoted, and the other made on
12 January 1950. He was absolutely right when he made
those statements and I should like to defend Mr. Acheson against Mr. Acheson, for, I repeat, he was undoubtedly right on that occasion. And Mr. Acheson has many
sources from which to draw confirmation, in the shape
of authoritative documentary proof, that he was right at
the time. I should like to refer to General Stilwell, former Commander-in-Chief of the United States forces in
China, and to quote him literally on the Kuomintang.
Mr. President, I must quote General Stilwell. I remember your injunction to use proper and moderate language, but these are not my words. I do not wish to use
any rude wordf;, and r shall not use any. But these words
were spoken by the Commander-in-Chief of the United
States forces in China, General Stilwell. Permit me to
cite these words of the General.
79. i shall quote what General Stilwell had to say
about the Kuomintang group, and I should like the delegate of that group to listen carefully: HA gang of thugs
with the one idea of perpetuating themselves and their
machine. Money, influence, and position the only considerations of the leaders. Intrigue, double-crossing,
lying reports. Hands out for anything they can get." 7
6 See United States Relations with ChinaJ published by the
Department of State, page VII.
7 See Stilwell, J. W., The Stilwell PapersJ William Sloane
Associates~ Inc., New York, page 190.

Mr. Acheson shpuld read page 190 of The Stilwell

Papers. What is stated there confirms that he was right

in August 1949 and in January 1950 when he admitted
that the Kuomintang group, which' claims to be the gov..
ernment of China, deserved no confidence and that it
had lost the confidence of the Chinese people as well as
the American people, whose Government supported and,
as we now see here, is still supporting that despicable
group of Kuomintang traitors to their people.
80. The Press contains a strangely similar reportI wonder whether it is a case of mutual inspiration. In
January 1950 the New York Post wrote the following,
which I quote word for .word : "Chiang can serve as
the classical, example in our time of the man who threw
away greatness to follow treachery. He betrayed the
ideals of Sun Yat-sen when he became leader of the
Kuomintang which Sun founded. He betrayed the
promises which he had made to President Roosevelt
and other American leaders who gave him support in
the early days. He betrayed his opponents who released
him after capture on the basis of an agreement. He betrayed the missionaries by confessing Christianity but
practising paganism. He betrayed the bankers, by taking their loans in the name of China and appropriating
them for himself. Above all, he betrayed the Chinese .
people by promising them liberty and establishing his
own brand of fascism."
81. These are not my own words. I am quoting from
the New York PC!st of 10 January 1950.
82. Such are the facts about the constitution on the
basis of which this group claims to represent the Government of China. Such are the facts about the so-called
democracy as depicted to us here by the representative
of the Kuomintang group.
83. The USSR delegation considers that these facts
are proved. Arithmetic is beside the point. Mr. Acheson
stated that forty-three States were in favour of the
Kuomintang regime and sixteen against. He knows full
well that in politics it frequently happens that sixteen
States which happen to be in a minority are of much
greater political, moral and historical significance than
the so-called majority. But this is another matter and I
shall not go into it now.
'
84. The delegation of the Soviet Union feels that the
true, genuine and national China must be invited to this
Assembly, that an invitation must be issued to the representatives of the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China, Mr. Chou En-Iai, informed
the Secretary-General of the United Nations as early
as ?6 August of this year of the appointment of a delegatIon of the Peo~le's Republic of China, headed by
Mr. Chang Wen-tIen, to the current session of the
General Assembly. The Central People's Government
emphasized in that cable [A/1364] that steps should be
taken to enable the delegation of the People's Republic
of China to attend the current session. I need not dwell
on this indisp.utabl~ claim of the Central People's Goverl1:ment, the only lawful and sovereign government of
Ch111a.
8S.. The USSR delegation must further draw the attent1~n of the General Assembly to the quite inadmissible
and 111tolerable nature of a state of affairs where the
People's Republic of China, a great country, which has

-

277th Meeting-19 September 1950

justly demanded that all the obstacles to its rightful
participation in the work of the United Nations and
all its organs should be removed, remains unrepresented
in the United Nations.
86, The representative of the Kuomintang group has
tried to object here to this formulation of the question,
asserting that the Central People's Government is not
in control of the territory of China and does not repre~
sent the Chinese people. He made what I thought were
rather unfortunate historical analogies with France,
Norway, Sweden.
87. We must look the facts in the face, and see them
as they really are. These facts say more eloquently than
any false words that the true government, invested
with full powers and trusted by the Chinese people is,
of course, the Chinese People's Government of the
People's Republic of China. Can anyone dispute this
fact? Is not this fact alone sufficient to remove all the
obstacles which prevent the Chinese people, in the
person of the representatives they have themselves ap~
pointed, from participating in the present session of the
General Assembly?
88. This is why the USSR delegation warmly supports
. the demand of the Chinese People's Government to be
permitted to take part in the work of the General As~
sembly and is proposing that the General Assembly
should adopt the following draft resolution [A/1370]:
((The General Assembly
((Decides to invite the representatives of the People's
Government to take part in the work of the General
Assembly and its organs."
89. I urge the adoption of this draft; it is so obvious
and incontestable that only the mQst obscure interests
could lead anyone to vote against such a proposal.
90. I would ask the General Assembly to weigh all
these facts and deal with this question in a manner
worthy of the authority and dignity of the General
Assembly.
91. Sir Benegal N. RAU (India): I see now that,
although the preliminary point which I raised has not
been settled, we are all speaking as if it had been set~
tIed. We are speaking on the merits of the various draft
resolutions. Therefore I shall have to follow that exam~
pIe and speak on the merits of my own draft resolution.
92. I should like to mention at the outset that the
question of the representation of China has been under
consideration in various organs of the United Nations
since January last. India recognized the new Central
People's Government of China toward the end of last
year and, ever since then, it has consistently followed
the logical consequences of that recognition. The pres~
ent draft resolution standing in the name of the dele~
gation of India is only another step in the same
direction. Thus our advocacy of the claims of new
China to be represented in the United Nations and its
organs began a long time ago, began before the present
Korean conflict and is in no way connected with it.
93. Why did we recognize the new Government of
China? For a variety of reasons, the main reason being
that, according to the best of our knowledge and infor~
tnation, it is a sound and stable government. An emi~
nent authority Oft international law, Dr. Lauterpacht,

9

in his edition of Oppenheim's T'reatise on this subject,
says this on the criteria for recognition:
"The government which enjoys the habitual obedience of the bulk of the population with a reasonable
expectancy of permanence"-these are the very
words I have quoted in my draft resolution-Hcan be
said to represent the State in question and as such
to be entitled to recognition. The bulk of the practice
of States, at least that of Great Britain and the
United States, in the matter of recognition of gov~
ernments, is based on the principle of effectiveness
thus conceived."a
94. That is the principle which India has followed in
respect of China.
95. Let us look at the matter from another point of
view, quite independent of recognition. As I have men~
tioned in my draft resolution, and as is well known, the
Republic of China is a Member of the United Nations
and a permanent member of the Security Council, and
as such that Republic has a number of obligations laid
upon it by the Charter of the United Nations. Who is
to fulfil them? A State cannot fulfil obligations except
through some government, and obviously only a government exercising effective control over the territory
and the people of the Republic of China can fulfil the
obligations laid upon the Republic of China. That seems
to us to be self-evident and, so far as India is aware,
the Central Government of the People's Republic of
China is the only government that exercises this control. Therefore that is the government that can dis~
charge China's duties and obligations under the
Charter.
96. But how can we require the fulfilment of these
obligations and yet deny that government its rights
under the Chatter, one of which is the right to be
represented in the United Nations? To deny· rights and,
in the same breath, to insist on obligations is clearly
illogical and inconsistent.
97. The question is sometimes asked, how can we
possibly seat here the representative of a puppet com..
munist government? There is a double fallacy here.
According trD our information, and we have quite good
.sources of il\1formation so far as the new Government
of China is concerned, that government is a national
coalition representing all sections of the nation, including some members of the Kuomintang, pledged to work
a common programme of democratic advance., In our
view, it is an independent government. Let me at this
point read some extracts from two articles published in
The Times of London on 28 and 29 June last. The
writer, speaking of Chinese communism, says:
"It is because it is a Chinese movement, seeking
to reform conditions in China, that it has gained such
wide support. Few of its followers are really interested in foreign nations or their fate. The mass sup~
port of all classes which the regime"-meaning the
new regime-"now enjoys is not given to theoretical
communism but to the practical programme of
reform and reconstruction which the party is now
carrying out.
a See Oppenheim, L. F, L., International La'w,' a treatise,
edited by H. Lauterpacht, 7th ed,.~ London, New York, Longmans Green and Co., vot. I, page 127.
.

10

Ge,..e-..al Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetillgs

"The administration, confined in the executive·
posts to party members, is impeccably honest; the
army is admirably disciplined; there is no nepotism;
efficiency and drive have replaced sloth and indiffer..
ence. Intellectuals and experts, non-communist in
their own views, have been asked to work for the
regime in order to reconstruct China, and find a
congenial atmosphere in which the expert is appre..
ciated and his advice accepted."
98. But let us assume that we are all wrong, that the
Government of India's view is wrong and that the
views from which I have just read out extracts are
also wrong. Let us assume that the new Government
of China is a communist government. Surely, the
United Nations is a world Organization in which there
is room for different systems of government, with different policies and ideals. The United Nations was not
in~ended to be a group of nations all thinking one way
~nd excluding everybody else. So long as a nation of
475 million people remains outside a world organization, that orgap.ization cannot be regarded as fully
representative.
99. India has historical and almost immemorial ties of
culture and friendship with China. For us, situated as
we are and where we are, the friendship of China is
desirable and natural. We wish to do everything possible to promote the friendly relations that now prevail
between us, because we feel that a free and inde?endent
China marching with India will be the Ii10St effective
stabilizing factor in Asia.
100. It is for these reasons that I commend my draft
resolution to the favourable consideration of the General Assembly.
101. Faris EL-KHOURI Bey (Syria): This question has been placed before the General Assembly for
the first time. I do not know wheth~r all the representatives here have, like myself, come to this meeting
without any idea that this important matter was to be
placed before us and that we were to be asked to vote
on it at once, without being given an opport1.1.nity to
consider the matter a little more deeply. Furthermore,
many of the representatives here are attending a session of the General Assembly for the first time, and
I think it would be only fair to give them a chance to
consider this matter further, especially in view of the
fact that there are now four different prr,posals before
them.
.
102. I do not agree with the statement that has been
made to the effect that the organizing of the General
Assembly necessitates taking an immediate vote on this
matter. The General Assembly could take a final and
definite decision after the credentials have been presented and all the representatives recognized as presumptive representatives to participate in the session.
103. The agenda for this session of the General
Assembly is composed of several items, of which the
first two have already been dealt with. The. next is the
appointment of a Credentials Committee. Now a new
proposal is before us which is not on the agenda. I
think that the voting on this fourth question ought to
be postponed at least until tomorrow in order that
delegations may have time for f.urther consideration.
For this reason I propose the postponement of a vote
on this matter and, at the same time, the appointment
of the CredentialS Committee at once in order not to

.

·l
~::

hinder the progress of the work of the General
bly, I hope that my proposal will be put to a vote.
104. Mr. PEARSON (Canada): I have asl~ed to
speak in order to explain very briefly a draft resolution
[A/1368] that stands in the name of my delegation and
which I assume will be considered only if the other
draft resolutions on this subject are not found accept..
able to the General Assembly.
.
105. The draft resolution submitted by my delegation
is a purely procedural one and should not cause anyone
to become too e'·i:eited. It has been submitted because
we do not feel that if the other draft resolutions on this
subject are defeated, this should finally dispose of this
very important matter at this present session; nor do
we feel that we should be asked to take a final decision
concerning it on the very first day of the session and
before an opportunity has been given for its careful
consideration.
106. To give such consideration, we propose in our
draft resolution the e.stablishment of a committee of
seven, of which one shall be the President of this
General Assembly, who shall select the other six. This
committee of seven shall report back with its recom..
mendations to the General Assembly.
107. There id, of course, as the representative of the
United States has pointed out, an item on the agenda
proposed by the delegation of Cuba, which reads:
HRecognition by the United Nations of the representation of a Member State"; that item has some bearing
on this question, but it deals with many other questions
as well as that of the representation of China. However, my delegation belie,ves that this Cuban item has
a bearing on the question ot Chinese representation
and that, therefore, the spe.cial committee which we
recommend may wish to consider the st1bstance of the
Cuban proposal at this session of the General Assembly
before reporting on the question of Chinese representation.

108. It may of course be felt that this question should
be dealt with by the Credentials Committee or in some
other way. Eut our view is that it is a matter of such
special importance that the procedure of a special committee, which is recommended in the Canadian draft
resolution, is wise. We the,refore recommend that procedure to the General Assembly.
109. Mr. HA]DU (Czechoslovakia) : In contrast with
the views expressed by other delegations, the Cze.choslovak delegation is glad that the Soviet Union proposal
gives the General Assembly an opportunity, at the very
beginning of its session, to put an end to a state of
affairs in which it finds itself in connexion with this
question, and which is in flagrant contradiction with
reality as well as with international law.
110. The Czechoslovak dele.gation is also glad that the
General Assembly will, as a result of this proposal, have
the l;.\ossibilityof wiping out the deception· of the 500
million Chinese people, as well as that of other pe.oples
throughout the world. That. deception arose out of the
undignified· proceedings with regard to this question
which nqve been conducted up to the present time by .
some organs of the United Nations. That conduct
has lowered the prestige of the Organization and not
only has not helped but, quite to the contrary, has

•

277th Meeting-19 September 1950

placed obstacles in the ~ath of the, peace effort, which
is the basic aim of the United Nations. That conduct
is the result of the policy of one of the great Powers,
the United States, which did not take into account either
the reality of the situation or international law. That
policy bars the legal representation in the Organization
of the United Nations of the 500 million strong and
glorious Chinese people, who are represented by a
lawful government which exercises sovereignty over the
whole Chinese mainland. That policy eliminates onefourth of mankind from active participation in peace
efforts and, as a result, weakens substantially the
United Nations.
111. World opinion cannot understand why some of
the main organs of the United Nations, whose task
should and must be the defence of peace, law and
justice, not only have not fulfilled this task but directly
. violate it. Much less can it understand the attitude of
those organs of not taking into account the unchangeable reality; that attitude is contrary to all logic and
common sense. This real situation must be acknowle.dged, as well as the principles of international law,
which recognizes the fact that the Government of the
Chinese People's Republic is the only legal government
of China.
112. The General Assembly intends to put an end to
this illegal and untenable state of affait·s, and to bring
it into harmony with legality and reality. By this action
the General Assembly will strengthen the prestige of
the United Nations in the eyes of the peoples of the
world. In doing this, the General Assembly will substantially contribute to its peace efforts.
113. For these reasons, the Czechoslovak delegation
supports the proposal of the Soviet Union and will
vote for it.
'
114. Mr. SPENDER (Australia): Australia is opposed to the draft resolutions put forward by India
and the Soviet Union and we propose to express our
reasons therefor.
115. In the first place, both draft resolutions make
allegations of fact whi,ch the General Assembly is not
in a position now to determine.
116. Secondly, they make allegations of fact· as the
necessary prerequisite to the admission of the Central
People's Government to the General Assembly. Even
if those allegations of fact were correct, it would not,
in the view of the Australian delegation, follow that
recognition should be accorded in this Assembly.
117. Thirdly, it is our view that there are othe,r
criteria, beyond those expressed in the draft resolution
of India, which must be considered before a nation is'
admitted to the, General Assembly.
118. Finally, even were those criteria the proper
criteria upon which to proceed, the Australian delegation submits that it is proper, in the circumstances in
which we, find ourselves today, that we should be
satisfied that in dealing with this draft resolution we
do not appear to the world to be giving way to pressure.
119. I shall now deal with each point that I have
made.
.
120. The members of the General Assembly will see,
if they peruse the draft resolution proposed by the
representative of India, that it makes the following
I

11

allegations in the second paragraph: HCon.sidering that
the obligations of a Member under the Charter of the
United Nations cannot be carried out except by a
government which, with ~ i'easonable expectancy of
permanence, actually exercises con.trol over the territory
of that Member and commands the obedience of its
people". It proceedf3 further to say: (!Recognizing that
the Central Government of the People's Republic of
China is the only such government functioning in the
Republic of China. as now' constituted". Then, proceeding upon those two premises, it goes on to say tha.t we
should decide to admit the Central People's GoV'ernment to the Gen(~ral Assembly.
121. We point out that those are alle.gations of fact
which ought to be determined by an appropriate body
before the General Assembly is asked to proceed any
further with this draft resolution. It is quite obvious,
from the statements made by the representatives of the
USSR and China, that there is a dispute on fact, and
that that dispute on fact ought first to be resolved. But
even assuming that the facts are correct, it by no
means follows that, being satisfied as to their truth,
we should proceed to admit the Central People's
Government of China.
122. I say that for these reasons. Is the fact that a
nation is controlled by a particular government, or that
that government commands the obedience of its people
and that it is the only functioning governme11t, sufficient
to justify the members of the General Assembly introducing that nation here? I venture to say that a
moment's reflection would suggest that the answer must
be unquestionably tiN 0". I say that because if our minds
go back over the last ten or fifteen years, Hitler's
regime, at the time' we were fighting it, could have
satisfied everyone of these criteria. Indeed, had South
Korea been overrun by North Korea. in the latter's
aggressive action, then the gov~rnment of North Korea
too could have said after a small passage of time : "We
satisfy these criteria and are therefore entitled to admission to the assembly of nations."
123. The Australian delegation believes that much
more, must be done before a nation is to come into the .
U nite~ Nations. We are here for the purpose -:- 01'
ostenSibly for the purpose - of advancing the cause of
peace throughout the world. One of the most important
criteria, in the judgment of my Government, is that we
must be satisfied that a nation that seeks admission to
this General Assembly is not only able but prepared to
undertake its international responsibilities. Furthermore, we must be satisfied that it is a nation not only
prepared to undertake its international responsibilities
in a general sense; it must be a nation that is prepared
to advance the cause of peace in this Assembly in
accordance with the objectives of the Charter of the
United Nations. And I beg leave to question very much
whether we can be satisfied. Certainly the Australian
delegation at this moment is not satisfied that the
People's Republic of China, if admitted to this Assembly, would advance the cause of peace.
124. I venture to say, and I express the view of my
Government, that there are represented in the General
Assembly today, and have been in the past, nations
that have not been conce,rned with aclvancitA.b the obJiectives of the United Nations but in t'rutlh with destroyling those objectives. So it is that we in. Australia make it

12

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

plain that we are not prepared to admit any nation
merely because it satisfies the conditions laid down in
the draft resolution introduced by India. May I say
that I am quite satisfied that the representative of
India represents a t:;0vernment that is deeply and
devoutly concerned wIth peace. I beg leave to express
my view that I do not think the same thing can be said
of the leader of the Soviet Union delegation and the
country he represents.

125. Our view, therefore, is that at the present moment
it is not proper for the Assembly to proceed any further
with this decision. We ought not to vote either for or
against it. Indeed, some appropriate tribunal or committe~ of this Assembly should consider what criteria must
be applied in determining these matters. For that reason
I generally support the proposal of the representative
of Canada, with this qualification: I think the members
of that committee ought to be members properly elected
hy this' Assembly and should not, with due respect to
the President and any other person - and I am sure
the President will not misunderstand what I say - be
nominated by anyone person.
126. Finally, I wish to say this. In the country from
which I come, living as we do under a British system
of justice, there is a well known maxim which we
apply to all our actions: not only is it important that
justice should be done, it is equally important that
justice should appear to be done. And so it is important
today that we should not make it appear, by anything
we do, that we are giving way to pressure by any group
or nation. We have seen the issue realistically and
cannot ignore the fact that much has gone before. Th;s
matter cannot be decided as if it were just an academic
matter now to be decided for the first time.
127. We know very well that in the dispute in Korea,
where the United Nations have come together for the
purpose of resisting aggre,ssion, there have been suggestions made that we settle this matter on the condition
that we admit the People's Republic of China. May I
say, on behalf of Australia, that we will have nothing
whatever to do with that kind of approach. We are not
people who submit to pressure; we are people who are
desirous of doing our part in achieving peace. We are
quite satisfied that peace will not be advanced if we
give way to pressure. We are equally satisfied that it
will not be advanced if we appear to give way to
pressur~. I have no doubt that throughout the world
today t:~lere are millions of people who are looking to
this P',ssembly for a strong lead. We shall not give them
that lead if we make it appear - because it will be so
construed - that all the pressure brought to bear upon
us has finally been successful.
128. For those reasons, we are opposed to the draft
resolutions introduced by India and the Soviet Union.
. We shall sUJ?port the draft resolution of Canada with
the qualification I have indicated.

129. Mr. CASTRO (El Salvador) (translated from
Spanish) : In taking the floor on this occasion, it is my
intention to submit the point of view of a delegation
which has long maintained an absolutely consistent
stand on the question of China. There have, of course,
been many problems in the Chinese situation which
have caused changes in the respective positions of the

,

two governments which control part ef the territory
of that great nation.
130. As one of the principal arguments in favour of
the recognition of the Government of' the so-called
People's Republic of China there have been put forward
certain concepts of international law according to which
a government which controls a territory, which is
capable of fulfilling its international obligations and
which has the will to do so, should be recognized by
the other governments of the world as the l~gitimate
government of the country.
131. Here we have a nation which has been torn by
internal strife for many years, by civil war on the one
hand and, on the other, by foreign attempts to interfere
in internal matters and to bring about a particular type
of settlement of the Chinese situation.
132. There are therefore grounds for reflecting upon
the situation before dealing with it hastily. We must
look at it for ourselves and be completely convinced tnat
the movement which has arisen in China is a genuinely
national movement, before we can decide that the government which controls the major part of the territory
of that country can be admitted to the United Nations.
We must see whether the Government of the People's
Republic of China is fulfilling its international obligations, whether the diplomatic and consular representatives accredited to that country are receiving the treatment to which they are entitled, or whether, t<J put it
bluntly, they are subject to restrictions, and international
obligations are not being properly complied with.
133. Lastly, apart from all these considerations, 'it is
our duty to take into account the present world situation.
The words of the Temporary President of the A~)sembly
are still ringing in my ears. We are faced with a conflict which is draining away the life-blood of the world,
and we cannot forgE:t the blood which is being shed at
this very moment.
134. Conseque11tly our decision on this matter must
take into account the present position of the United
Nations which is fighting aggression in Korea. And
here, we are faced with a clearly defined situation: the
Nationalist Government of China, at present established
on the island of Formosa, has made known its desire to
co-operate with the United Nations in resisting aggression and has even offered armed forces to be placed in
the service of what is now the cause of the United Nations. What has been the position of the Government of
the People's Republic of China? It has been the exact
opposite. Its attitude has b':;en to denounce and accuse
the Republic of Korea. It has declared that it was the
Republic of Korea which first attacked North Korea,
and that the latter has been waging a defensive war. But
the war potential of North Korea is so enormous and
powerful that the Republic in the South would never
have dared to challenge it for the simple reason that it
did not even possess the means of defence.
135. Thus, through highly special circumstances which
enabled the Security Council to emerge from its usual
paralysis and to act for the first time as the legitimate
organ responsible for defending and promoting the cause
of peace, the United Nations found itself faced with a
sitt ,~, ~ion of genuine and far-reaching importance for the
futtu ~ of this international Organization which is of
almost universal scope.
T

-

277th Meeting-19 September 1950

136. The problem bciore us is not one of recognizing
a nation and saving that it is a Member of the United
Nations. Obviously China is a Member of the United
Nations. We are faced with an unfinished conflict in
China and we are simply deciding which government is
to be recognized by the United Nations.
137. As the representative of the United States said a
. moment ago, an overwhelming maj ority of the States
I Members of the United Nations have not recognized the
People's Republic of China, or, more exactly, the govI ernment of that people's republic. Plainly, then, the
majority of the States Members of the United Nations
represented here have already made known their opinion in the form of an act of sovereignty by withholding
recognition from the Peiping government.
138. But when we come here to the United Nations,
we have to consider, as the representative of Australia
has just said, the essential purpose of the Organization,
which is the maintenance of international peace and
order.
139. Which of the two governments, the Nationalist
Government of China or the Government of the People's Republic of China, is the one which is genuinely
aisposed to further the cause of the United Nations?
140. Obviously, leaving aside any defects and shortcomings which there may be in any government and
which we are not in a position to consider here, it is our
duty to decide, in the face of an unfinished conflict such
as the one in China, which of the two governments controlling part of the territory of China will co-operate
most fully with the United Nations. The reply is obvious: it is the Nationalist Government at present established on the island of Formosa.
141. Consequently we should be disregarding the interests of the universal Organization of which our
States are Members if we were to accept now the represent~,.tives of a government which is entirely opposed
to the cause of the United Nations and which has in fact
dearly challenged and defied that cause.
142. In the circumstances, it is my belief that there is
lIO possible alternative for any State which wishes to
defend and carry forward the flag of peace which is now
in the hands of our Organization.
143. The delegation of El Salvador will vote against
the two draft resolutions of the Soviet Union, against
the draft r~solution submitted by the delegation of India,
and will abstain from voting on the Canadian draft
" resolution for one very simple reason, which is that the
position of the United Nations in this problem must be
c1eal'1y defined. The problem is, simply and solely, which
of the two governments is to be recognized.
1.44. The delegation of the Soviet Union has been entirely consistent in its presentation of the problem.
During the years in which the United Nations has been
in existence, only one government, the Nationalist Government, has been recognized; hence the USSR delegation, in accordance with its oV-Tn particular viewswhich aloe not those of the delegation of El Salv~dor-­
has proposed that the representative of Nationalist
China should be expelled. The proi)Qsal is logical and
in conformity with its own views, but we challenge those
views for reasons which we have already made clear,
and declare emphatically that in no case should we vote
I

I

13

for the recognition of a government controlling part of
the territory of any nation, if such recognition were to
mean introducing another disruptive element into the
United Nations.
145. Mr. UNDEN (Sweden) (translated from
French): My delegation supports the proposal submitted by the delegation of India. It considers that, as
the Peking government controls almost the whole. territory of China, it should be regarded as the de facto
government of China.
146. No government has any obligation under international law to give de jure recognition to a situation
of the kind which exists in China. All governments are
legally free to defer recognition of the new regime for
reasons of which they are the sole judges. For my part,
however, I associate myself with the opinion expressed
by the representative of India, namely, that our Organization should be guided by the indisputable fact that the
Chinese nation is today no longer represented by the
Nationalist Government which has its seat in Formosa.
My delegation will accordingly vote for the draft resolution submitted by India.

147. Mr. DIHIGO (Cuba) (translated from Spanish) : Since some of the previous speakers have referred
to the item whieh was placed on the provisional agenda
of the present session by Cuba, we should like to make
;t clear that as far as the representation of. Member
'States in the United Nations is concerned, this item is
of a general scope and does not refer or apply specifically
to the case of China. That this case might be included
under such general rules as the Assembly may deem it
desirable to adopt, is a different matter. Our intention,
in requesting the inclusion of this topic, was precisely
that. the Assembly should take a decision on a conb'oversial matter which is not governed by uniform rul(~s
applicable to all the organs of the United Nations.

148. Having made this dear, I wish to support the
point of view of the representative of Syria, and to
recall that he has raised a point of order which the
President should decide immediately.
149. The representative of Syria said-and I agree
with him-that we should appoint the Credentials Com..
mittee at once. In an Assembly of this nature, until the
Credentials Committee has been appointed and has ac..
c~pted and reported on the credel1:tials of the representatives, the Assembly cannot techmcally be considered as
duly constituted. This is the first thing we must do.
150. For that reason, I am of the opinion that we
should proceed immediately to the appointment of the
Credentials Committee, and that the latter should make
its report. 'When the credentials have been approved we
should examine the various draft resolutions submitted.
It seems to me that then would be the proper time to
support the Canadian proposal for the appointment of a
committee to ;;tudy the problem before us.
151. Mr. BARANOVSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translated from Russian) : The USSR
an~ Indian represent~tiv~~ gave adequate reasons in
their statements for 111vlbng a r~~}tesentative of the
People's Republic of China to tak6 his rightful place
amo?g th~. other dele~atio:as to the United Nations.
Their posItion was logical enough; yet the Australian
representative tried to refute it, unashamedly giving his

...
1 "",

14

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

real reasons for opposing a proposal based on legal and
practical considerations.
152. J shall say nothing of the inexcusable tone he took
when he attempted to lay the blame for the diverger:ces
which arise·in the United Nations on the representattves
of the Soviet delegations. J shall draw attention only to
the obvious fact that he wishes to keep out of the United
Nations those pe?ples whose political regi~e and e.conomic structure dIffer from those of AustralIa. He lumself said, I repeat, that he would not w.ish to see in ~l~e
United Nations governments of countnes whose polIttcal and economic structure differ from Australia's. He
could hardly have been more frank and unabashed.
153. The United Nations is an international Organization composed of all the nations which.wish jointly ~o
strive for and to secure a stable and lastmg peace. ThIS
desire is apparently not shared by the Australian representative, since he deems it possible, in violation of
the Charter, of a signed agreement, to make exceptions
in the cases of some countries merely because they have
a different political regime and economic structure.
154. Not only does the Chinese People's Governme~t
enjoy the confidence of its people, which has elected It
and invested it with its powers j its policies and activities are designed to meet the basic, the most vital and
essential interests of that people. The Indian representative affirmed quite rightly, by quoting the Press and a
number of other authoritative sources in support of his
:statement, that the Chinese People's Government works
better and more rapidly and in the best interests of the
people.

155. The Press, the testimony of members of various
non-communist parties who visited China, the testimony
<of outstanding authorities, all bear witness to the fact
that in the short space of tirnc since the overthrow of the
,anti-national regime, since the liberation of China from
the Kuomintang clique, the people's government has
done much to bring about social and economic reforms.
In a relatively brief period the people's government has
been able to improve the people's condition. Is that not
proof that it is truly a people's government? In a relatively brief period, the Chinese People's Government
has introduced a number of social and economic reforms
which will improve the condition of the Chinese people.
Because of this concern with its welfare, the Chinese people supports its Government's measures. The Chinese
people fully supports these progressive measures and is
successfully carrying them out.
156. It is strange to listen to the statement of the
representative of a small group which claims to represent a people; it is strange to listen to the statement
of the representative of a small group of wholly corrupt
politicians, of political intriguers who, thanks to the
inexcusable weakness of the permanent organ of the
United Nations, are still tolerated in om midst as
representatives of this group which represents no one.
157. My Government, like the governments of other
countries, cannot tolerate the presence of representatives of the Kuomintang group at this Assembly; for
that reason, the delegation of the Ukrainian SSR will
'Vote for the proposal made by the representative of the
Soviet Union, Mr. Vyshinsky, to the effect that the
Kuomintang group should not be permitted to act as

representatives at this session, and will support the
proposal that representatives of the tme People's Government of China, the government headed by Mao Tse ;
Tung, should be invited to ~ake the~r places. an:ong ~he
other delegations to the Dmted NatIOns begmmng WIth
the very first meeting of the General Assembly.
158. Mr. BELAUNDE (Peru) (translated from
Spanish) : After the humorous admonition of the Temporary President of the Assembly, it is obvious that
no speaker, however bold, dare make a lon~ speech.
I certainly am not going to do so. I wish slmply to ,
restore to its true path this debate which has gone
astray on account of the various interventions and
perhaps of the political opinions governing some of
them.
159. To come down to facts, I think there is one
point in the Indian draft resoluti?n w~ich we ~~n settle
at once. It is the paragraph readmg: Recognzzmg that
the Central Government of the People's Republic of
China is the only such government functioning in the
Republic of China as now constituted".
160, The Indian proposal gives the United Nations
the power of deciding on the status of a government
and upon the validity of the theory that that govern.
ment which is in practice discharging its functions Of,
as would be said in classic international law, is in con,
trol of the government machinery, should be called to
the Assembly.
161. I think that on that matter the Assembly cannot
enjoy separate competence or initiate, so ~o speak, a
conflict of jurisdiction with the States or WIth the governments of those States. It is obvious that the representation of a nation is, in some cases, theoretically at
least, distinct from the representation attributed to the
government, but normally a government represents a
nation.
162. We all know that according to the Charter of
the United Nations, the Chinese nation forms part of
the Organization. The problem is what govermnent
will represent. or is le?>"itimately or effectively rep.resenting the Chmese natIOn. The answer to the questIon
depends on the opinion of those governments which
maintain relations with China. If the nations decide 1Jy
a majm-ity, by a vast majority, or unanimously, tha~ a ,
certain government exercises such representatIOn With
respect to the United Nations, it is evident that this
Assembly would have no right to state that that government whatever its position, unless it were naturally
or politi~ally opposed to peace and national well-being,
had no right to form part of the Assembly.

163. But a very important fact has been mentioned
here by the United States Secretary of State. It is held,
by forty-three governments as against sixteen, that no
change has yet taken place in the representation of the
Chinese nation. In face of this incontrovertible fact
that of the nations which constitute the United Nations,
forty-three have not recognized the existing govem:
ment as the legitimate representative of the Chinese
nation, it is obvious that it would be imprudent for the
General Assembly of the United Nations, in opposition
to the opinion 01 those forty-three governments, to say
that the legitimate represel1tative of the Chinese natior
is the Government of the People's Republic. In mj
opinion, this argument is decisive because there cann()

-

277th Meeting-19 SeptembeJ: 1950

be a double competence. Who recognizes the body
representing a nation? It is recognized by those' governments which enter into relations with that nation or,
more correctly, with the government which undertakes
to represent it.
164. It would be absurd for the United Nations to
arrogate to itself one of the attributes of national sovereignty. The United Nations cannot even hypothetically assume the power of saying to governments that
it imposes on them the obligation of renouncing their
own judgment and· accepting its judgment that such
and such a government is really the representative of
a certain nation.
165. It is therefore my opinion on this point that the
Indian draft resolution, since it deals with a legal point,
does not require a subsequent reso~ution.
160. It can nevertheless be argued that it is never
useless to study matters more fully. In this sense it is
evident that the Canadian draft resolution, supported
by the Cuban and Syrian delegations, implies the possibility of further study of the problem by the Assembly.
167. If the Assembly decides to appoint a committee,
I suggest, with regard to suet]. study, that it is not
within the competence of the United Nations Assembly
to decide in each particular· case what government is
in control of the administrative machinery and what
'government is the effective representative of a specific
nation.
'

15

based on technical rather than on political considerations.
173. Certainly it is not possible today to separate
political from technical considerations; it is certain that
all of us, even those representatives who are not directly
involved in the question, are influenced by the emotion
of the moment; nevertheless, for the sake of the dignity
of the Assembly, it is right and proper that purely
juridical .and technical considerations should pl'evail
over political considerations.
174. Consequently the Peruvian delegation supports
the argument of the United States Secretary of State
to the effect that the non-recognition of the People's
Government of China by the majority of the United
Nations enables the Assembly to consider the proposals
of India and the USSR as improper and forthwith to
reject them. The Peruvian delegation, therefore, in
order to give greater force to the Assembly's decision,
will, as it has already indicated, vote in favour of the
Canadian draft resolution.
175.' The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: The debate
is closed, and we now have before us the proposal of
the Syrian delegation that the vote on this question
should be postponed until tomorrow. I shall submit this
proposal to the General Assembly.
The proposal was rejected by 21 votes to 16, with 13
abstentions.
1~6. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: The General Assembly has before it four draft resolutions and
168. As for other considerations, it is evident, from . one amendment. There is a draft resolution proposed
the argume!!t which has been presented here by other
by India; one proposed by Canada and two proposed
delegations, that the criterion of material control of the
by the USSR, and an amendment to the Canadian draft
government and recognition by even a majority of
resolution proposed by Australia. I propose to submit
other governments is not sufficient for a government.
these different drafts in the order in which they were
to be accepted as the representative of a country in the
received: first, that proposed by India; secondly, that
United Nations.
proposed by Canada; and then the two draft resolutions
.
proposed by the Soviet Union.
169. There is no doubt that the requirement laid down
in the Articles of Chapter III of the Charter refers to
177. We shall now vote on the draft resolution
the fulfilment of the chief international obligation,
presented by India [A/136S]; the delegation of the
which is support of the principles of the Charter. And
Soviet Union has requested a roll-call.
it is obvious that if we could give the United Nations
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Assembly the power to override the argument of
Costa Rica, having been drawn by lot by the Tempoincompetence which I submit with regard to the Indian
rary President, voted first.
proposal, we should have to examine the other point,
to which attention has also been called here; this conIn favour: Czechoslovakia, Denmark, India, Israel,
cerns'the evidence that the Government of the People?s • Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Poland, Sweden,
Republic of China has given or may give us with
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
respect to its collaboration in our policy of peace.
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Burma,
170. I wish to conclude this clarification of the matter
by saying that we could in fact settle the fundamental .Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic.
part' of the Indian proposal; nevertheless if the AssemAgainst: Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic,
bly should prefer that a more thorough· examination of
El Salvador, Ethiopia, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Icethe question should be made, I do not think that the
land, Iran, Iraq, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico, New
Credentials Committee is the competent body.
Zealand,' Nicaragua, Panama,' Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Thailand, Turkey, Union of South Africa,
171. It is true that the Credentials Committee can often
~
United
States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela,
give an opinion on a matter of substance; however, nor-.
Australia,
Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, China,
,tnally it confines itself to a statement to the effect that the
'Colombia.
I credentials are in order and it c.annot give an opinion on
such an important question of substance.
Abstaining: Ecuador, Egypt, France, Guatemala,
Lebanon,
Saudi Arabia, Syria, Yemen, Argentina,
172. If, therefore, the most important factor is time,
Canada.
the matter must obviously be referred to a committee
for thorough study. Moreover, the advantage of such a
The draft resolution was rejected by 33 votes to 16,
with 10 abstentions.
study would be that the Assembly's decision would be
I

I

I

I

16

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

178. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I shall now
put to the vote the .draft resolution presented by the
delegation of Canada [A/1368]. The Australian amendrtlent [A/1371] has been accepted by the Canadian
delegation.
179. Mr. VYSHINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) ( translated from Russian): The second
draft resolution was submitted by the USSR delegation.
180. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I beg to
differ. It was the Canadian draft resolution that was
submitted next.
181. A request has been made that we vote on the two
parts of the Canadian draft resolution separately. The
first part of the draft reads as follows:

((The General AssemblYI
((Taking note of differences of view concerning the
representation of China in the United Nations,
((Establishes a Special Committee consisting of the
President of the Assembly and six other representatives selected by the President to consider the question
of Chinese representation and to report back, with
recommendations, to the present session of the General Assembly, after the Assembly shall have considered item 62 of the provisional agenda (Cuban item)."
182. The Australian amendment [A/1371] is that,
in place of the words "the President of the Assembly
and six other representatives selected by the President",
there should be inserted the words "seven members nominated by the President and confirmed by the Assembly".
That amendment, as I have already indicated, has been
accepted by the Canadian delegation.
183. A vote will be taken on the first part of the
Canadian draft resolution as amended by Australia.
The first part was adopted by 38 votes to 61 with 11

abstentions.
184. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: The second

part of the Canadian draft resolution reads as follows:
((Resolves that, pending a decision by the General
Assembly on the report of this Special Committee,
the representatives of the National Government of
China shall be seated in the General Assembly with
the same rights as other representatives."
A vote will be taken on the second part.
The second part was adopted by 42 votes to 81 with

6 abstentions.
185. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: The Gen-

eral Assembly will now vote on the draft resolution presented by the delegation of the USSR [A/1369].
The draft resolution was rejected by 38 votes to 101
with 8 abstentions.
186. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: The General Assembly will now vote on the next draft resolution
presented by the delegation of the USSR [A/1370].
The draft resolu,·ion was rejected by 37 votes to 11 1

with 8 abstentions.
'187. Mr. QUEVEDO (Ecuador) (translated fro'm.
Spanish): The Government of my country maintains

relations with the Nationalist Government of China and
until now it considers that government to be the legiti-

mate government of China. Accordingly, if the Credentials Committee presents its report promptly, my delegation will vote in favour of recognizing the credentials
of that government.
.
188. Nevertheless, my country has felt that the question of the representation of China in the Assembly is
of such grave importance that this organ of the United
Nations should take cognizance thereof and that each
Member should be given ample opportunity to express
its opinion. The problem is most serious since it involves
a large part of the world's population and is a cause, of
a grave division of opinion among the Members.
189. For these reasons, my delegation was of the opinion that the Indian draft resolution should not be voted
on at this time, but should be referred fOf study, together
with the Canadian draft resolution, to a special committee, particularly since the Indian draft contains a
suggestion that the General Assembly should recommend to the other organs of the United Nations the.
proper method of dealing with the problem.
190. It was for this reason that my delegation abstained from voting on the Indian draft, which we fee~
merits closer study, and voted hi favour of the draft
resolution presented by Canada.
191. Mr. VYSHINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (tra'nslated from Russian) : The USSR delegation considers that the decision which has just been
taken to reject the draft resolutions of the USSR and
Indian delegation is wrong and illegal. No one can
doubt that the Central People's Government of China
is the true and only authorized government of the People's Republic of China and that, therefore, only persons
accredited by it can represent China, its people and the
People's Republic of China in this Assembly. The delegation of the Soviet Union considers that the decision
just taken against that proposal is both wrong and
illegal.
'

Appointment of the Credentials Committee

192. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: The first
step in the organization of the General Assembly is the
appointment of a Credentials Committee, as provided
in rule 28 of the rules of procedure. The committee is
composed of nine members which are appointed by the
General Assembly upon the proposal of the President.
In accorda,nce with the provisions of this rule, I propose for appointment by the General Assembly the fol.
lowing countries to serve as the Credentials Committee: ,
Belgium, Chile, India, Mexico, Thailand, Turkey, the
Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and t1;J.e United
States. Unless I hear any objection, I shall consider the
Committee so appointed.
I t was so decided.
Election of the President
193. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: The' next
item on the agenda is the election of the President of
the fifth session of the General Assembly. Rule 92 of
the rules of ,procedure requires that this election should
be held by secret ballot and that there should be no
nominations in connexidn with the election. We shall
therefore proceed immediately with the vote. Each delegation is requested to write on the ballot the name of the
person for whom the vote is cast.

17

277th Meeting-19 September 1950

....

A vote was taken by secret ballot.
At the invitation of the Temporary President, Faris
El-[(hour~ Bey (Syr~a) and Mr. G. P. !oo/.l'te (Unum
of South Africa) acted as tellers.
Number of ballot papers:
59
Invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
59
Abstentions:
0
Number of valid votes cast.·,
59
Required majority.'
30
lVumber of votes obtained:
Mr. Etrtezam (Iran),
32
Sir Mohammad Zafrulla Khan (Pakistan). 22
Mr. Siroky (Czechoslovakia)
4
Mr. Wierblowski (Poland)
,... 1
Mr. Nasrollah Entezam (Iran), having obtained the
required majority of the M embers present and voting,
was elected President of the fifth session of the General
Assembly, and took the Chair.
STATEMENT BY MR. NASROLLAH ENTEZAM, PRESIDENT
OF THE FIFTH SESSION

194. The PRESIDENT (translated from Frei ch) :
I wish, first of all, to express my deep appreciation of
the signal 'honour which has been conferred upon my
country through my election.
195. I am fully conscious of the difficulty of the task
before me, and of the heavy responsibility which has
been laid upon me. I can do no more than to promise
absolute impartiality and complete devotion to the cause
of the United Nations. In brief, I shall do all in my
power to merit your confidence, but I must beg you to
grant me your full and whole-hearted co-operation,
with01.tt which no President can hope to carry out his
miss';on successfully.

196. Although I have no desire to sound a note of
alarm at the beginning of this session, it is nevertheless
my duty to draw your attention to the gr?~V'ity of the
present situation. The aggressi~n which has tat\:en .place .
in Korea and the war now bemg fought there WIll, of
necessity, dominate our debates. It is reassuring to note
that the Security Council, even though the forces provided for in the Charter were not yet at its disposal,
has been able to shoulder its responsibilities; and it is
still more encouraging to note that its recommendations
have been supported by so strong a majority.
197. I cannot speak of these events without expressing our admiration and our gratitude to those who are
at present fighting, under the United Nations flag, for
the re-establishment of peace..I am sure that I speak
for all present here-and your applause encourages me
in this-in assuring these brave young fighters that we
shall do all in our power to enable them to return to
their homes at the earliest possible moment.
198. Although I have ventured to stress the gravity of
the interm.tional situation, it is not my wish to discourage you in any way. On the contrary, my purpose
is to recall the responsibilities which we shall be called
upon to assume towards the peoples whom we represent.
199. The United Nations' was created to preserve
peace and prevent war. We should be failing in our
duty if we did not succeed in saving the world from
tbe catastrophe which threatens it. It is my hope that
we shall not fail in that duty, and that your efforts will
make it possible for me, at the end of this session, to
announce to the peoples of the world that we have
achieved what was expected of us.
200. In that hope, I call upon the Assembly to begin
its work.
201. The next item on the agenda is the constitution
of the Main Committees and the election of officers. In
view of the lateness of the hour, however, I propose
that the meeting should be adjourned until tomorrow
at 10.30 a.m.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

.

Printed in U.S.A.

A-40464-September 1950-3,550
