ISO

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

39/196.

Economic Assistance to Haiti

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/ 194 of 17 December 1981, in
which it endorsed the Substantial New Programme of
Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries, 108
Recalling that Haiti is one of the least developed
countries and is therefore entitled to the assistance provided for in the relevant General Assembly resolutions for
the more intensive development of those countries,
Noting with concern that Haiti continues to face serious
economic and financial difficulties owing to the severe
constraints on the economy consequent upon the decline
in gross national product in real terms, the balance-of-payments deficit, the external debt and the budgetary deficit,
Deeply concerned at the complete collapse of the tourist
industry and the termination of bauxite mining consequent upon the exhaustion of reserves, two of the country's principal sources of foreign exchange,
Gravely concerned at the impoverishment of the rural
population resulting from the total elimination of the pig
population as a result of swine fever,
Bearing in mind the damage caused by cyclone "Allen"
in 1981 to a substantial area of Haiti's coffee plantations,
Taking into account that the Government of Haiti, in
view of the serious economic situation, has implemented,
with the assistance of the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank, an intensive economic and financial
stabilization programme,
I. Expresses its gratitude to Member States and to
international, regional and interregional organizations for
their assistance to Haiti;
2. Renews its urgent appeal to all Governments and
international organizations which, at the United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries, assumed
commitments under the Substantial New Programme of
Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries to
honour their pledges generously;
3. Urges Governments of Member States and international, regional, interregional and intergovernmental
organizations to increase and intensify their assistance to
Haiti substantially to help it cope with its economic and
financial difficulties and implement successfully its development plan for the biennium 1985-1986;
4. Invites all organizations and programmes of the
United Nations system, particularly the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Children's
Fund, the United Nations Fund for Population Activities,
the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the World Bank, the International Fund for
Agricultural Development and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, as well as the Department of Technical Co-operation for Development of the
Secretariat, to take account of Haiti's specific needs and to
apprise the Secretary-General of their decisions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To send a mission to Haiti to assess the priority
needs of the country, to prepare a programme for assisting
the country in coping with the present economic crisis and
to pursue its efforts to obtain supplementary international
assistance;
l08 R_eport of the United Nau ons ( ·onjerence on the Least Developed
Countries, Paris, 1-14 September 19/i/ (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.82.1.8), part one, sect. A

(b) To apprise the Economic and Social Council of the
mission at its second regular session of 1985 and to report
to the General Assembly at its fortieth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39 / 197. Assistance for the reconstruction and development of Lebanon
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/146 of 20 December 1978,
34/135 of 14 December 1979, 35/85 of5 December 1980,
36/205 of 17 December 1981, 37/163 of 17 December
1982, 38/220 of 20 December 1983 on assistance for the
reconstruction and development of Lebanon,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution
I 980/ I 5 of 29 April 1980 and decisions 1983/112 of 17
May I 983 and 1984/ 17 4 of 26 July I 984,
Noting with deep concern the continuing heavy loss of
life and the additional destruction of property, which have
caused further extensive damage to the economic and
social structures of Lebanon,
Also noting with concern the serious economic situation
in Lebanon,
Welcoming the determined efforts of the Government of
Lebanon in undertaking its reconstruction and rehabilitation programme,
Reaffirming the urgent need for further international
action to assist the Government of Lebanon in its continuing efforts for reconstruction and development,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General 109
and of the statement made on 6 November 1984 by the
United Nations Co-ordinator of Assistance for the Reconstruction and Development of Lebanon, 110
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his report and for the steps he has taken to mobilize
assistance to Lebanon;
2. Commends the United Nations Co-ordinator of
Assistance for the Reconstruction and Development of
Lebanon and his staff for their valuable and unstinting
efforts in the discharge of their duties;
3. Expresses its appreciation for the relentless efforts
undertaken by the Government of Lebanon in the implementation of the initial phase of reconstruction of the
country, despite adverse circumstances, and for the steps it
has taken to remedy the economic situation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue and
intensify his efforts to mobilize all possible assistance
within the United Nations system to help the Government
of Lebanon in its reconstruction and development efforts;
5. Requests the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to intensify their programmes of
assistance and to expand them in response to the needs of
Lebanon;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session
of 1985 and to the General Assembly at its fortieth session
on the progress achieved in the implementation of the
present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984
!09 A/39/390.
1IO See Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-ninth Sessior,,
\'rcond Committee, rth meeting. paras. 15-24.
