V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

of international economic co-operation and development in
a comprehensive and effective manner,
Recalling, in particular, section IV of the annex to resolution 32/197 on structures for regional and interregional
co-operation, through which the General Assembly designated the regional commissions, inter alia, as the main
general economic and social development centres within the
United Nations system for their respective regions,
Recalling also its resolution 35/64 of 5 December 1980
on special measures for the social and economic development of Africa in the 1980s,
Recalling further the Final Act of Lagos. 81 adopted by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its second extraordinary
session, devoted to economic matters, held at Lagos on 28
and 29 April 1980, which called, inter alia, for the establishment of a subregional common market by 1990 as the
first step towards the establishment of an African economic
community by the year 2000,
Taking note of resolution 311 (XIII) adopted on I March
1977 by the Conference of Ministers of the Economic Commission for Africa, 82 by which the Conference decided to
establish a certain number of Multinational Programming
and Operational Centres at the subregional level,
Bearing in mind that the Multinational Programming and
Operational Centres have become an integral part of the
Economic Commission for Africa, through which the Commission effectively carries out its terms of reference not
only with regard to studies, research, the organization of
meetings and consultations but also with regard to its operational activities as an executing agency,
Emphasizing the importance of the activities of the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres for the
African countries and the need for substantial and adequate
financial and human resources to sustain those activities,
I. Calls upon the Secretary-General urgently to seek
to provide extrabudgetary resources to enable all the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres to carry
out in 1982, at the subregional level, their work programme
in the field of general programming, research, studies and
the organization of meetings;
2. Welcomes the financial support which the United
Nations Development Programme has extended to the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres since their
inception and urges the Administrator of the Programme to
continue with this essential support to the operational activities of the Centres during the third programming cycle,
1982-1986, of the Programme;
3. Calls upon other organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system, as well as intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations, to render their fullest
support to the activities of the Multinational Programming
and Operational Centres;
. 4. Invites the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and the Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa, to submit to the Economic and Social
Council, at its second regular session of 1982, a report on
the financing of the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres on an established basis;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution.
103rd plenary meetinr<
17 December /9R/
81 A/S-11/14,

82

annex II.

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. Sixr.v-third

Session, Supplement No. 7, vol. I (E/5941 ). part Ill.

36/179.

Interrelationships between resources, environment, people and development
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Director-General for
Development and International Economic Co-operation on
interrelationships between resources, environment. people
and development, 8 '
Conscious of the interrelationships between resources,
environment, people and development, as noted in the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, 84
Recognizing that the application of existing knowledge
concerning those interrelationships could lead to a more
efficient use of available resources in the United Nations
system,
Recalling its resolution 35174 of 5 December 1980, in
paragraph 5 of which it requested the Secretary-General_ to
take the requisite steps for implementation of a system-wide
programme of work on the interrelationships between resources, environment, people and development,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions 1981/
51 of ~2 July I 981 and 1981/73 of 24 July 1981,
Aware that the formulation and implementation, at the
national level, of policies and strategies in the fields of
resources, environment, people and development fall within
the prerogative of Governments,
I. Requests the Director-General for Development and
International Economic Co-operation:
(a) To initiate implementation of a co-ordinated multidisciplinary programme of work on interrelationships between resources. environment, people and development, as
outlined in his report, 8 -' and within this framework the recommendations on this subject of the Governing Council of
the United Nations Environment Programme 85 and of the
Economic and Social Council; 80
(b) Urgently to consult Governments on the elements
contained in his report, as he proceeds in the implementation
of the above-mentioned programme of work;
2. Supports the arrangements proposed by the DirectorGeneral for Development and International Economic Cooperation for interagency consultations and programme
support in the implementation of the programme of work,
as well as the establishment of a small advisory body, to
be financed through the trust fund which has been established for financing activities concerning interrelationships
between resources, environment, people and development,
to assist him in the over-all guidance of the programme of
work and to oversee the operation of the trust fund;
3. Appeals to Governments to contribute to the trust
fund;
4. Decides to review at its thirty-eighth session the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December 198/
36/180.

Special measures for the social and economic
development of Africa in the 1980s
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
I May 1974. containing the Declaration and the Programme

"' A/36/571. annex.
"' Resolution 35/56. annex. para. 41.
" See Official Records 11( the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session,
Supplement No. 25 (A/.\6/25 and Corr. I). annex I, decision 9/1, sect. IL
"" See Economk and '>ocial Coundl resolution 1981173 of 24 July 198 I.
