148

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

composition of the Secretariat and resolution 3416
(XXX) on the employment of women in the Secretariat
has been limited,
Reaffirming that the considerations of efficiency, competence and integrity in the employment of staff, as
laid down in Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations, do not conflict with the principle
of an equitable geographical distribution in the composition of the Secretariat,
Concerned that the reforms of personnel policy approved by the General Assembly are proceeding too
slowly,
Recognizing that the highest standards of efficiency,
competence and integrity are not exclusively restricted
to nationals of any particular Member State or group
of Member States,
Reaffirming that the principle of equitable geographical distribution should be applied to the Secretariat as
a whole and that, to this end, no post, individual department, division or unit in the Secretariat should be
considered as the exclusive preserve of any individual
Member State or any region,
Desirous of strengthening the role of the Office of
Personnel Services of the Secretariat in the implementation of the numerous resolutions adopted on this
rmbject,
Convinced that to achieve the objectives and goals
of the United Nations, especially with regard to the
new international economic order, the developing countries should be adequately represented at all levels in
the Secretariat and, in particular, at the senior levels,
1. Adopts:
(a) The new method of establishing the desirable
ranges of posts for Member States as described in paragraph 11 of the report of the Secretary-General on
the composition of the Secretariat;35
( b) The new desirable range of 2 to 7, as proposed
by the Secretary-General in paragraph 14 of his report,
for Member States with the minimum assessment in
the apportionment of United Nations expenses, thus
providing for a wider distribution of posts in the Secretariat;
2. Reaffirms its resolution 3417 A (XXX) and
requests the Secretary-General, in the implementation
of that resolution, to take effective measures, either by
recruitment or promotion, or both, to increase the
number of staff from all developing countries in senior
and policy-making posts in the Secretariat so as to
ensure their appropriate representation at those levels;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to give priority
to the recruitment of candidates from among nationals
of unrepresented and under-represented Member 1States;
4. Urges the Secretary-General to increase his
efforts to attract younger people to the service of the
United Nations, thus increasing the proportion of youth
and achieving a better age balance in the Secretariat;
5. Urges Member States to intensify their efforts
to seek and to put forward for consideration qualified
women candidates for Professional positions, particularly
at the policy-making level, within the United Nations
and specialized agencies, in order to improve the proportion of women in senior positions within the context
of equitable geographical distribution;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure,
through all appropriate measures, equal opportunity

for the promotion of women in the Secretariat, without any discrimination based on sex;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to appoint
as soon as possible a panel to investigate allegations of
discriminatory treatment and to recommend appropriate
action;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to provide the General Assembly at its thirty-third session
with precise data showing the result of his efforts to
realize the objectives of the present resolution.
81st plenary meeting
29 November 1976
31/27.

Implementation of personnel policy reforms

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision at the twenty-ninth session
authorizing the Secretary-General to proceed with the
implementation of the proposals for the improvement
of the personnel policies and practices of the United
Nations contained in his report and requesting him to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session
on the progress made in the implementation of those
proposals, 89
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the progress made up to 30 June 1976•0 and
the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the implementation of the personnel policy reforms approved by the
General Assembly in 1974/1
Concerned about the slow pace of the implementation of those reforms,
Taking note of the statement that, in the opinion of
the Secretary-General, the reforms should be substantially put into effect in 1977 and 1978,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary steps to accelerate the implementation of the
above-mentioned reforms;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session a report
on the application of his proposals, drawing attention
in particular to any of those proposals that may not
yet have been fully implemented.
81 st plenary meeting
29 November 1976
31/93.

Medium-term plan

The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant recommendations of the Ad
Hoe Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances of
the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies/2
Recalling also its resolutions 3199 (XXVIII) of
18 December 1973, 3392 (XXX) of 20 November
1975 and 3534 (XXX) of 17 December 1975,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolutions 2008 (LX) of 14 May 1976 and 2019 (LXI)
of 3 August 1976,
39 Ibid.,

Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/9631),

p. 139, item 81, para. (c) (i) and (ii).
40 A/C.5/31/9.
41 A/31/264 and Corr. I.
42 Official Records of the

General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes. agenda item 80, document A/6343.

VIII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the .Fifth Commillcc

Having considered the medium-term plan for the
period 1978-1981, 43 chapter III, section H, and chapter VII, section A, of the report of the Economic and
Social Council, 44 the report of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination on the work of its sixteenth
session,45 the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the mediumterm plan, 46 the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the major recommendations of the
Joint Inspection Unit on medium-term planning in the
United Nations system, 47 the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 3534 (XXX) 48 and the related report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 49
Conscious of the need for further harmonization of
programmes throughout the United Nations system,
Aware of the usefulness of the medium-term plan as
an instrument for effective co-ordination of the activities of the United Nations system,
Aware also of the respective roles of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council in coordinating decisions taken by sectoral and regional
bodies, while providing over-all guidance, determining
policy lines and indicating areas of priority,
Recalling that the need to improve and strengthen
the evaluation process as part of planning, programming
and budgeting has been recognized since the issue of
the report of the Ad Hoe Committee of Experts to
Examine the Finances of the United Nations and the
Specialized Agencies,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the mediumterm plan for the period 1978-1981 and accepts it in
the light of the recommendations and conclusions contained in the reports of the Committee for Programme
and Co-ordination and the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions as the framework for the preparation of the programme budget for
the biennium 1978-1979;
2. Urges each organization within the United
Nations system to plan its activities, bearing in mind
the related programmes planned or being carried out
in other parts of the system;
3. Decides that the future medium-term plans of
the United Nations should be prepared according to
the following procedure:
(a) The draft medium-term plans proposed by
the Secretary-General should embody:
(i) A short statement on directions that United
Nations activities should take in the medium
term;
(ii) A set of documents in which each major programme, developed in accordance with legislative decisions, is presented in a consolidated
manner;
(iii) The following financial information:
a. Any approved allocations in the current
regular budget;
4 3 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 6A (A/31/6/
Add. l and Corr.2-5).
44 Ibid., Supplement No. 3 (A/31/3).
45 [bid., Supplement No. 38 (A/31/38).
4 6A/31/139.
47 A/C.5/31/15.
48 A/C.5/31127.
49 A/31/326.

149

The actual extrabudgetary expenditure for
the preceding year or biennium;
c. Estimates, in percentage terms only, of
the proportion of each programme's allocations during the planning period that
the Secretary-General intends to devote
to each subprogramme;
d. Indications of the time-phasing of planned
activities as far as practicable, by programme, subprogramme and programme
element;
e. As appropriate and in so far as possible,
approximate amounts allocated or expended (as in a. and b. above) on related activities by other organs of the
United Nations system;
(iv) Preliminary and approximate indications of
future costs under the regular budget and from
extrabudgetary resources for the plan as a
whole and by major programmes which would
neither constitute ceilings nor be binding upon
Member States;
( v) Appropriate information on how proposed
United Nations programmes would relate to
activities of other organizations of the United
Nations system;
(b) The medium-term plan will be considered by
the General Assembly in the light of the comments and
recommendations of the Economic and Social Council,
the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions following the procedures adopted by
the Economic and Social Council in its decision 139
(ORG-76) of 15 January 1976;
(c) After approval by the General Assembly, the
medium-term plan will constitute the principal policy
directive of the United Nations which:
(i) States the medium-term objectives to be attained in a four-year period;
(ii) Describes the strategy to be followed to that
effect and the means of action to be used;
(iii) Gives an indicative estimate of the necessary
resources in over-all terms and by major
programme;
b.

4. Endorses the remaining recommendations of the
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination not covered in paragraph 3 above and expresses appreciation
for the comments thereon of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take measures to involve more closely the sectoral, functional and
regional programme-formulating organs in the planning and programming process;
6. Urges those organs to refrain from undertaking
new activities not programmed in the medium-term plan
and the subsequent programme budget unless a pressing
need of an unforeseeable nature arises as determined
by the General Assembly;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure compliance with the planning and programme-budgeting
procedure referred to above;
8. Reaffirms that supplementary estimates for
expansion of existing activities or initiation of new

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

150

programmes will be considered only after specific
approval of the General Assembly;
9. Reaffirms its resolution 3534 (XXX) and
stresses the responsibility of the Secretary-General to
draw to the attention of the competent intergovernmental bodies activities that are obsolete, of marginal
usefulness or ineffective, indicating the resources which
could be released so that the bodies concerned may
take the necessary action;
10. Decides that the Committee for Programme
and Co-ordination shall function as the main subsidiary
organ of the Economic and Social Council and the
General Assembly for planning, programming and coordination and approves the consolidated terms of reference as set out in Economic and Social Council resolution 2008 (LX);
11. Instructs the Committee for Programme and
Co-ordination in particular:
(a) To review in depth, on a selective basis, the
major programmes of the plan and to recommend any
necessary amendments to the Economic and Social
Council and the General Assembly;
( b) To determine which programmes, subprogrammes or programme elements are obsolete, of marginal usefulness or ineffective and to recommend, as
appropriate, their curtailment or termination;
( c) To assess the degree of substantive co-ordination of selected programmes within the United
Nations system and to recommend the appropriate action thereon;
12. Further decides that, in order to encourage
Member States to be represented at a high level of expertise and to ensure the continuity of their representation in the body whose central role and over-all responsibilities are recognized, the Organization shall bear
from 1978 onwards, for an experimental period and
subject to review by the General Assembly at its thirtyfourth session, as a special exception to the basic principles set out in paragraph 2 of Assembly resolution 1798 (XVII) of 11 December 1962 concerning
the payment out of United Nations funds of travel and
subsistence expenses to members of organs and subsidiary organs of the United Nations, the travel (on the
basis of economy class) and subsistence expenses ( at
standard rates applicable to officials of the Secretariat
plus 15 per cent) of one representative of each Member State on the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
98th plenary meeting
14 December 1976

31/94.

Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations with the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered with appreciation the reports of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions relating to administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations with the specializ.ed agencies and the International Atomic Energy

Agency 50 and to co-ordination questions in the activities of the United Nations Environment Programme/ 1
Concerned with the growing need for effective administrative and budgetary co-ordination within the
framework of the United Nations system,
1. Concurs with the observations and comments of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in the above-mentioned reports;
2. Refers to the organizations concerned the observations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in its reports
and brings the report on co-ordination questions in the
activities of the United Nations Environment Programme51 specifically to the attention of the Governing
Council of the Programme;
3. Refers the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on coordination questions 51 to the Committee on Programme
and Co-ordination in connexion with the decision of
that Committee to consider in depth environment programmes at its seventeenth session in 1977;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to refer to the
executive heads of the organizations of the United
Nations system, through the Administrative Committee
on Co-ordination, matters arising out of the abovementioned reports and the related discussion in the
Fifth Committee which call for their attention and
necessary action, in particular the question of rotation
of staff;
5. Transmits those reports to the Board of Auditors,
to the members of the Panel of External Auditors and
to the Joint Inspection Unit for their information;
6. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to continue to supplement, as appropriate, the annual reports on administrative and budgetary co-ordination with reports on
specific problems, taking into account the suggestions
made in this respect during the discussions in the Fifth
Committee.

98th plenary meeting
14 December 1976
B

The General Assembly,
Considering the rapidly expanding applications of
electronic data processing techniques to information
systems and data banks throughout the United Nations
system, their potential value in accelerating the implementation and co-ordination of important programmes, particularly in the field of economic and
social development, and the importance of ensuring
efficient use of available resources,
1. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to provide policy advice and recommendations on the administrative coordination of electronic data processing and information
systems in the United Nations organizations; in carrying out this task, the Advisory Committee should identify and focus on major issues that will help to increase
the benefit from the expanding applications of elec50 A/31/233

5 1 A/31/227.

and Add. I.
