UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

.RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

MEETING:

10 MAY. 1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2537). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . .

1

Adoptionofthe

1

agenda.................................................

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/165 14). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

SlPV .2537

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2537th
Held in New York

MEETING

on Thursday,

President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

chuluun (Mongolia),
Mrs. Noriega (Panama), Mr. St.
Aimee (Saint Lucia), Mr. Wijewardane (Sri Lanka),
Mr. Al-Atassi (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Golob
(Yugoslavia) and Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
Adoption

2.

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16514)
The meeting

2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter from the representative of the
German Democratic Republic in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

agenda (S/Agenda/2537)

1.

of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ott (German
Democratic Republic) took the place reserved for him
at the side of the Council chamber,

was called to order at 12 noon.
Adoption

10 May 1984, at 10.30 a.m.

of the agenda

3. The .PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
The Security Council will now resume its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The first speaker is the representative of Panama. I invite her to take a place at the
Council table and to make her statement.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16514)

4. Mrs. NORIEGA
(Panama) [interpretation
from
Spanish]: I thank the members of the Security Council
for having permitted me to speak. I wish first to say how
pleased my delegation is to see you, Sir, as President
of the Council for the month of May; we congratulate
you on your assumption of that office. It gives me
personal pleasure to be making my first statement before this body at a time when it is presided over by
such a worthy representative,
whose acknowledged
prestige, valuable experience, tact and ability promise
even-handedness and success in the Council’s deliberations and in its fulfilment of its vital responsibilities.
At the same time, I take this opportunity to convey to
the representative of the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist
Republic, Mr. Vladimir Kravets, our satisfaction at the
competence and efficiency with which he guided the
Council’s work in April.

1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings on this item [253Zst to 2536th meetings],
I invite the representatives
of Cyprus, Greece and
Turkey to take places at the Council table; I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and
Barbuda, Australia, Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Ecuador, Guyana, Hungary, Jamaica, Mongolia, Panama, Saint Lucia, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Yugoslavia and Viet Nam to take the places,
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Iacovou (Cyprus), Mr. Dountas (Greece) and Mr. Kirca (Turkey)
took places at the Council table; Mr. Zartf (Afghanistan), Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria), Mr. Jacobs (Antigua
and Barbuda), Mr. Woolcott (Australia), Mr. Wasiuddin (Bangladesh), Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Zumbado Jime’nez (Costa Rica), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba),
Mr. Albornoz
(Ecuador),
Mr. Karran (Guyana),
Mr. Rdcz (Hungary), Mr. Carr (Jamaica), Mr. Erdene-

5; From the outset, my Government has closely followed the development of the events which have now
impelled the President of the Republic of Cyprus to
make his urgent appeal for the Security Council, as the
primary guarantor of international peace and security,
1

to consider and resolve, as a matter of urgency,
serious situation in that small Republic.

the

10. The right to survival claimed today by the Republic of Cyprus is a right which we all share and which
we too can claim for ourselves at some time. The grave
situation in Cyprus is a challenge, in the final analysis,
to the integrity and effectiveness of the Charter of the
United Nations. We must not forget that the United
Nations is all and each of our countries.

6. It would be redundant for us to repeat or to endorse
facts and actions which have already been set before
the Council and other relevant representative bodies of
the community of nations. But we note with alarm and
concern that while there has been recourse to the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations for settling disputes between countries peacefully and for redressing violations of clear norms of international law,
the necessary political will of the countries involved to
achieve positive, tangible results has been lacking.

11. In conclusion, I should like to quote the thoughts
of John Donne as expressed in one of his best-known
works: “if a clod be washed away by the sea, Europe
is the less, as well as if a promontory were . . . and
therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls; it
tolls for thee.”

7. We believe that the de&to
situation in Cyprus,
brought about by occupation by foreign troops and
gradually exacerbated by a unilateral attempt to split
the territory and community of Cyprus in two, places
in jeopardy the fundamental right of a small country
devoid of military- might to sovereignty, territorial
integrity, internal unity and its own identity within the
community of nations.

12. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of the German
Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
13. Mr. OTT (German Democratic Republic): It gives
me great pleasure to extend to you, Oleg Aleksandrovich Troyanovsky, m&t cordial congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May. Your great political
and diplomatic skills, your long-standing and persistent
activity for the strengthening of peace and international
security and your devotion to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations are the guarantee that
you, as the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, with which my country is linked by fraternal bonds, will successfully guide the responsible
work of this body during this month. The delegation of
the German Democratic Republic would also like to
congratulate the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic,
Vladimir
Alexeyevich
Kravets,
who ,with great diplomatic
skill directed the complicated work of this Council during the previous month.

8. As a small country vulnerable to incursions from
stronger countries, a friend of the people and Govemment of Cyprus, a member of the group of non-aligned
countries, of which the. sister Republic of Cyprus is a
founding member, and ‘as a country which signed and
respects the Charter of the United Nations, we wish to
reaffirm the solidarity of the Government of Panama
with the Republic of Cyprus and its Government in the
just claim they are now reiterating before the Council.
That support confirms the position taken at the thirtyseventh session of the General Assembly on 5 October
1982, at the 18th meeting, by Mr. Jorge E. Illueca-then
Vice-President
of Panama and now President of our
country and of the General Assembly itself-a position
which was reiterated in the Assembly on 12 May 1983,
at the 119th meeting, by Mr. Carlos Ozores Typaldos,
then representative of Panama to the United Nations
and now Vice-President
of our country, We support
Security Council resolutions 365 (1974), 367 (1975)
and 541 (1983), and the Declarations of the Seventh
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March 1983,
which expressed support for the people and Govemment of the Republic of Cyprus and respect for the
independence,
unity and non-aligned status of that
country.

14. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic also thanks the members of the Council for
giving us the opportunity to explain here our country’s
point of view on the question of Cyprus. We support the
convocation of the Council at the request of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus in connection with
the serious situation existing on the island as ajustified
measure to counter any further aggravation of the tensions. Indeed, the worsening of the crisis in Cyprus
constitutes an extremely serious threat to peace and
security in the region and to world peace in general.

9. My delegation expresses its deep appreciation of
and admiration for the praiseworthy efforts made by the
Secretary-General
in the difficult missions entrusted to
him. We also reiterate our confidence in the ability of
the supreme organs of the United Nations to resolve
this conflict, and especially of this Council, whose decisions-both
those I have mentioned and the one it will
be taking shortly-should
be observed immediately by
the parties to the conflict. This will be the most effective
way of promoting and preserving peaceful coexistence
among countries.

15. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic appeals urgently to the Security Council to fulfil
its responsibility
for the maintenance of international
peace and security and to initiate measures to prevent a
further aggravation of the situation and form a starting
point for the resumption of efforts aimed at achieving a
negotiated solution of the question of Cyprus.
16. The Government
of the German Democratic
Republic and its delegation to the United Nations have
on various occasions time and again made it clear that
2

’

the German Democratic Republic stands resolutely in
favour of preserving the independence,
sovereignty,
territorial integrity and non-aligned status of the Republic of Cyprus. We decisively oppose all actions
which undermine those principles and are directed at
the division of Cyprus. Such separatist acts undertaken
over the past few months in that part of the territory
of Cyprus which is under foreign military occupation
exacerbate the situation on the island and make it
harder to achieve a peaceful settlement of the problems through negotiations.

21. It is now time finally to comply with the Cypriot
people’s wish for peace, security and independence.
There is only one way to do this, namely by way of
negotiations.
The Foreign Minister of the German
Democratic Republic signed on behalf of our country
the communique of the meeting of the Committee of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the States Parties to the
Warsaw Treaty held last month at Budapest, in which
the following reference is made to the solution of international conflicts:

17. The General Assembly and Security Council have
repeatedly made clear demands and put forth proposals
for the achievement of a solution of the question of
Cyprus. Last year, in resolution 541 (1983), the Security Council called upon all States to respect the
sovereignty,
independence,
territorial
integrity and
non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus and not to
recognize any Cypriot State .other than the Republic,
and it called upon all States and the two communities in
Cyprus to refrain from any action which might exacerbate the situation. How is it then possible that the
demands contained in that resolution and other decisions on the question of Cyprus adopted by the United
Nations, as well as the efforts of the Secretary-General,
can simply be ignored?

“The narticinants
in the meeting stressed the
immutability
of-the principled courseof their States
at eliminating
the existing centres of tension and
armed conflicts all over the world and at preventing
the emergence of new ones, and at settling all the
international
disputes by peaceful means, through
talks. They reiterated their solidarity with the peoples fighting for freedom, independence and social
progress, for economic development and against the
policy of imperialist aggression, colonialism and racism.” [See S/16504, annex.]
22. Regarding the solution of the question of Cyprus,
this means reversing the unilateral division of Cyprus
and carrying on constructive negotiations on the basis
of relevant United Nations decisions. The German
Democratic Republic will in the future also support all
decisions and measures to this end. The just struggle of
the people of Cyprus against imperialist oppression and
interference from outside will continue to have the
support of the German Democratic Republic.

18. Even the crocodile tears shed in well-known
imperialist quarters over the deplorable developments
in Cyprus cannot veil the fact that the answer to this
question has to be found within the wider context of the
imperialist policy of aggression and domination. Those
in imperialist quarters, above all in the United States of
America, which declares the whole region of the Mediterranean and the Middle East to be a so-called zone of
vital interest, are in no way interested in settling the
question of Cyprus through negotiations, respecting the
non-alignment of Cyprus and, as demanded by Spyros
Kyprianou, the President of Cyprus, demilitarizing
the
island.

23. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus, Mr. George
Iacovou, has asked to speak. I welcome him and invite
him to make his statement.
24. Mr. IACOVOU
(Cyprus): As this is the first time
that I have spoken in this debate, Sir, I should like to
extend to you my warmest congratulations
on your
assumption of the high office of President of the Security Council for the month of May. It is a source -of
pleasure for us that the presidency of this body is
occupied by the representative of the USSR, a friendly
country with which we enjoy very close and friendly
relations. Your vast diplomatic experience, your talent
and your charm already augur well’for the successful
deliberations
of the Council. I would also like to
express my appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Kravets of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, for the
excellent manner in which he guided the work of the
Council in the month of April.

19. The concentration of huge naval forces, the establishment of more and more new military bases, the
establishment of so-called rapid deployment forces, the
persistent stirring up of tensions and the destabilization
of Governments and States, as well as the stationing
of new American nuclear missiles in Western Europe
-which,
by the way, could also become operational
against the Mediterranean
and the Middle East region-are
part and parcel of the imperialist policy of
threat and war.
20. Only recently a devastating defeat was inflicted in
the Middle East region upon those imperialist factions
and the establishment of an imperialist military bridgehead in Lebanon was prevented. The question is rightfully asked whether the old intention of transforming
the island of Cyprus into an “unsinkable
aircraft carrier” is now to be turned into a reality using all available
means. Are the imperialist military bases on Cyprus to
be preserved and new ones set up by leaving the question of Cyprus permanently open?

25. Even while the Council is considering the grave
situation in Cyprus resulting from the continuous violations of its mandatory resolution 541 (1983) and
studying ways to reverse them, the Turkish side is
warning this body that it will continue with further
illegalities in order to consolidate the secessionist act of
15 November 1983. On 3 May 1984, the day the Council
was convened [253Zst meeting], we read statements by
3

the Turkish Cypriot leadership to the effect that “in the
search for a Cyprus solution the return of Varosha to
the Greek Cypriots is impossible”.

results of the invasion by importing tens of thousands of
settlers from Turkey, to whom they have illegally distributed the properties of the forcibly expelled refugees
by issuing so-called title deeds to these properties, by
abolishing the Cyprus pound and replacing it by the
Turkish lira, by establishing a so-called central bank
and by other fairs accomplis.

26. A few days earlier it was publicly declared that the
illegal regime in the occupied area was planning to open
part of the new town of Famagusta to settlement by
persons other than its inhabitants, thus, in the context
of recent developments, adding insult to injury. Even
now, today, while the Council is meeting, threats of the
settlement of Varosha continue unabated. There are
reports in today’s Turkish Cypriot newspapers that
with the incitement
of the Turkish leadership, the
occupation of houses in the new city of Varosha has
already begun.

3 1. Turkey is solely responsible for what is happening
in the occupied part of Cyprus, in fact and in law.
Turkey continues to exercise actual and exclusive
authority over this area. The occupied area is saturated
with Turkish troops; there is one soldier for every four
members of the population, including women and children. If one takes into account also the settlers from
Turkey, then the proportion is one Turk from Turkey to
every two members of the Turkish Cypriot community.
It is thus impossible for any independent action to be
taken by the Turkish Cypriots. The Turkish Cypriot
leadership in fact expresses the will and policy of Turkey. That leadership is no more than a political fig-leaf
covering the body of aggression. A persuasive statement made by Mr. Denktag himself speaks for itself:
“Whether I believe it or not, whether I consider it right
or not, I do whatever Turkey says.” That is taken from
the 5 October 1982 edition of Yeniduzen.

27. Equally serious, indeed potentially dangerous, is
Turkey’s and the Turkish Cypriot leadership’s intention to change the status, function or deployment of
the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP).
This was quite evident from their refusal
to concur in the renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP
last December,
28. Determined to have a free military hand, Turkey
and the Turkish Cypriot leadership, in mid-December
1983, refused to concur with resolution 544 (1983),
which extended UNFICYP’s
mandate. Even after the
Council adopted that resolution,
Mr. DenktaS declared his rejection of that mandatory resolution and
made it known that at a later stage he would interfere with UNFICYP’s
modus operandi and deployment in Cyprus. On 17 March 1984 Mr. Denktas again
threatened to prevent the extension of UNFICYP’s
mandate if the Council or the General Assembly passed
another resolution
in favour, as he said, of the
Greek Cypriots. As recently as 20 April Mr. Denktag was making menacing noises about the extension
of UNFICYP’s
mandate if my Government were to
approach the Security Council again.

32. The European Commission of Human Rights, an
international
body of distinguished European jurists,
after considering the case of Cyprus v. Turkey on violations of the human rights of Cypriots by Turkey, held
that sole control over the Turkish occupying forces is
vested in the Government of Turkey and that its presence in the occupied area engages Turkey’s intemational responsibility
in respect of all persons or
property over which they exercise control. That
appears in the report of the Commission in the case of
Cyprus v. Turkey, 10 July 1976, page 32; in the decision of 10 July 1978 on the admissibility
of Application
No. 8007177; and in the report on Application No. 80071
77, paragraphs 21 and 22. That same report found Turkey guilty of crimes and of flagrantly violating the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of the people
of Cyprus.

29. The presence and unhindered functioning
of
UNFICYP
are essential to the maintenance of peace
and security. Threats against UNFICYP
are threats
against the quest for a peaceful solution of the Cyprus
problem. The withdrawal of UNFICYP
is likely to lead
to incidents along the cease-fire line, possibly ending in
a major conflagration. The threats against UNFICYP
thus constitute a potential threat to international peace
and security in the area.

33. Turkey and the Turkish Cypriot leadership are
now in blatant breach of Council resolution 541 (1983).
They have ignored paragraph 2, calling for the withdrawal of the declaration of the purported secession;
they have ignored paragraph 3, calling for urgent and
effective implementation
of the Council’s earlier resolutions 365 (1974) and 367 (1975); they have acted contrary to paragraphs 4 and 5 by frustrating the SecretaryGeneral’s mission of good offices and effectively declining to co-operate; and they have breached paragraph 6 by violating the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. Turkey has ignored
paragraph 7 by formally recognizing, by its “ambassadorial exchange”,
the so-called Turkish Republic
of Northern Cyprus. Both Turkey and the Turkish
Cypriot leadership have trampled on paragraph 8 by
repeatedly taking new and yet further actions leading to

30. Today, almost 10 years after the Turkish invasion
and the occupation of 37 per cent of the territory of the
Republic of Cyprus by Turkish troops, the situation is
more critical than ever. The Turkish occupation forces
are still on our soil, in violation of the Charter and
the resolutions of the United Nations. Not one of the
200,000 Greek Cypriot refugees has been allowed to
return to his home and lands. The fate of missing persons remains unascertained. Over this period Turkey
and its organs in the occupied area have systematically
pursued their plans to consolidate the division and the
4

the exacerbation
Cyprus.

and deterioration

of the situation

in

not my intention to go into a long presentation of the
many well-known facts. A sample of such facts must
suffice.

34. Turkey’s recent conduct in establishing a puppet
State and formally recognizing
its so-called Government reveals the threadbare character of the justification given by Turkey for its 1974 invasion of the
Republic of Cyprus. Its claims no longer have a shred
of plausibility.
Indeed, Turkey is in material breach
not only of the 1960 treaties specific to Cyprus but
also of the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations-annexed
to General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV)-and
the principles embodied in
the Helsinki Final Act, to which it is a signatory. In
addition, under article 3 (e) of the 1974 Definition of
Aggression-in
the annex to General Assembly resolution 33 14 (XXIX)-it
is guilty of aggression against the
Republic of Cyprus by virtue of the use of its armed
forces within the territory of the Republic in contravention of the peremptory norms of international law and
the conditions provided for by the Treaty of Guarantee.

38. Mr. Emin Dirvana, the first ambassador of Turkey
to Cyprus-a legal ambassador to the Republic of Cyprus-in an interview given to the Turkish newspaper
Milliyet on 15 December 1964 revealed Turkish tactics
when he spoke clearly about
“the irresponsibility
of the extremist terrorist Turkish Cypriot leadership in Cyprus, which disregards
the true interests of the Turkish community and concentrates on promoting division and friction between
the two communities”.
39. Let Mr. Dirvana now speak about the first bloody
incidents in Cyprus-before
independence. The following statement by him was also published in Milliyet:
“I was informed that on 7 June a bomb had been
planted in the Turkish Press Office in Nicosia by
persons who, as was established later, had nothing to
do with the Greek Cypriots. The Turks of Nicosia
were then incited ‘to be overwhelmed by holy indignation’ and perpetrated acts similar to those committed on 6 and 7 September in Istanbul.”

35. Turkey is in breach of Article 2, paragraph 4, of
the Charter of the United Nations by virtue of its use
of force against the territorial integrity of the Republic
of Cyprus and in a manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations, and in particular by its
lack of respect for and nonobservance of human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as
to race, language or religion, as required by Article 55 of
the Charter.

40. Mr. Fazil Ktictik,
the Turkish Cypriot VicePresident of Cyprus, wrote the following in his newspaper Hulkin Sesi, on 29 February 1964, describing the
events of 1963:
“The Greeks are in a state of distress in the full sense
of the word. Starting from Nicosia, in all clashes the
Greeks suffered great losses, but they did not give the
casualty figures. The Turkish fighters have pledged
to tight on until the realization of partition. The attitude of the Turkish minority has been admittedly one
of provoking division and instigating armed conflict
with the aim of partition.”

36. Ankara’s plans against Cyprus are becoming more
and more manifest every day. Its deeds speak louder
than its words. In order, allegedly, to provide security
to the Turkish Cypriots, Turkey invaded Cyprus, violated its independence,
sovereignty and territorial
integrity, occupied almost 37 per cent of its territory
and in the process eliminated a high percentage of its
population,
at the same time uprooting from their
homes and lands in the occupied area almost twice as
many Greek Cypriots as the total Turkish Cypriot
population of the whole of Cyprus. Of course, the
Greek Cypriots, who represent 80 per cent of the total
population of Cyprus, have, according to this reasoning, no rights whatsoever to be respected by Turkey
and its military forces.

41. The recent revelation in the memoirs of Mr. Tahsin, the Chairman of the Turkish Cypriot Teachers’
Union, was really shocking. In the Turkish Cypriot
paper Soz, on 21-22 December 1982, he accuses the
Turkish Cypriot leadership of being responsible for
placing bombs in Turkish mosques and shrines in 1962.
Mr. Tahsin said: “There is no one who does not know
by now that the bombs placed in the mosques in 1962
were not placed by Greek Cypriots.” He further stated
that the .purpose.of the act was to incite the Turkish
Cypriots against the Greek Cypriots. Mr. Tahsin
accused the TMT, an illegal Turkish organization,
of
these acts. Mr. DenktaS, in an interview in The Times
on 20 January 1978, admitted that he himself had
formed the TMT.

37. On the same reasoning, the few intercommunal
clashes of the 196Os, which were instigated by.Turkey,
are intentionally
magnified and exploited in order to
justify the imposed artificial separation of our people.
Echoes of the provocative invective that was used in
the past to arouse in Turkish Cypriots feelings of hatred
and enmity towards their Greek Cypriot compatriots
have been heard in this Chamber, and unfounded allegations about the usurpation of the rights of Turkish
Cypriots have been repeated. Closer investigation
is
more likely to prove that the Turkish Cypriot population has been the victim of its leadership. However, it is

42. Attempts have been made from time to time to
present the Cyprus problem merely as a conflict between the two communities
in Cyprus. The Turkish
side always very carefully steers away from touching
5

upon the substance of this most serious international
problem of aggression and continuing
occupation,
while at the same time it tries to conceal its expansionist
aims regarding Cyprus and the annexation of part or all
of Cyprus to Turkey at some opportune time.

question of security and that the major reason for that
attitude was a political one.
46. In his report dated 3 June 1969 the SecretaryGeneral states:
“Whereas
Turkish
Cypriots may move freely
throughout the island except in a few militarily
restricted areas, access to Turkish Cypriot enclaves,
a number of Turkish Cypriot villages and certain
roads continues to be denied to Greek Cypriots.
. . . the Turkish Cypriots have enjoyed full freedom
of movement over the whole island for some time,
whilst the Greek Cypriots are still prevented from
using some of the Republic’s
main roads.” [See
S/9233, para. 55.1

43. In a recent long interview in the Turkish paper
Tercuman of 30 June 1983, Mr. Esenbel, former
Secretary-General of the Turkish Foreign Ministry, former Foreign Minister and former Turkish Ambassador
to Washington, who also played a role in the ZurichLondon Agreements of 1959, revealed Turkey’s real
intention towards Cyprus, admitting that behind its
partitionist designs on Cyprus were its own strategic
considerations.
Mr. Esenbel explained how Turkey
became a party to the Cyprus problem through enormous and patient work. He further stated that Turkey
accepted only the proposals that were leaving the door
open to partition and rejected all proposals, including a
proposal by the then Governor of Cyprus, Sir Hugh
Foot, when they realized that “the road leading to
partition was a bit closed”. They accepted Macmillan’s
plan only when they were given assurances that the
right of separate self-determination
could be used, and
thus the road to partition could also be used. Mr. Esenbe1 went even further and revealed that the then Turkish Prime Minister Menderes gave them instructions in
Zurich to find a formula for Cyprus which would ensure
the possibility of Turkey’s security, because “‘it is becoming obvious that at this stage we will not be able
to achieve partition”.
Referring to- the present day,
Mr. Esenbel stated that “according to the de facto
situation it is clear on the territory itself, and not on
paper, as to how the Cyprus problem will be solved”.

47. The Turkish Cypriot population,
which is also
suffering now under the Turkish military occupation,
has many times voiced its concern at the separatist and
partitionist attitude of the Turkish side. Indicative of
that concern is a statement by Mr. Orhan Kahya, the
leader of the Turkish Cypriots who were forced to cross
to the occupied area of Cyprus in 1975, published in the
Turkish Cypriot magazine Olay in 1982. He said:
“Presently,
even the Turkish Cypriot women are
exerting efforts to go to their properties in the south
and the women are being prevented from doing so.
The reason why the people insist on going to the
south is that they have properties there.. Now they
live in misery in the north.”
48. The leader of the Turkish Cypriot trade union
DEV-IS, Mr. Hasan Sarica, denied the allegation that
Turks were suffering before 1974, when he stated:

44. Any sufferings of the Turkish Cypriot community
can be attributed mainly to Turkey’s old and still valid
policy aimed at the partition of Cyprus. This has been
borne out on many occasions by the periodic reports of
the Secretary-General.
In his report of 11 March 1965
he said, “the Turkish Cypriot policy of self-isolation
has led the community in the opposite direction from
normality”
[see S/6228, para. 171, and “the community
leadership discourages the Turkish Cypriot population from engaging in personal, commercial or other
contacts with their Greek Cypriot compatriots, from
applying to government offices in administrative
matters, or from resettling in their home villages if they are
refugees” [ibid., para. 551.

“In pre-1974 years the Turkish Cypriots and the
Greek Cypriots worked together in a brotherly manner and the economic position of Turkish workers
was excellent. . . . After 1974 the economic position
of the Turkish Cypriot workers substantially deteriorated. In pre-1974 Cyprus, the Turkish Cypriots
-and Greek Cypriots worked together and shared the
same economic profits. The conditions of life of the
Turkish Cypriots changed after 1974.”
This statement was published
on 30 August 1980.

in the newspaper Birlik

49. The Turkish Cypriot Ministers refused in 1964 to
participate in the Council of Ministers of the Republic in
order to show, as the then Vice-President,
Mr. Kiictik
put it, “that the Republic was dead” and to promote
partition. The agenda of the Council of Ministers continued to be sent to the Turkish Cypriot Ministers for at
least one year after they chose not to participate, but
they persisted in their refusal. The Turkish Cypriot
judges remained in their positions until 1966, but, when
they were forced to withdraw on threat of imprisonment by the Turkish leadership, they acted accordingly .

45. In his report of 8 December 1966 [S/76221 the
Secretary-General
stated that for some considerable
time the Government had been urging the refugees to
return to their homes and that it had repaired or rebuilt
an abundant number of Turkish Cypriot houses. However, it was known; the report continued, that the Turkish Cypriot leadership would not allow them to return to
their former homes located in Government-controlled
areas at the time. To justify this position the Turkish
Cypriot leadership stressed considerations of security,
although there could be little doubt that there was no
6

in the latter programmes has been as follows: school
feeding 17.94 per cent, soil conservation 16 per cent
and mixed farming 18.56 per cent.” [See S/21294,
paras. 45 and 46.1

50. It is worth mentioning that the Supreme Court, at
the time when it was presided over by aTurkish Cypriot
judge, decided that the Government’of
Cyprus was
obliged to take measures under the law of necessity to
save the State from collapse.

55. Even after the invasion, foreign aid to Cyprus,
through the Offtce of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
the European Economic Community,
the World Food Programme and
the World Health Organization Fellowship Programme
was always distributed to the Turkish Cypriot community in accordance with its population ratio. An example of this is the assistance provided through UNHCR.
Take, for instance, the United States assistance to Cyprus through UNHCR from 1974 to 1981. According to
a report by the United States Accounting Office of
30 November 1981, $90.3,million was distributed to the
Greek Cypriots and $20.8 million to the Turkish Cypriots. Taking into consideration the fact-stated in the
same report-that
$58.1 million of the amount given to
Greek Cypriots was allocated to the housing needs of
the Greek Cypriot refugees, the proportion of useful
assistance to the Turkish Cypriots is much higher than
their population
ratio. The distribution
of aid to
the Turkish Cypriot community continues today, even
after the recent provocations. Similar evidence can be
produced for all aid to Cyprus.

51. Many Turkish Cypriots who served in the diplomatic missions of Cyprus abroad chose to remain in
their positions until the Turkish invasion of 1974. In the
High Commission of the Republic in London, Turkish
Cypriots continue to serve, some even after they retired
from the public service, having applied for and been
granted an extension of their service.
52. Despite strong objections by the Turkish leadership, for many years before the invasion there was cooperation among the people themselves, and many
Turkish Cypriots were working and co-operating with
Greek Cypriots. No intercommunal
incidents of any
significance took place for seven years before the invasion. During the disgraceful coup &&at against President Archbishop Makarios Greek Cypriots were the
only victims; not a single Turkish Cypriot was hurt.
53. Attempts to distort the facts as regards the assistance provided to the Turkish Cypriots are easily neutralized by reports of the Secretary-General
himself.
For example, in his report of 20 May 1971 he stated:

56. Since 1964 Turkish Cypriots have been supplied
with 20 million dollars’ worth of electricity a year. No
charges have been collected for that service, which is
thus being supplied at the expense of Greek Cypriot
consumers. The Government of the Republic has also
been supplying the Turkish Cypriots with gas at subsidized rates, the cost of the subsidy being borne by
the Greek Cypriot consumer. Medical care is available
to any Turkish Cypriot who asks for it and who is
allowed by his leadership to come to the Governmentcontrolled area for treatment, and thousands of serious
cases have, in fact, taken advantage of this.

“To meet the acute demand for skilled workers in
certain trades, various courses open to Greek and
TurkishCypriots
alike have been conducted by the
Cyprus Productivity Centre*‘-an
institution funded
jointly by the International
Labour Organisation
(ILO) and the Cyprus Government-“For
example;
35 Turkish Cypriots participated in an accelerated
training programme . . . under the supervision of a
Turkish Cypriot instructor especially engaged for the
purpose . . . Similarly,
Turkish Cypriot students
have been attending courses at the Higher Technical Institute and the Hotel and Catering Institute,
sponsored by the Government and the United Nations Development Programme with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organizai
tion and the International
Labour Organisation as
executing agencies, respectively.”
[See S/10199,
para. 39.1

57. As regards telecommunications,
the Republic has
always been prepared to provide the Turkish Cypriots
with the full benefits of the telecommunications
service, and some do take advantage of the service. There
are telephones installed in the occupied area. Two telephone lines are provided to Mr. De&as
himself.
Mr. Denktas’s bills for 1983 exceeded $30,000 and
were paid by the Cyprus Government.
All telegrams
and letters arriving in Cyprus for the Turkish Cypriots
are promptly delivered through the United Nations
authorities.

54. In his report of 22 May 1974, just a few weeks
before the invasion, the Secretary-General
stated:
“co-operation
has been evident in connexion with
the Morphou/Tylliria
water feasibility study . . . The
UNDP/FAO
livestock
production
improvement
project, the veterinary services project and the Cyprus Productivity
Centre . . . have maintained
services to Turkish Cypriots. . .

58. The first action of many Turkish Cypriots who
manage to get out of the occupied area is to visit a
Republic of Cyprus embassy or consulate to obtain or
renew passports of the Republic of Cyprus in spite of
the fact that the regime in the occupied area punishes
those who do so. The embassies of Cyprus abroad have
issued thousands of passports to Turkish Cypriots since
the invasion.

“Turkish Cypriots have also shared in the assistance
provided by the industrial development
services
project of UNDP and the United Nations Industrial
Development
Organization and by the World Food
Programme projects. Turkish Cypriot participation
7

Yeniduzen on 18 April 1984, a few days before the
rejection by the Turkish side of the Secretary-General’s
initiative, said that DenktaS was trying to “torpedo de
CuelIar’s initiative”,
and that if the Turkish side rejected the Secretary-General’s
proposals Cyprus would
face many negative developments. He said further, “A
leader who once sowed chauvinism cannot be expected
to sow happiness today.”

59. For many years now the Turkish side has claimed
to place the emphasis for the solution of the Cyprus
problem on the intercommunal
talks. Yet it refused to
attend the talks scheduled to resume at the end of May
1983, a date it had agreed to in advance with the United
Nations. In reality the Turkish side never wanted, or
participated in, substantive talks for the solution of the
Cyprus problem. The Turkish position has always been
one of delaying tactics and meaningless proposals, thus
leading the talks to a virtual impasse, while preparing
the ground, through a series of unlawful measures, for
secession.

65. The developments outlined above speak for themselves. Turkish “faith” and “goodwill”
were put to the
test and proved to be non-existent. A recent commentator in the 31 March 1984 issue of the Turkish newspaper Hurriyet had the courage to say that “various
civilian Governments have come and gone, but Turkey
has stuck to a policy of no concession [on the Cyprus
problem], as was also confirmed by Evren’s recent
statement”.

60. Even the Turkish Cypriots themselves see that the
stalematk at the intercommunal
talks was created by
the Turkish side. A recent article in the newspaper
Mifliyet on 14 April 1983, stated, “The intercommunal
talks are enabling the Turkish side to gain time and for
this reason the continuation of the talks is regarded as
beneticial by some.” The Turkish Cypriot paper Yeniduzen on 30 August 1983 warned: “No matter what
DenktaS says, the world sees the Turkish side as being
responsible for the termination of the talks and for the
failure of the resumption of the talks, because he puts
forward conditions which change daily.”

66. Countries with military might probably do not
need the protection of the United Nations. Small countries, when faced by aggressive neighbours, can preserve their territorial integrity and security only by
reposing their faith in the United Nations, and the Security Council in particular. Small, defenceless countries have no other way. Cyprus is a small, defenceless
country that has placed its faith in the United Nations
and in the Council.

61. From time to time they throw out a challenge
concerning a high-level meeting. Members will all
remember that this happened also last October. Of
course, it was accompanied by threats and the.setting
of time-limits.
After consultations with the SecretaryGeneral we accepted the challenge. An announcement
was made to that effect by the Secretary-General.
In a
responsible and quiet way we started working with the
acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Cyprus on the preparation of the agenda for a meeting
that was planned for January of this year. We were
already in the second phase of consultations about the
agenda when the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hugo Gobbi, returned to Cyprus to
pursue the matter further. The day after his return, and
without waiting to listen to him, the Turkish side went
ahead with the illegal declaration, once more kicking
the United Nations and us in the teeth.

67. It is with grave concern that my Government finds
it necessary to return to the Security Council. Turkey is
flouting the authority of the United Nations and continuing to violate the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Cyprus. In doing so it is challenging
the credibility of the United Nations, jeopardizing its
effectiveness, usefulness and influence in world affairs.
68. On 18 November 1983 the Security Council, mindful of its responsibilities,
adopted resolution 541 (1983)
in response to the illegal secessionist act of 15 November. Since then the Turkish side has provocatively
proceeded to ignore the provisions of that resolution.
We express the certainty not only that the Council will
reaffirm its resolution 541 (1983), but that it will examine methods to ensure compliance with it. The Council should, further, specifically condemn any new actions contravening resolution 541(1983) and the threats
of colonization of Famagusta and against UNFICYP.

62. The memory of the international community is not
so poor as to allow it to forget that the “exchange of
ambassadors’* and the preparations for a “constitu“elections”
and so on took
tion”, a “referendum”,
place a little before the formal rejection of the latest
ideas of the Secretary-General,
which included a new
meeting between President Kyprianou and Mr. Denktag. Again, these acts took place at a time when
Mr. Gobbi was in Nicosia, in a last effort to rescue the
initiative of the Secretary-General.

69. It is my Government’s
contention that Turkey’s
conduct towards the Republic of Cyprus in recent
months has given rise to a situation likely to endanger
the maintenance of international
peace and security.
My Government,
therefore, appeals to the Security
Council to discharge with urgency its responsibilities
under the Charter by beginning to consider the adoption
of such effective measures as are warranted by the
situation.

63. Who is responsible for the recent deadlock is eloquently revealed, admittedly in diplomatic language, by
the most recent report of the Secretary-General,
distributed as document S/16519 of 1 May 1984.

70. The Secretary-General’s
mandate of good offices
should be revitalized and strengthened in order to
p!omote an overall solution of the Cyprus problem. The

64. A Turkish Cypriot leader, Mr. Ozgur, in an interview published in the Turkish Cypriot newspaper
8

Charter and the provisions of the relevant United Nations resolutions are twin beacons that can light his path
and ours.
71. The Council is being asked to save Cyprus. But in
asking the Council to save Cyprus we are asking the
Council to do justice to many other countries. For, if
the Security Council does not protect. Cyprus, if it does
not reverse the trends, and if the policy of partition
succeeds, what will be the future of multicommunal
and
multiconfessional
societies around the world? How
many countries will survive in their present form if
the standards being imposed by Turkey on Cyprus are
applied? In asking the Council to do justice to us we are
asking it to do justice to the world and to the principles
of the United Nations.
72. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Russian]:
The representative of Turkey has asked to speak, and
I now call on him.

73. Mr. KIRCA
(Turkey)
[interpretation
from
Frenchk At a time when there is serious reason to
believe that there may be hope, I have listened with
great consternation to the inopportune statement of the
representative of the Greek Cypriot administration.
He
has once again entered a field in which it is very easy to
beat him. His arguments have long been known to us
and we have demolished them many times.
74. We have a proverb that says, “The lie lasts no
longer than the candle, from morning to night, from
night to morning”-as
Figaro said.
75. I do not think that that statement merits any response. I am determined not to follow his assiduous
efforts, which have no other purpose than to torpedo
any chance of a resumption of negotiations and of the
search for a final solution-at
this time, I repeat, when
great opportunities exist.
The meeting

rose at 1.15 p.m.

:
. .’

:
::,

,,

:

:

)”

.:
: ? .I

~ ;

:!

,, .‘.
j:

: ..3 .,

(I : : ?

,i

_L

!I-:;1

‘.‘:.

28
1’.

:

,

; .!
!

‘j
! :,:

,-.,,

:.
I

HOW

,,I1

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les libmiries et les agences dipositaires
du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
ti : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
EAK

COMO

IIOJIYYMTh

CONSEGUIR

N3AAHZIR

OPX-AHIISAI[HU

PUBLICACIONES

OKI>E~HHEHHhIX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAUHR

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en vcnta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

90-61313-Janualy

1993-2,llSO
