S/PV.8702

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8702

nd meeting
Monday, 13 January 2020, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Baati
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2019/988)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-00911 (E)
*2000911*

Colombia

S/PV.8702

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2019/988)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/988, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ruiz Massieu.
Mr. Ruiz Massieu: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to introduce the most recent report
of the Secretary-General on Colombia (S/2019/988)
and to update the Security Council on the most
recent developments. It is a pleasure to be here along
with Foreign Minister Claudia Blum de Barberi and
the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and
Consolidation, Mr. Emilio Archila.
During the year that just ended Colombia continued
making significant strides in its peace process, even
in the face of serious challenges, particularly in
terms of security for conflict-affected communities,
social leaders and former combatants. Enhanced
participation and improved security in the October
2/20

13/01/2020

regional elections demonstrated the positive impact
of the peace process on Colombian democracy. The
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition continued its invaluable work,
with the active participation of victims. Thousands
of former combatants, who only a few years ago were
armed with weapons of war, continue to forge new lives
through the opportunities provided by peace, despite
many difficulties and security risks.
Those and many other achievements of the peace
process have been possible because of the efforts
of both the Colombian Government and the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC), the
support of the international community, including
the Council, and because Colombians around the
country — social leaders, public officials, volunteers,
members of the security forces, the private sector and
many others — work every day to consolidate peace in
their communities. Just this past Saturday, in southern
Tolima, one of the regions where the conflict began a
half century ago, former combatants, the armed forces
and members of the community started building a bridge
together for the benefit of surrounding communities. I
cannot think of a more encouraging example to begin
the new year than the image of former adversaries
working with a local community to build a bridge
together. Those hard-won gains must be protected,
preserved and built upon.
The best path, as the Secretary-General again
stressed in his report, is through the comprehensive
implementation of the peace agreement. I encourage
both parties to deepen their dialogue regarding
any differences on the implementation of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, especially through the
mechanisms designed by the Agreement itself, such
as the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement. The social mobilizations that have taken
place since last November have also opened up an
opportunity for constructive dialogue on peace
implementation.
On 27 December 2019, in a welcome development, the
reintegration road map was adopted, which establishes
the framework for the long-term reintegration process.
Consultations between the Government, particularly
the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, and
the FARC were key to the finalization of that document.
The United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
20-00911

13/01/2020

Colombia

S/PV. 8702

certainly looks forward to supporting the parties in its
implementation. In addition, with the approval of 12 new
collective productive projects, close to 2,500 former
combatants now benefit from such projects. Beyond the
projects’ approval and funding, it is important to ensure
their long-term viability and sustainability, including
through access to land, access to technical assistance
and access to markets. It is also important to increase
the participation of women and the involvement of
local communities so that the projects help encourage
development and reconciliation.

Lucy Villarreal was killed in Nariño department after
conducting an art workshop for children.

It remains necessary to continue devoting specific
attention to the more than 9,000 former combatants
living outside the territorial areas. They face higher
security risks and additional obstacles to accessing
basic services and educational, employment and
productive opportunities. Former combatants with
disabilities should also be given special attention.
Sustained measures are also needed to provide
protective environments for more than 2,000 children
of former combatants.

Peace will not be fully achieved if the brave voices
of social leaders continue to be silenced through
violence and if those former combatants who laid down
their weapons and are committed to their reintegration
continue to be killed. The announcement yesterday by
the authorities that they had thwarted a planned attempt
against the life of the FARC party’s President, Rodrigo
Londoño Echeverri, alias “Timochenko”, underscored
the risks facing former FARC-EP members and the
peace process itself and how crucially important it is to
guarantee their security.

I welcome the 128 additional accreditations for
former combatants since the Secretary-General’s
September report as a positive first step in moving
forward with this important matter. I also call upon
all relevant actors to intensify efforts to resolve the
situation of the former members of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) whose accreditations remain pending.
Without proper accreditation, they are left in legal
uncertainty and cannot access reintegration benefits.
The pervasive violence in conflict-affected
areas continues to threaten the consolidation of
peace, as illustrated by several profoundly worrying
developments in the last few weeks. In his report,
the Secretary-General warned of the risk of more
widespread violence in the department of Chocó owing
to the activities of illicit armed groups. These past
two weeks, communities in Bojayá, a municipality
historically affected by the conflict, denounced the fact
that the illegal armed group Autodefensas Gaitanistas
de Colombia had occupied territories and confined
several communities, while other communities in the
area remain affected by the activities of the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional. Last week, I met with AfroColombian leader Leyner Palacios from Bojayá and
heard first-hand about the dire situation of those
communities as well as of communities across the
Pacific Coast. On 23 December, artist and social leader

The killings of former FARC-EP combatants
resumed on the very first day of the year, with the death,
in Cauca department, of Benjamín Banguera Rosales.
The perpetrators of attacks against social leaders
and former combatants must be brought swiftly to
justice, including both material and intellectual authors,
and more effective measures are still imperative to
protect these individuals and their communities.

Cauca, Chocó, Nariño — the epicentres of
violence remain the same, as the Secretary-General
has reported repeatedly, and the underlying conditions
are consistent: rural areas affected by a limited State
presence and persistent poverty, and where illegal armed
groups and criminal structures continue victimizing
populations, especially ethnic communities, to control
illicit economies.
Each of those underlying causes of violence is
addressed in different parts of the peace agreement.
That is yet another reason to advance urgently with
its full implementation. For instance, the development
programmes with a territorial focus, one of the tools
envisioned in section 1 of the peace agreement, on
comprehensive rural reform, are helping to bring muchneeded investments for conflict-affected populations.
Regarding illicit economies, the peace agreement
created a crop-substitution programme to support
families in transitioning away from coca cultivation to
other productive endeavours. Continued support for that
programme and security measures for its participants is
essential. Additionally, the peace agreement provided
for the development of a public policy to dismantle
illegal armed groups, criminal structures and their
support networks through the National Commission on
Security Guarantees, which met this past Wednesday. It
is urgent that this policy be established and implemented

20-009113/20

S/PV.8702

Colombia

13/01/2020

and that the Government intensify efforts to address
the security situation in former conflict areas.

implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.

(spoke in Spanish)

I should also like to welcome the announcement by
President Duque that he would like the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia to stay in that country
for the duration of his Government. That is an important
indication of the Government’s commitment to peace.

Since 1 January, Colombia has had new local and
departmental authorities, including male and female
mayors, male and female governors, and members of
municipal councils and departmental assemblies. These
include eight former ex-combatants from the former
FARC-EP who were elected to public posts.
We are encouraged by the fact that a large number
of the recently elected authorities from various parties
have expressed their commitment to peace and their
support for the implementation of the agreement.
The role of local authorities has been and remains
fundamental to all peacebuilding efforts.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, as Council members are aware,
the peace agreement contains far-sighted provisions
to address the multitude of challenges that have
afflicted Colombia for decades. For this reason, we
remain convinced that the full implementation of the
peace agreement, in all its interconnected aspects,
provides the best possible hope for Colombia to lay the
foundations for a more peaceful and prosperous future.
The United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
and the United Nations system in that country will
continue to support the parties in moving forward.
The support of the international community and of the
Council in particular will remain key.
The President: I thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Before I start on
Colombia, let me thank you, Mr. President, for having
arranged the two moments of silence and also used
this occasion to pay tribute to His late Majesty Sultan
Qaboos of Oman.
Turning to Columbia, I would like to welcome the
Foreign Minister. We are very pleased to have her here
and wish her all the best in her new role. I also thank the
Special Representative for his report and for his briefing
to the Council today. We very much share his analysis
of events in Colombia over the past three months. This
reflects both the achievements and the challenges of the
4/20

October saw the first local elections since the
accords were reached and the first in which the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) political
party took part. Despite the concerning levels of
violence during the campaign, election day showed the
strength and inclusivity of Colombian democracy, with
more candidates from across the political spectrum
competing than ever before and the highest turnout in
modern times.
We were encouraged, too, by the overwhelming
commitment of those elected to continue along the path
to peace. The newly elected local authorities have a
key role in the implementation of the peace agreement,
especially through the development programmes with
a territorial focus. We welcome the Government’s
support for these programmes, including through
expanded financing, and encourage coordination
between national, departmental and local authorities to
ensure effective implementation.
However, there are some areas in which urgent
efforts are necessary to preserve the gains of the past
three years. Fortunately, the mechanisms to address
them already exist; the challenge is to make more
effective use of them.
First, we are deeply concerned about the persistent
level of violence and threats towards human rights
defenders, community leaders, including women,
and former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) combatants.
We have highlighted this point on previous occasions,
but we are concerned that the situation is not improving
despite the Government’s stated commitment to
tackling the issue. In that connection, we welcome
last week’s meeting of the National Commission on
Security Guarantees and encourage full, ongoing use
of that mechanism, including engagement with civil
society, to further implementation. We encourage
prioritization of the action plan of the Intersectoral
Commission on Security, Women Leaders and Human
Rights Defenders, which has the potential to transform
departmental security conditions for the better. We
20-00911

13/01/2020

Colombia

also welcome recent steps to strengthen the protection
of former FARC-EP combatants and note yesterday’s
announcement of an operation to thwart a plan to
attack FARC political party leader Rodrigo Londoño
Echeverri. We encourage the Government to ensure the
extension of protection measures to territorial areas for
training and reintegration and informal settlement of
former FARC-EP combatants.
Secondly, we urge the Colombian Government
to accelerate reintegration programmes, which are
crucial to maintaining the faith of ex-combatants
and communities in the process. Efforts should be
made to ensure legal accreditation and access to
income-generating projects for former FARC-EP
combatants living both inside and outside the former
territorial areas for training and reintegration. More
widely, we encourage the Government to work with all
stakeholders to resolve outstanding questions about the
long-term status of those areas, particularly concerning
the land on which they are located.
Finally, in his report, the Special Representative
emphasizes the interconnected nature of all elements
of the peace process. Implementing individual
components of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace may
produce limited outputs, but the outcome of inclusive,
stable and lasting peace in Colombia will not be
possible unless all components progress simultaneously
and in a coherent fashion. In that regard, we encourage
the Colombian Government to take advantage of the
national dialogue process it began following the recent
protests to build consensus with diverse sectors and
ensure that implementation continues in an effective
and comprehensive manner.
The United Kingdom recognizes the important
progress that has been achieved so far in Colombia. We
look forward to continuing to support the Colombian
Government to ensure a lasting peace enjoyed by all.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his briefing and for
taking the time to be here; it is really nice to see him.
I congratulate the Minister for Foreign Affairs on her
new role; it is lovely to see her. We welcome the High
Commissioner to the Council today.
Three years after the signing of the peace
agreement, Colombia is to be congratulated, not only
for ending decades of conflict, which is important,
but also for faithfully working to heal the wounds

S/PV. 8702

of the conflict. Although many challenges remain,
Colombians are demonstrating their commitment to
a future of peace, reconciliation and prosperity. That
commitment was on full display when I travelled to
Colombia in November and saw the staggering impact
of the humanitarian and economic crisis in Venezuela
on Colombia, which now hosts more than 1.6 million
Venezuelan refugees and other displaced persons.
What was especially remarkable to me was how the
Colombians have responded to the plight of those
less fortunate, embracing them as family despite the
challenges that the Colombians are already facing.
Their generosity is inspiring. The United States has
hoped to mirror that example by responding to the crisis
with over $650 million of aid, with almost $252 million
directed towards the response inside Colombia, by far
the highest aid package from any donor country.
My visit was also an opportunity to learn about
the challenges of the peace accord’s implementation
and the important work being carried out by President
Duque Márquez and key stakeholders. The fact that
Colombia’s local and regional elections in October were
the most peaceful and inclusive in its recent history is a
credit to their commendable efforts.
However, the United States remains deeply
concerned by reports of violence against human
rights defenders, social leaders and ex-combatants, as
outlined in the Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2019/988). We support the Colombian Government’s
efforts to enhance protections for those groups, whose
security is fundamental to a just and lasting peace. We
applaud Colombia’s progress on transitional justice,
while recognizing that it those difficult decisions have
not been made without controversy in Colombia. The
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the Truth Commission
and the Unit for the Search for Persons deemed Missing
in the Context of and Due to the Armed Conflict
have made important progress, although their work is
unfinished. The United States views the transitional
justice mechanisms outlined in the accord as important
mechanisms for peace and justice in Colombia. We
also welcome actions to ensure that those who commit
serious crimes post-accord are held accountable to the
full extent of the law.
We must be mindful, though, that the successful
implementation of the peace accord is closely linked
with two other challenges, namely, Colombia’s
narcotics problem and the crisis in Venezuela, which
threatens to destabilize the region. The United States

20-009115/20

S/PV.8702

Colombia

is committed to working with Colombia to pursue a
whole-of-Government approach to counter-narcotics,
rural development and rural security, including
expanded manual eradication or the resumption of
aerial eradication, when the requirements of Colombian
law have been met. We share with Colombia the goal of
reducing coca cultivation and cocaine production to half
of 2017 levels by the end of 2023. Those efforts directly
support peace implementation. More broadly, as I have
previously noted, they boost economic development in
areas with significant coca cultivation. The people of
Colombia need viable economic alternatives to break out
of a cycle that ultimately funds violence and impunity.
Widespread
and
largely
peaceful
social
mobilizations demonstrate that Colombians are paying
attention to the peace process, and we applaud the
national conversations launched by President Duque
Márquez in response. We hope that those conversations
will facilitate the Government’s efforts to ensure the
reintegration of former combatants, the extension of
Government presence and services into areas where
they are lacking and economic opportunities for all
Colombians. Colombia has a friend in the United States,
and we look forward to continuing our joint efforts to
not only end the conflict in the country but also to mend
the wounds that it causes.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to start by showing
solidarity with the people of the Niger for the death of
over 89 soldiers over the weekend and by expressing
our continued solidarity with our brotherly country of
Haiti on another anniversary of the tragic earthquake of
2010 that cost over 300,000 lives, including 102 people
working for the United Nations.
We welcome Colombia’s Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi. It is truly an
honour to have her with us in the Security Council. We
also thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his briefing.
At the outset, the Dominican Republic reiterates
its firm support for the peace process in Colombia and
acknowledges the Colombian people’s commitment to
the process of achieving peace in the country. Peace has
cost them dearly, and we must all remain committed to
its consolidation. We cannot forget that it has been the
brotherly Colombian people who have paid the highest
price over years of violence. We therefore welcome
the Government’s efforts to address the demands and
aspirations of Colombians within the framework of a
6/20

13/01/2020

national conversation and to prioritize very specifically
the issue of youth within that conversation. We hope
that will culminate in the adoption of tangible joint
measures to increase the people’s confidence in the
entire process.
We deplore the acts of violence recorded in some
areas of the country resulting from the presence of
illegal armed groups. We encourage the parties to
ensure a safe environment free from violence for the
civilian population.
Despite the challenges to its implementation,
the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia
remains a point of reference for building a conflictfree American continent and a clear illustration that
dialogue and consultation are the only way to achieve
peace. Therefore, to overcome the challenges ahead,
the parties must address and resolve their differences in
joint spaces such as the Commission for the Follow-up,
Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the
Final Agreement, the National Commission on Security
Guarantees and the National Reintegration Council.
We recognize the efforts of the Government, which
has committed itself to the peace process and promoted
comprehensive reforms, including rural reform, as a
way to combat poverty and promote the development
of the communities most affected by the conflict.
We stress that it is essential to continue providing
educational opportunities to ex-combatants for their
subsequent economic and social reintegration as agents
of change and definitive reconciliation in Colombia.
We regret that, regarding the security situation,
especially in rural areas, social leaders and human
rights defenders who support the peace agreement and
related policies continue to face heightened risks. We
are particularly concerned that indigenous leaders,
women leaders and human rights defenders, especially
women defenders of the land and the environment,
face threats to their security. Likewise, armed groups
continue to violate the rights of not only Colombian
children but also of Venezuelan children, who are in
highly vulnerable situations. We call on the groups to
commit to ending such violations.
We would like to express our recognition to the
Colombian people for having peacefully exercised
their right to vote in the recent district elections. We
urge the authorities to step up efforts to provide the
necessary guarantees to participants in the political
20-00911

13/01/2020

Colombia

process, including ex-combatants. Those efforts were
on display yesterday when the Government of Colombia
prevented an attack on Rodrigo Londoño Echeverri
“Timochenko”, a leader of the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común, for which I commend the
Government of Colombia. All acts of violence must be
investigated and prosecuted.
We hope that all parties concerned, including civil
society, local communities and the private sector, will
decisively stay the course, value the progress made in
the peace process and prioritize the full implementation
of the agreement. These goals can be achieved through
inclusive dialogue, building trust among all the parties
and promoting peace through development.
In conclusion, the Dominican Republic reiterates its
support for the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia and encourage it to continue working tirelessly
with all stakeholders, including the United Nations
country team, civil society and local communities, on
the road to lasting peace based on the promotion and
preservation of Colombia’s national unity.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I wish to thank you
personally, Sir, for having called the two minutes of
silence on Haiti and the Niger before the meeting. On
this occasion, I would like to convey to the Ambassador
of the Niger the condolences of the Government and
the people of Germany for the heavy loss his country
has suffered.
I would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, Claudia Blum de Barberi, for
several reasons. First, she is of German descent, so we
are very happy to have her here. Secondly, her presence
here, like that of her predecessors, really signifies
that the Colombian Government is fully supportive
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. As our British
colleague just said, we welcome the President’s
announcement regarding the extension of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia until the end
of its mandate is a very welcome signal because the
Colombian peace agreement continues to be a source
of inspiration for all those people engaged in seeking to
resolve complex conflict.
On a further positive note, I think the recent local
and regional elections were a positive sign. The high
rate of participation and the participation of the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) for
the first time as a political party was a very important

S/PV. 8702

signal of the gradual advance towards a more inclusive
and democratic Colombia. Moreover, during the recent
demonstrations and mobilization, many young people
in Colombia have called for the preservation and full
implementation of the of the peace agreement, so I
would encourage the new Government, through the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, to continue working
towards common solutions in the spirit of inclusive and
respectful dialogue. I found the example of the bridge
that was built, as mentioned by Carlos Ruiz Massieu, to
be excellent; more such examples would be welcome.
The international community will continue to
assist Colombia. It is great to have unity in the Security
Council. We should preserve that. All of us who
participated remember very fondly the Security Council
mission to Colombia, where we all demonstrated our
support for the peace agreement. The United Nations
there, as we witnessed, continues to play a key role. At
this stage, I would like to commend Carlos Ruiz for his
work, the work of his people and the work of the United
Nations agencies on the ground.
Germany supports the Secretary-General’s call to
make more use of the tripartite arrangements among
the Government, the United Nations and the FARC to
promote dialogue and foster confidence-building.
With regard to the implementation of the
agreement — and basically everything is in the
agreement; it just needs to be implemented — I would
like to just briefly mention what are the three key points
from our perspective.
First, we strongly welcome the adoption of the
reintegration road map. It is now very important now
that it be implemented and that we find more clarity
on education, health, economic reintegration, housing,
community-based reintegration and psychosocial
assistance. In this respect, I would like to echo what
Carlos said regarding the inclusion of women as key
and the inclusion of the 9,000 Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
fighters living outside the former territorial areas for
training and reintegration. The communities are ready
to include them, but those communities need support.
Secondly, with regard to the security road map,
this is perhaps the saddest development. Last year
was the most violent year for former combatants, with
173 victims. Social leaders, human rights defenders,
indigenous leaders and women’s rights defenders
continue to face grave risks and I therefore welcome

20-009117/20

S/PV.8702

Colombia

the fact that the National Commission on Security
Guarantees met for the first time, after some time. I
would really encourage the Commission to continue
its work and to work hard on dismantling criminal
organizations and their support networks, which are
basically responsible for the deaths of social leaders.
The presence of the State must be extended.
My final point relates to support for the institutions
of the peace agreement. When Council members were in
Bogotá, we met with representatives of these institutions.
I am still very impressed by the quality and commitment
of those people. We see the two Commissions and the
National Reintegration Council as key to overcoming
the deeply entrenched legacy of conflict in the country.
They will lead to true reconciliation. In this context, it
remains key that the Commissions remain independent
and have the proper funding and functioning. The only
thing to be overcome is the uncertainty with regard to
the legal status of former combatants.
I am aware that that is a heavy task, and would like
to echo what Kelly Craft said earlier. In addition to that
task, there is that of housing hundreds of thousands of
refugees from Venezuela. I would also like to commend
Colombia on what its people and Government are doing
in that regard.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would like to begin by echoing the words of
condolence and solidarity expressed to the delegation
of the Niger.
I should then like to welcome the presence today of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia and thank
Special Representative Ruiz Massieu for his briefing.
Over three years since the signing of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace, Colombia can stand proud.
The parties to the agreement should be congratulated
for their commitment and the progress achieved. At
the same time, of course, we must ensure that we keep
abreast of the challenges that remain.
The recent local elections testify to the positive
impact of the peace process on Colombian democracy.
There have been fewer reported incidents of violence
and citizens were able to participate in the elections
in areas of the country that had previously not been
safe enough. Like the recent social demonstrations,
these elections illustrate the commitment of Colombian
8/20

13/01/2020

society to peace, as well as to the full implementation
of the peace agreement.
We are also encouraged by the implementation of
development programmes with a territorial focus that
have benefited from increased funding, as well as by
the progress in economic and social reintegration.
The restart of the activities of the Gender Technical
Working Group of the National Reintegration Council
is also an important step. However, with regard to legal
safeguards, it is worrying that no substantial progress
has been made in the process of accreditation of former
combatants, which creates legal uncertainty and
increases the risk of recidivism.
One of the cornerstones of the peace agreement
is the establishment of the Comprehensive System
of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition.
Transitional justice is essential for reconciliation and
lasting peace. We welcome the significant progress
made by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and urge
all those under its jurisdiction to contribute to truthseeking efforts. Threats of violence against lawyers
defending former combatants are unacceptable.
We also regret the continuing violence against
human rights defenders, social leaders and former
combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP). The year
2019 was the most violent for former combatants since
the peace agreement was signed.
We are particularly concerned about the specific
targeting of women human rights defenders and social
leaders, as well as by the lack of protection for excombatants residing outside the former territorial
areas, who represent approximately 70 per cent of those
who have been accredited. More effective measures
are needed, including the finalization of the action
plan of the Intersectoral Commission on Safeguards
for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders
and the reconvening of the National Commission on
Security Guarantees.
We have carefully read the recent report of the
Secretary-General on children in armed conflict
(A/73/907-S/2019/509) and are extremely concerned
about the high levels of recruitment and use of
children by armed groups in Colombia, in particular
by the Ejército de Liberación Nacional and FARCEP dissidents. I urge all armed groups to adopt and
implement commitments to put an end to that grave
violation and immediately release all children in their
20-00911

13/01/2020

Colombia

ranks. We also call for continued investment in the “A
different path of life” reintegration programme and the
work of the Technical Working Group on Children of
the National Reintegration Council.
In conclusion, it is important to build trust
between the parties and to intensify cooperation and
dialogue with regard to the implementation of the Final
Agreement. It is in every interest of the parties to make
use of the consultation, monitoring and verification
institutions and mechanisms that have been created
for that purpose. I would like to reiterate Belgium’s
firm commitment to working closely with Colombia
in order to advance the full implementation of the
peace agreement.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French):
Before addressing the situation in Colombia, I would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for the two
minutes of silence that were observed earlier, first of
all in memory of the countless victims of the Haitian
earthquake on 12 January 2010. I would also like to
offer my condolences to Ambassador Abarry and to the
Government and the people of the Niger for the deaths
of 89 Nigerien soldiers in the terrorist attack on the
Chinagodrar camp on 9 January.
Turning now to Colombia, I wish to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Claudia Blum de
Barberi, to the Chamber and congratulate her on her
appointment. I would also like to thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu for his briefing and, above all, to commend his
work and that of the entire team at the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia. The Council has
endeavoured to take a united front in supporting the
collective efforts of the Colombian Government and
people, in particular through the establishment of the
United Nations Verification Mission, and we welcome
President Duque’s call to extend the Mission until 2022.
It has now been over three years since the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace was concluded. Much has
already been accomplished thanks to the efforts of the
Colombian Government and people, which I once again
wish to commend.
For the first time since the peace agreement was
signed, local and departmental elections were held
on 27 October under broadly satisfactory conditions.
The Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común
party presented numerous candidates and Colombian
voters turned out in large numbers. That high level

S/PV. 8702

of participation in the elections demonstrated the
positive contribution of the peace agreement to the
democratic process in Colombia. The newly-elected
local authorities will now be able to contribute to the
implementation of the agreement, in particular through
their involvement in development programmes with
a territorial focus, which constitute an important
component of the agreement.
The reintegration system is also producing results,
as evidenced in the report of the Secretary-General
(see S/2019/988). We are particularly pleased that the
vast majority of Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) excombatants remain engaged in the economic and
social reintegration process, despite the choice of a
very small minority to resume armed struggle, which
France condemns.
We also welcome the continued progress in the
work carried out by the Comprehensive System of
Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition. The
transitional justice system is set to hand down its first
sentences this year, which is a crucial element in the
construction of a lasting and inclusive peace. However,
that will only be successful if the entire process is
carried out and concluded effectively.
We must also clearly recognize that, compared
with the ambition of 2016, certain provisions of the
agreement have not yet been sufficiently implemented.
As several speakers before me have highlighted, the
peace agreement was conceived of as a whole, the
various elements of which must be interconnected and
inseparable in order to be fully effective.
France therefore calls on all stakeholders to
redouble their efforts with a view to fully implementing
all components of the peace agreement. We stress,
in particular, the importance of the National
Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of
Illicit Crops, which must be endowed with the resources
it needs to properly function, especially to finance the
alternative productive projects that will ensure its longterm success. Rural reform is one of the fundamental
pillars of the agreement and must be implemented, as
must political reform. Particular attention should also
be paid to the chapters of the agreement addressing
issues relating to ethnicity and gender.
The full and complete implementation of the
peace agreement is the only viable way to respond to
the remaining major security problems in the country,

20-009119/20

S/PV.8702

Colombia

including with regard to civil society figures, human
rights defenders, former FARC-EP combatants and
indigenous peoples, who are the principal victims.
The year 2019 was particularly worrisome from that
perspective. The Government has made efforts to
ensure the presence of law and order forces and the
individual protection of those at risk, but France calls
on the Colombian authorities to do more to ensure the
presence of all services — military and civilian — across
its territory, including in the most remote departments,
in consultation with civil society. Progress in the field
of collective protection is also necessary. I fully agree
with what the Ambassador of Belgium said concerning
the protection of children.
Difficulties in implementation are inherent in any
agreement, but various mechanisms have been devised
in order to provide solutions to those problems. They
constitute the appropriate forum for dialogue and
should be used to a greater extent. We are also fully
aware that the implementation of the agreement is
taking place in a complex context, in particular due
to the challenge that the Venezuelan migration crisis
poses for Colombia. Here, I commend the generosity of
the Colombian Government and people in welcoming
Venezuelan refugees and migrants with the support of
the international community.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize once
again that the Government and the people of Colombia
can rest assured of France’s support and readiness
to continue supporting them, alongside our partners
within the European Union, on the demanding path
towards peace.

13/01/2020

I want also to welcome the presence of Ms. Claudia
Blum de Barberi, Foreign Minister of Colombia, and
her delegation, as well as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, whom
I thank for his briefing this morning.
I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2019/988) and the valuable information it contains
on various issues relating to the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia, which was
signed three years ago. The agreement represents an
important and historic achievement for the Republic
of Colombia, paving the way for a new and promising
period of peace, stability and well-being. We also
commend the efforts of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
As my delegation expresses its satisfaction at the
important steps that have been taken so far on the
various political, economic, social and security tracks,
we once again stress the need for all Colombian parties
to pursue their efforts in the national interest in order
to fulfil the remaining phases, strengthen security
and stability and achieve national reconciliation. In
that connection, Tunisia hopes that President Duque
Márquez’s initiative will be able to overcome the
pending difficulties and disputes, while achieving
the desired progress in the areas of inclusive growth,
transparency, combating corruption, promoting
education, the environment and youth, in addition to
completing the “peace with legality” initiative launched
by the Colombian Government.

Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me, Mr. President, to express our
condolences to the Government and the people of the
sisterly Sultanate of Oman following the death of the
late Sultan Qaboos bin Said, who made important
contributions to humanitarian issues and international
peace and security.

Tunisia believes in national dialogue as an effective
mechanism for overcoming difficulties and resolving
disputes. We therefore stress the need for all Colombian
parties to continue to address all issues within the
framework of constructive dialogue and compromise
without excluding or marginalizing any party.
Colombia’s success in launching the comprehensive
national dialogue and organizing local and provincial
elections was a good indicator in that regard.

I also wish to thank you, Sir, for your response to
my delegation’s suggestion to hold a minute of silence.
I extend my condolences as well to the brotherly Niger
and express our solidarity with the Haitian people and
the United Nations, which has lost more than 100 senior
personnel, notably the Tunisian Hédi Annabi, who was
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti at that time.

Success in implementing the peace agreement,
achieving national reconciliation and consolidating
security and stability is not limited to progress made
in terms of political reintegration, but also relies on
achieving inclusive development and the provision of
basic services in all regions. In that vein, my delegation
underscores the need to continue efforts in the areas
of social and economic reintegration, in particular

10/20

20-00911

13/01/2020

Colombia

through the provision of health services, education
and vocational training to all, especially within local
communities and former territorial areas for training
and reintegration, with a view to reintegration.
We also reaffirm the importance of advancing
on the transitional justice track, providing security
guarantees, ensuring State presence and authority,
achieving inclusive development in all regions, creating
a climate of trust and laying the foundations for continued
progress in all areas. Moreover, Tunisia emphasizes
the importance of strengthening programmes for the
reintegration of children and giving them access to
education, health care and psychological and family
support in order to set them on a different path of life
and protect them from exploitation. It is also necessary
to enhance the participation of women and young
people in political and social processes, peacebuilding,
enhancing human rights and rural reform, which are
among the basic requirements for success in achieving
peace and stability.
In conclusion, the ingredients for achieving peace
and stability in Colombia are available and successful
results are being achieved, despite circumstantial
difficulties. For its part, Tunisia continues to support the
efforts of the United Nations and of all the Colombian
actors as they advance along the path towards a lasting
peace for the benefit of all.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
offers its deepest condolences to Oman for the untimely
passing of Sultan Qaboos.
China condemns the recent terrorist attacks in the
Niger. We thank the Council presidency for the two
minutes of silence observed in the wake of the terrorist
attack in the Niger and on the occasion of the tenth
anniversary of the Haitian earthquake.
China welcomes the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia, Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, to today’s
meeting of the Security Council and wishes to thank
Special Representative Ruiz Massieu for his briefing.
In the three years since the signing of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace, thanks to the efforts of the Colombian
Government and all parties involved, the reintegration
of former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) combatants,
institution-building and reforms in various areas, as
well as the judicial mechanism, have been strengthened

S/PV. 8702

and the peace and reconciliation process has continued
to move forward.
In October last year, elections were held at the
local and departmental levels for the first time since
the signing of the peace agreement, which was an
indication of continued progress in the Colombian
political process. A new chapter is being written for
peace, reconciliation and hope through the efforts of
the Colombian people. Special Representative Ruiz
Massieu and the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, under his leadership, have made important
contributions to the peace process in Colombia as
they pursue their efforts to assist former FARC-EP
combatants with their social, political and economic
reintegration, as well as to take measures to guarantee
their safety and safeguard the rights and interests of
the people of Colombia, especially those of women,
children and minority groups. China expresses its
appreciation for all those efforts and hopes that the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
while respecting its sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity, will continue to play a greater
role in maintaining peace and stability in the country.
The peace agreement reflects the aspiration of
the parties in Colombia for peace, development and
prosperity and represents the broadest consensus in
the country. There has been great progress in the peace
process to date but much remains to be done in order
to fully implement the peace agreement. The security
situation in some areas is still fragile and the safety of
former combatants and social leaders is still threatened.
Given all these challenges, we hope that the
Government of Colombia and all the parties concerned
will cherish the hard-won peace process, shoulder their
respective responsibilities and obligations and take the
fundamental interests of the country into account by
pursuing dialogue with the necessary patience to resolve
differences. They should work together with the United
Nations Verification Mission in its mediation efforts to
promote the peace process in Columbia so as to achieve
greater and more concrete and meaningful progress.
China stands ready to work with other Council
members in supporting the efforts of the Columbian
Government, dialogue among the parties, the work of the
Verification Mission and the peace process in Colombia
so as to contribute positively towards achieving
comprehensive peace, stability and development in
the country.

20-0091111/20

S/PV.8702

Colombia

13/01/2020

Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, allow me to
join previous speakers in extending our condolences
to the Government and people of Oman on the passing
of Sultan Qaboos Bin Said. I would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing the two moments of
silence. On behalf of the Government and people of
Indonesia, let me in particular extend our condolences
to the Government and people of the Niger over the
recent terrorist attack, which claimed 89 lives.

to make use of the National Reintegration Council to
undertake strategic discussions on pending challenges
in the reintegration process and take concerted action
to address them by implementing the recently adopted
road map. The political, legal and socioeconomic
reintegration of former members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo is crucial to creating public trust and confidence
in the peace process.

Let me also warmly welcome Ms. Claudia Blum
de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
Her presence here today is appreciated, as it reflects
the importance that her Government attaches to the
Council’s support for the peace process in her country.
I would also like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu Aguirre
for his detailed and comprehensive briefing on the
recent developments. Today, I would like to make three
brief points.

Lastly, it is incumbent on the Security Council and
on us individually as friends to ensure that every effort
is made to assist the people of Colombia. The Council,
in particular, should continue to provide assistance
to Colombia based on its relevant resolutions. It
is also important for the Council to recall that the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia was
originally established in accordance with the 2016 peace
agreement, in which the parties in Colombia requested
the United Nations to set up a political mission.

First, Indonesia congratulates the people of
Colombia on the successful and relatively peaceful
conduct of the local and departmental elections on
27 October 2019, in which the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común political party and former
combatants participated. The people of Colombia must
build on that important step in the political reintegration
process. We therefore join the Secretary-General in
encouraging the newly elected mayors, governors and
other officials to make sure that programmes related to
the implementation of peace are high on their agenda.

Indonesia
believes
that
capacity-building
and technical support, along with projects geared
towards economic self-sufficiency, would contribute
positively to creating a conducive environment for the
implementation of the peace agreement. As we have
stated previously in the Chamber, Indonesia stands
ready to assist, including by sharing our experiences and
best practices in reintegration as well as in programmes
on crops for peace, such as palm oil. In that regard, I
am happy to report that from 5 to 9 November 2019,
Indonesia and Colombia, in collaboration with the
United Nations Development Programme, organized an
international workshop on crops for peace in Indonesia.
The workshop was aimed at sharing Indonesia’s
experience on how the palm oil industry has helped
to improve the condition of infrastructure in the
environment around plantations and the socioeconomic
conditions of the community.

Secondly, Indonesia would like to underline
once again that the consolidation of sustainable
peace in Colombia can be achieved only through
the comprehensive and consistent fulfilment by all
Colombian stakeholders of their obligations under
the Final Agreement to End the Armed Conflict and
Build a Stable and Lasting Peace. While we, as always,
welcome the many positive developments that have
been achieved, as well as the advances that have been
generated by the peace agreement, we continue to call
on all relevant parties to redouble their efforts to deliver
on their individual commitments.
While it is relatively slow, as pointed out in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/988), we acknowledge
the progress and efforts that have been made in
resolving the accreditation of former combatants.
However, that must be continued. We therefore once
again join the Secretary-General in urging all parties
12/20

In conclusion, I once again reiterate Indonesia’s
support for the peace process in Colombia and commend
the people of Colombia for their courage to achieve
peace and stability in their country.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for taking the initiative to observe a minute of silence
before our meeting in memory of the victims of the
earthquake in Haiti and the recent terrorist attack in
Niger. We grieve together with our colleagues. We
extend our condolences to our Nigerien friends.
20-00911

13/01/2020

Colombia

We welcome the participation of Ms. Claudia Blum
de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
I take this opportunity to congratulate her on her
appointment to that important position and express our
hope that the topic of Colombia will be discussed in the
Security Council only in a positive manner. We also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Carlos Ruiz Massieu Aguirre for his presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/988).
Based on that document, the Security Council and the
Secretary-General agree that the success of the peace
process depends entirely on the ability of Colombians
to fully meet their obligations under the historic Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace.
Colombia has entered a crucial phase that will
determine the sustainability of the peace that the
Colombians achieved at such a high price. As the
Secretary-General rightly notes in his report, the Final
Agreement stipulates a long period of post-conflict
recovery but the solid foundations for peace must be
laid now.
That is why the Security Council, which is entrusted
with monitoring the Colombian peace process, is closely
following developments and hopes that the success
achieved by the signing of the Final Agreement will
not only be maintained but also built upon. The role of
the Verification Mission is very important. However,
the primary responsibility for the peace process clearly
lies with the Colombians themselves. As the report
points out, despite some progress most of the work to
consolidate peace still lies ahead.
Since the signing of the Final Agreement, it has
become clear that, in addition to the emergence of
new challenges in the Colombian peace process, there
remain basic issues that need to be urgently addressed.
While the October elections were more peaceful than
previous ones, the Secretary-General notes increasing
mistrust among various sectors of society. There are
various reasons for that situation.
One of the main ones is the lack of solutions to
security-related issues. The year 2019 saw the highest
number of victims since the final peace agreement
was signed. We believe that every murder must
be investigated and that those responsible must be
appropriately punished. The report also notes gaps in
the area of political reintegration. In particular, one seat
in Parliament remains temporarily blocked, although

S/PV. 8702

under the final agreement it was supposed to be allotted
to the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común
(FARC) party, not to a specific representative.
There is public demand for increasing the
effectiveness of socioeconomic reintegration. The report
notes the widespread dissatisfaction in society with
regard to insufficient progress in the implementation
of agrarian reforms, including reintegration and crop
substitution programmes. In terms of legal reintegration,
it is worth noting that, during the reporting period, State
programmes did not accredit a single new participant,
although they had received applications to that effect.
The Security Council regularly insists on the need
to preserve the independence of the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace. In that regard, we cannot but be concerned
about information in the report that lawyers representing
former combatants in court have been subject to threats.
Regardless of the origin of those threats, we see them as
an attempt to pressure the justice system. That practice
must stop immediately; prominent cases need to be
investigated, and those responsible must be brought
to justice.
I also note the report’s observation that communities
and civil society organizations affected by the actions
of the Ejército de Liberación Nacional are insisting on
the need for dialogue with the latter. We agree with
the view that achieving genuinely lasting peace in
Colombia is hard to imagine without taking into account
the full spectrum of opinions. We trust that Bogotá will
find a way to resolve disagreements with Cuba over
negotiations with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional.
We share the position of Havana that members of that
group cannot be extradited, because Colombia cannot
ensure their immunity, as demanded by the guarantees
established under the protocols signed by the parties
governing the actions of participants in the event that
the dialogue breaks down.
Like all those who have read the report, we are
alarmed by the wave of protests in the country. We are
convinced that only the effective implementation of
the final agreement can reassure society and prevent
another return to arms. That document and its core
element, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, have made
it possible for the Secretary-General and the Security
Council to support the peace process.
It has been our consistent belief that the situation
can be stabilized only through peaceful means, with
the greatest possible level of public dialogue. That

20-0091113/20

S/PV.8702

Colombia

approach is enshrined in core resolution 2282 (2016), on
peacebuilding, which states that national responsibility
for preserving peace presupposes that the Government
concerned take into account the views of every segments
of society. In that regard, we hope that the initiatives
announced by the President and society to establish a
broad national dialogue will yield results. The most
important thing is to prevent duplication of work.
We welcome the declared commitment of the
Colombian leadership to the peace process, but we
cannot stop there. The international community,
the United Nations, the Security Council and, most
important, the Colombians themselves expect the
strict implementation of obligations under the final
peace agreement. Absent that, the consequences
of half a century of internal armed conflict will be
insurmountable. We trust that the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia will continue to play
a significant role in the peace process.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the observance of two minutes of
silence that you organized this morning. We would like
to convey the condolences of the Government of South
Africa to our brothers and sisters of the Niger on the
terrible loss that they suffered. We also remember with
sadness the large number of our brothers and sisters in
Haiti, as well as the valiant United Nations personnel,
who lost their lives 10 years ago.
With regard to the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, let me start by thanking the
Foreign Minister for Colombia, Ms. Claudia Blum de
Barberi, and welcoming her presence at this meeting.
We appreciate her commitment and availability to brief
the Security Council. I should like to assure her of
South Africa’s full support for her country’s efforts to
achieve long-term and sustainable peace. We also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the Verification Mission in Colombia,
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his consistent and hard
work in Colombia and informative briefing.
South Africa remains fully supportive of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace, which was signed between
the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) in 2016. We
welcome the mechanisms of the peace agreement,
such as the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
14/20

13/01/2020

Agreement, and urge the Colombian people and
authorities to use such mechanisms to address gaps
and challenges related to the implementation of the
peace agreement.
That is consistent with South Africa’s principled
stance that the only viable, sustainable resolution to
the conflict remains in the full implementation of the
peace agreement and an inclusive political settlement
that is nationally led by and in the interests of the
people of Colombia. In that regard, we welcome the
relatively peaceful and successful holding of the local
and departmental elections in October 2019, despite
the challenges leading up to the day of elections. The
participation of the FARC and former combatants is
commendable and represents a positive step forward.
South Africa commends the progress made on the
demobilization and reintegration of former members
of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP). In order to achieve
continued and sustained progress in that regard, the
demobilization should be accompanied by continued
training and the creation of economic opportunities for
former combatants.
South Africa welcomes the recent progress made
with regard to the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, which
is playing a key role in addressing accountability for
gross human rights violations committed during the
internal conflict in Colombia. We furthermore call for
respect for the judicial independence of the Special
Jurisdiction. South Africa’s own experience with its
Truth and Reconciliation Commission confirmed that
it was crucial for achieving national unity. In Colombia,
reconciliation processes can ensure that the road to
peace is inclusive.
South Africa is concerned about the intimidation
and increased killings of former members of the FARCEP and of social and community leaders, who now also
include members of the indigenous and Afro-Colombian
populations. We call for a secure environment to be
put in place for the protection of women, children,
social leaders and human rights defenders, as well
as all who are involved in the implementation of the
peace agreement. In that regard, it is also important
to strengthen the role of the National Commission on
Security Guarantees, which can be used as a vehicle to
swiftly implement the peace agreement.
We welcome the Government’s efforts with regard
to the territorial areas for training and reintegration,
20-00911

13/01/2020

Colombia

as well as the constructive role and responsive attitude
of the FARC. That is vital for the sustainable and
successful integration of the FARC into Colombian
society through, but not limited to, rural and political
reintegration, work, access to land and opportunities,
education, the protection of victims’ rights and the
empowerment of women.
Let me conclude by reiterating that it is important
for the international community and, in particular
the United Nations Verification Mission, to continue
to support the full compliance with the agreement
reached between the parties, as well as the cessation of
hostilities and the laying down of arms.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special
Representative of Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz
Massieu for his briefing and for the important work that
he is doing. We warmly welcome Ms. Claudia Blum de
Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Colombia.
The peace process has continued to move
forward through a challenging period. We encourage
everyone to continue those efforts on the path to peace
and prosperity.
We welcome the first local and departmental
elections since the signing of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace and the first with the participation of the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), which marks an
important step forward.
The role of the local and departmental authorities
is critical to the success of Colombia’s peacebuilding
efforts. It is the opportunity for the newly elected
local authorities to align themselves with the peace
process and advance the implementation of the peace
agreement. We acknowledge the Government-initiated
national conversation on different sectors and themes.
We encourage seeing dialogue as a platform to build
more consensus and maintain momentum in the society.
We note positively that the vast majority of former
fighters remain engaged and committed to the Final
Agreement and continue working to reintegrate into
civilian life, despite continued uncertainties and attacks
against them. It is important to emphasize that risks
and challenges still remain and require more attention
and action. As a result of the increased urbanization

S/PV. 8702

of demobilization, the majority of ex-combatants now
live in civilian communities where it is more difficult
to track them and ensure that they can access services
and the same benefits as other citizens.
We are deeply concerned about the security
situation and the rising levels of violence against
community leaders, human rights advocates and former
combatants. Those individuals are at the forefront
of implementing the peace agreement and violence
towards them represents a fundamental threat to its
success. The year 2019 was the most violent year for
former combatants — a record 77 of whom were killed.
We also remain concerned about the reports of violence
targeting women’s political participation.
It is important to ensure the security of all parts
of the country, especially for the most vulnerable. We
encourage the Colombian Government to continue
to make use of all established mechanisms. The
National Commission on Security Guarantees, a body
established in the peace agreement with the mandate
of seeking solutions to ongoing protection challenges,
should be used to develop a policy on the dismantling
of criminal organizations and their support networks.
We reiterate the need to prioritize prevention, early
warning and collective protection measures, which
should take into consideration the particular needs
of the potential victims, such as indigenous people
and Afro-Colombian communities, and should have a
gender-sensitive approach.
Progress is needed in other areas of the agreement.
We encourage everyone to continue that valuable work
though transitional justice mechanisms that provide
truth, justice and reconciliation for victims — decisive
elements for sustainable peace and long-lasting
development. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace
is a pillar of transitional justice and respect for its
independence and autonomy must be ensured.
We are pleased to see the progress that the
Colombian Government has made and would like to
express Estonia’s strong support for the comprehensive
implementation of the peace agreement. The support
of the international community, including the Security
Council, remains critical.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Before I begin, I would also like to express my country’s
solidarity with the Government and people of Haiti 10
years after the devastating earthquake and express our
condolences to the Government and people of the Niger.

20-0091115/20

S/PV.8702

Colombia

We thank you, Mr. President, for acknowledging those
events with moments of silence earlier.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines extends a warm
greeting to Her Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de
Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
and Mr. Emilio Archila, Presidential Counsellor
for Stabilization and Consolidation, and welcomes
their participation in today’s meeting. We also thank
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, for his briefing and
very important work.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the
progress highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/988). We acknowledge the advances made
during the reporting period, such as progress in the
“peace with legality” strategy; the convocation of the
first local and department elections since the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace, in particular the participation
of former combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) and the active participation of women in the
political process; the development of programmes with
a territorial focus for conflict-affected municipalities;
the valuable contributions of the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace; the 12 new collective productive projects
approved by the National Reintegration Council;
and the increase in the number of former combatants
pursuing academic studies.
We also wish to highlight the reported progress in
discussing the bill to extend the law for victims and
land restitution. Indeed, the issue of reparations is an
important component of restitution and reconciliation.
Notwithstanding those positive developments,
my delegation notes significant encumbrances to the
comprehensive implementation of the Final Agreement.
We are concerned about the lack of progress in the
process of accreditation of former combatants, as well
as the difficulties in ensuring security guarantees for
some communities. Those legal and security guarantees
are paramount for the holistic reintegration of former
FARC-EP combatants.
Similarly, permanent solutions for the former FARCEP combatants who reside outside former territorial
areas for training and reintegration (representing 70 per
cent of those who have been accredited) are crucial for
the full implementation of the Final Agreement. Equally
16/20

13/01/2020

crucial is the need for agricultural reforms and the full
implementation of the programme for the substitution of
illicit crops, which will serve to discourage participants
from entering the illegitimate economy. Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines is concerned about the reported
threats to participants involved in that programme.
Fundamentally, my delegation is disturbed by the
continuing acts of violence, especially against women
and children; the attacks against communities; and the
killing of indigenous people and Afro-Colombians.
We condemn those acts of violence and call for the
perpetrators to be brought to justice.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines agrees with the
Secretary-General’s call for the parties to the Final
Agreement to overcome their differences regarding
its implementation through sustained dialogue, as
well as his recommendation to fully capitalize on
the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and
Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement to resolve their disputes.
It is important to underscore that the process of
consolidating lasting peace in Colombia is at a very
important stage. There is no space for complacency
or selective implementation of the Agreement. Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines calls on all parties to honour
their obligations and comply with the comprehensive
implementation of the Final Agreement. The Colombian
peace process remains an exemplar in our multilateral
system, underscoring that one must never foreclose on
dialogue in seeking to resolve conflict, no matter how
difficult and entrenched a conflict may be.
In closing, we reiterate our support to the
Government and people of Colombia in their pursuit of
lasting peace, as well as the United Nations Verification
Mission and country team in assisting with the
comprehensive implementation of the Final Agreement.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for having
the Security Council observe a moment of silence in
memory of the victims of the earthquake in Haiti and
for the victims of terrorism in my country. I express
my condolences to the Government and the people of
Oman following the passing of Sultan Qaboos. I thank
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for his
very informative briefing. I also thank the Minister
20-00911

13/01/2020

Colombia

for Foreign Affairs of Colombia and her delegation for
their presence here today.
Three years have passed since the signing, in
Havana, of the Final Agreement for Ending Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, between the
Government of Colombia and the rebels of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) in 2016. Today, we are pleased
to note that the implementation process of the Final
Agreement has made significant progress in some
areas. Although it is slow or even insufficient in some
respects, that progress nevertheless demonstrates the
strong will of the Colombian authorities and other
stakeholders to advance the peace process and is to
be welcomed.
As a result of the war and organized crime, Colombia
continues to register serious human rights violations
and ongoing criminal activities. The violence, which
had reached a worrying level at the end of last year,
is now somewhat reduced, which has enabled elections
to take place, even in areas where elections could not
previously be held due to insecurity. My delegation
is pleased with the smooth running of those inclusive
municipal elections, in which a woman, for the first
time, was elected mayor of the capital, Bogotá.
Despite that progress, my delegation would like to
call on all actors to redouble their efforts to consolidate
the gains I mentioned earlier. Several factors may
still undermine the progress made, including the still
ineffective State presence in several regions of the
country formerly occupied by armed groups, insufficient
funding for the implementation of the Final Agreement
and the assassinations of human rights activists, leaders
of indigenous peoples and former combatants.
The country is also facing the reconfiguration
of paramilitary groups and the rearmament of some
of the armed groups that have decided to drop their
commitments with the Colombian State. Nevertheless,
we welcome the categorical rejection by Colombians
on all sides of such attempts to undermine the peace
process. The adoption of the road map for reintegration
will hopefully enable progress in the social sectors and
will bolster the country’s current positive momentum.
There is no doubt that the diversification of the
economy through the substitution of illicit crops and
the promotion of alternative agricultural production
will help reduce the level of violence by increasing the
income of producers.

S/PV. 8702

My delegation also commends the efforts to
date the Colombian Government to achieve national
reconciliation and implement the Final Agreement
despite constraints, especially the financial constraints.
We also reiterate our appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ruiz
Massieu, for his tireless work and urge the members
of the Council to maintain their vital support of the
Colombian authorities in their pursuit of lasting peace.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the Niger’s
support for the full implementation of the Final
Agreement so that the Colombian people, whose
history has been marked by conflicts, can at last
know peace, calm and prosperity. I would also like
to once again convey my gratitude for the words of
solidarity expressed towards my country following our
recent tragedy.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Viet Nam.
I warmly welcome Her Excellency Ms. Claudia
Blum de Barberi to this meeting. I thank Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, for his informative and
important briefing.
Last November, the people and all political parties
of Colombia commemorated the third anniversary of
the signing of the historic Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
History tells us that reaching a peace agreement is
difficult, but putting it into action is much more difficult.
In that regard, Viet Nam highly commends the
commitment and efforts of the Colombian Government
and all relevant stakeholders in achieving sustainable
peace and security in the country. Over the last
three years, Colombia has witnessed very positive
developments. We believe that those advances will help
promote the livelihood of its people. We also stress
the important role of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, along with the United Nations
country team, in supporting projects and initiatives
related to the implementation of the Final Agreement.
Many challenges, difficulties and problems remain,
as mentioned by Council members. In that regard, I
would like to stress the following points. First, security
and development for all Colombian people, including
former combatants, must be a top priority. That will

20-0091117/20

S/PV.8702

Colombia

greatly contribute to long-lasting conciliation and
peace. The international community should intensify
its support for the Government of Colombia in several
important areas, such as law enforcement capacitybuilding, substitution of illicit crops and the prevention
of illicit economic activities, crime and violence. We
call for intensified efforts and cooperation to disclose
the location of mines and minefields in the country.
Secondly, we emphasize the need for further
measures to promote economic and inclusive
development, social cohesion, rural development,
housing, education and job creation in order to
sustain the progress made to date. In all reconciliation
processes, providing equal opportunity to all is the
only viable means of deterring violence and reducing
the risk of relapsing into conflict.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our strong
support for the processes of peace, security, national
reconciliation, national unity and development
in Colombia.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
Ms. Blum de Barberi (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): Ten years after the earthquake that affected
millions of people and changed their history, Colombia
reaffirms its solidarity with the people of Haiti. We also
express our sorrow for the victims of the violent events
in the Niger.
I thank the presidency of Viet Nam for convening
this meeting and all Council members for their ongoing
and unanimous support of Colombia. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2019/988) and his Special Representative, Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, for the significant work of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia under his
leadership. My Government appreciates the Mission’s
participation in the national talks led by the President
of the Republic on the policy of “Peace with legality”,
as well as its independent assessments of the progress
and challenges in that area.
The policy of “Peace with legality” that the
Government of President Iván Duque Márquez has
been implementing is aimed at the realization of the
constitutional right of Colombians to peace within the
framework of the protection of the rule of law and is
18/20

13/01/2020

therefore a benchmark for the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, signed in 2016 between
the Government and the former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) guerrillas.
Among its many components, the policy includes
decisive instruments for making progress on the
two fronts examined by the Verification Mission, in
accordance with its mandate — the reintegration of
former FARC-EP members and security guarantees for
communities in the areas most affected by the violence.
With regard to the first mandate, concerning
reintegration programmes, the Secretary-General
has acknowledged the significant progress made by
Colombia. The first-ever participation of the FARC
party in the regional elections held last October and
the election of some former combatants or candidates
endorsed by them are evidence of the guarantee of the
full integration of its members into political life.
In addition, the State lifted the bans that could
restrict the exercise of the vote or the candidature of
former combatants and special protection measures for
their candidates were put in place. That election day
was more peaceful than in the past and reaffirmed the
vitality and pluralism of Colombian democracy.
In terms of economic and social reintegration, the
898 individual productive projects and 47 collective
projects under way and access to employment have
allowed more former combatants to generate their own
income and not depend on State programmes. Ninetynine per cent of former FARC members are affiliated
with the health insurance scheme and 9,000 of them have
had access to formal education and technical training.
I am also pleased to announce that on 27 December,
the Government approved the road map for social
and economic reintegration agreed with FARC,
which establishes a comprehensive, sustainable and
transitional process that, based on institutional services,
will guarantee the realization of the right of people in
transit and their families to reintegration.
We have taken note of the information provided by
the Secretary-General on the accreditation of former
combatants and a workplan has already been defined
to analyse individual cases. The workplan enabled the
accreditation of a further 99 individuals in December
2019, in addition to those included in the report, thus
20-00911

13/01/2020

Colombia

bringing the total number of accredited persons to
13,185. Similarly, as mentioned in the report, the
activities of the Gender Technical Working Group of
the National Reintegration Council are noteworthy, as
are the participation of young people.
The Secretary-General also refers to the
Government’s expectation that former FARC-EP
members hand over their assets to provide reparations
to victims and that they cooperate in locating
anti-personnel mines and in establishing the truth.
Those remains issues on which Colombian society
expects answers. It is worth noting that the Verification
Mission is paying greater attention to those issues,
which are also part of the reintegration process.
Regarding the Mission’s second mandate, the report
mentions various measures adopted by the State for the
protection and security of the communities affected by
violence but warns of the serious challenges that remain,
several of which concern the need to consolidate the
stabilization of the areas most affected by poverty and
violence. That is where the projects under the “Peace
with legality” policy become important. Pursuant to that
policy, the Government has launched 16 development
plans with a territorial focus, which cover the 170
municipalities most affected by violence and poverty.
In the 17 months since the Government took
office, 309 new projects have been approved for
implementation by local authorities, at an investment
cost of $500 million. At the national level, the
Government has completed 641 additional projects
under the plans. It is also essential to highlight the role
of the private sector, which recognizes the economic
benefits of stabilizing the territories concerned and is
progressively investing in the areas most affected by
violence and poverty.
Other undeniable security challenges relate to illegal
economies and associated crime, which we have not yet
been able to eradicate from our country. We continue
to suffer the consequences of criminal economies, in
particular drug trafficking and illegal mining, which
have historically fuelled violence. The Government is
prioritizing the issue and working resolutely to address
those threats, which affect former combatants, social
leaders, ethnic populations, human rights defenders
and vulnerable communities in general.
Colombia ended 2019 with the lowest rate of
kidnapping in its recent history, while homicides
of social leaders decreased by 25 per cent compared

S/PV. 8702

to 2018. Such crimes nonetheless remain deplorable
reminders that we cannot be complacent and must
continue to work. For that reason, the State is taking
systematic steps to speed up judicial investigations
and develop comprehensive public policies to confront
criminal organizations and strengthen prevention, early
warning and protection.
The special unit of the Public Prosecutor’s Office
assigned to investigate attacks on former combatants
has already issued 51 arrest warrants against suspects
and 23 sentences have been handed down, including in
the cases of Alexander Parra Uribe and Dimar Torres
mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report.
A new meeting of the National Commission on
Security Guarantees, led by President Duque Márquez,
was held on 8 January, at which the Commission
verified that the considerations of civil society were
reflected in public policies on the dismantling of illegal
armed groups and the protection of social leaders,
former combatants and human rights defenders. The
recent thwarting of a plan to assassinate the president
of the FARC party is the result of the robust measures
being taken by the Government.
By the end of 2017, coca plantations had reached
an unprecedented 200,000 hectares, but thanks to the
State’s action since 2018, their growth has been halted.
Some 100,000 hectares were destroyed in 2019, mainly
through forced manual eradication programmes. The
Government recognizes the challenges that the country
faces and will continue to work with unwavering
commitment to confront the criminal structures
responsible for attacks on communities and individuals.
The Secretary-General’s report mentions the
importance of achieving comprehensive progress
in other chapters of the 2016 agreement. Although
the issue is not part of the Mission’s mandate, our
Government has a comprehensive vision for that field.
There are more than 500 action indicators that impact
the construction of “peace with legality”, for example
in terms of our comprehensive rural transformation. In
the 17 months that our Government has been in power,
697,000 hectares have been incorporated into our land
fund and 375,000 hectares have been regularized. With
the enactment of an economic growth law, between
2020 and 2022 approximately $900 million will be
invested in building tertiary roads that will improve the
connectivity of remote rural areas of the country with
more developed centres.

20-0091119/20

S/PV.8702

Colombia

At the same time, the Comprehensive System
of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition
continues to be consolidated, with the increasingly
active participation of victims. The necessary resources
have been approved in our national budget for 2020 so
that the three principal mechanisms of that system will
be able to fulfil their mission independently.
Finally, I wish to refer to the demonstrations that
have taken place in the capital and other cities since
21 November, which are referred to in the report of
the Secretary-General. Social and non-governmental
organizations have addressed various petitions to the
State in the course of these demonstrations. Colombia
guarantees the right to social protest as an expression
of participatory democracy, which must be protected.
In response to the demonstrations, President Duque
launched a grand national conversation as a channel for
communication between citizens and their institutions.

20/20

13/01/2020

By 31 December, 12 meetings had been held between
representatives of the Government and more than 1,000
members of social organizations, leaders and experts in
many fields in order to analyse proposals with a view to
building a more just and equitable society. I note with
satisfaction that the report recognizes President Duque’s
openness in the national conversation and I trust that it
will contribute to consolidating the progress achieved
in our ever-challenging political and social context.
I wish to reiterate before the Council today that the
process of building “peace with legality” in Colombia
is ongoing. The process is an irreversible one, but it
requires the commitment and support of the Council
and of the international community as attestations to
the exceptional achievements and advances that have
been made thus far.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

20-00911
