S/PV.8213

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8213th meeting

Friday, 23 March 2018, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Kaag. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Kononuchenko
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen
Ms. Eckels-Currie

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-08141 (E)
*1808141*

S/PV.8213

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the following briefers to participate in this
meeting: Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; and Mr. David Beasley, Executive
Director of the United Nations World Food Programme.
Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley are joining this
meeting via video-teleconference from Dublin and
Biel, Switzerland, respectively.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Recalling the Security Council’s latest note 507 on
its working methods (S/2017/507), I wish to encourage
all participants, both members and non-members of the
Council, to deliver their statements in five minutes or
less. Note 507 also encourages briefers to be succinct and
to focus on key issues. Briefers are further encouraged
to limit initial remarks to 15 minutes or less.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Famines and extreme hunger have
been a part of the human experience since the first
person walked the Earth. Yet it is possible to eradicate
famine from the human experience within our lifetime.
I would like to take a few moments to explain to the
Security Council why I think that is the case and how it
can help achieve that goal.
Despite the wildest predictions, famines have
become less frequent and less lethal over the past few
decades. That is an big achievement. What happened?
First, we have seen a dramatic expansion in
agricultural output and productivity, making more
food available and making it cheaper. In the past
50 years, dramatic improvements in agriculture,
from plant breeding to pest prevention to storage
to irrigation to transportation, produced a fourfold
increase in food grain production using only 12 per
cent more agricultural land. Transportation networks,
improvements in cold-chain technology, science and
trade allow food to be available more consistently
2/21

23/03/2018

and more predictably. That trend is likely to continue.
Science and human ingenuity are likely to continue to
increase productivity, and we will seize the enormous
potential to develop agricultural land in less productive
areas of the world with today’s technology and rising
demand.
Secondly, we have witnessed a global reduction in
poverty. Large numbers of previously poor people have
gained purchasing power over larger volumes of food
now being produced. That would not have happened
without international action and support, including help
with safety net schemes in some of the poorest countries
over the past 20 years, which have been able to scale up
and down as harvests fail or succeed and which have
been adopted into national policy frameworks. That
means that we do not have to face situations in which
drought automatically turns into famine.
While most of the world is better off and faces
fewer risks of famine and hunger, some people still
experience the opposite. The remaining risk of famine
and hunger is now concentrated in a relatively small
number of countries affected by large-scale, severe and
protracted conflict. Nearly two thirds of the world’s
hungry live in countries in conflict. Nearly 500 million
undernourished people — and almost 80 per cent of the
world’s 155 million stunted children — live in countries
affected by conflict.
My colleagues at the Food and Agriculture
Organization and the World Food Programme, together
with the European Union, released a new study
yesterday confirming that conflict — often conflated
with extreme climatic shock and high prices of staple
foods — is now the main driver of global food insecurity.
That includes the four countries where there was a
famine risk last year. Famine was prevented in those
countries only through concerted international efforts.
We therefore have to build on the experience of
last year and sustain and expand our efforts in those
countries, with more funding and better access, while
we continue to join up humanitarian life-saving with
longer-term development efforts. We also need to
build upon the vast experience in the humanitarian
system, which, over the past decades, has become more
effective, efficient and better funded. We have learned
a difficult lesson: between hunger and death there lies
disease. Our response has become more professional
and more integrated. We cover health, nutrition and
18-08141

23/03/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

education, in addition to food, water and shelter, which
used to be our focus.
Most people affected by conflict live in rural areas,
but South Sudan’s former breadbasket, the Equatorias,
has nearly emptied as farmers have fled to Uganda.
In cities, fighting hinders other food production,
transportation and distribution to larger parts of the
population, reducing access to food and causing prices
to increase. When civilians exhaust their resilience,
they are often forced to flee. Once people are displaced,
food insecurity increases for both displaced people and
their hosts — communities of people who themselves
are often living on the cusp of survival. Hunger is the
clear corollary of the vicious cycle of displacement
and conflict.
The behaviour of combatants in these contexts
is often atrocious. Humanitarian access — both by
agencies to reach people and for people to reach aid — is
too often difficult or denied. In some cases, starvation
is being used as a method of warfare. Warring parties
damage or destroy water systems, farms, livestock
and markets. Food-sellers and traders face looting and
exorbitant costs to get food to their clients.
International humanitarian law is designed
to protect against hunger in armed conflict. The
fundamental rules of distinction, proportionality and
precaution serve to safeguard civilian objects necessary
for food production and distribution. International
humanitarian law is very clear: it prohibits starvation
of the civilian population as a method of warfare; it
prohibits attacking, destroying, removing or rendering
useless objects that are indispensable to the survival of
the civilian population; it requires that humanitarian
personnel and assets be respected and protected; and it
requires that all parties to conflict allow and facilitate
impartial humanitarian relief for civilians in need and
that they ensure that humanitarian personnel have the
freedom of movement to carry out life-saving work.
While parties to conflict bear the primary
responsibility for respecting international humanitarian
law, all States carry the duty to ensure that that law
is respected. Members of the Security Council have
influence over parties to conflicts. The Council has the
means to investigate violations of the law. The Council
also has the means to enhance accountability when that
law is violated.
There are no humanitarian solutions to conflict.
We all know that peace and political solutions are what

S/PV. 8213

will disrupt the vicious cycle of conflict and hunger.
The Security Council’s main responsibility is peace and
international security. In other words, the Council can
help prevent famine from ever occurring again.
The President: I thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Beasley.
Mr. Beasley: It is great, Madam President, to be
with you in the digital world. It is always good to see
you, Madam, and it is great to be speaking before the
Security Council. It is good to hear from my friend
Mark Lowcock, who is doing a great job. I have really
come to respect him and the spirit he has in building the
teams and coalitions that are necessary to confront the
conflicts, the wars, the hunger and the other problems
that we are facing on a day-to-day basis.
When I took this role about a year ago, I visited over
36 countries, some of them multiple times, and what I
have seen is good news and bad news. What we are
reporting as of yesterday is extremely bad news, and as
Mark was saying, there is no reason that there should
ever be famine in the world today. There is actually
no reason there should be hunger in the world today,
when we have $300 trillion of available wealth. But
wars and conflicts are driving hunger in a way we have
never seen before. In fact, the hunger rate went up from
777 million people to 815 million people, as Council
members are well aware. But what is very disturbing
is that, even though we have been able to avert famine
in countries like South Sudan, Somalia, Yemen and
Nigeria, particularly its north-east, we now have three
countries that are again on the brink of famine, and it is
absolutely horrific that we were in this place.
But what we have seen for the past three
years is that the number of those who are severely
hungry — those who are literally marching to the brink
of starvation — has gone from 80 million people to
108 million people, 108 million people to 124 million
people. We do not have enough money to feed full
rations to 80 million people. The moneys of the World
Food Programme are about $6 billion; we need $9 to
$10 billion just to reach the 108 million people, much
less the 124 million people. The question we have to
ask ourselves today is, what is driving this extreme
hunger rate? The answer is, as Mark clearly stipulated,
human-made conflict. I speak here on behalf of the
Rome-based agencies, understanding that we can in
fact end world hunger by 2030, but we cannot do it as
long as there is conflict.

18-081413/21

S/PV.8213

Maintenance of international peace and security

Let me paint a couple pictures of what I see as a
worst-case scenario if we do not get ahead of the curve.
This is what I said to the security conference in Munich
just a few weeks ago, where I saw many members of the
Council in the Chamber today. When we take a country
the size of Syria, for example, with approximately
20 million people, with destabilization and conflict, we
know from our studies and surveys that for every 1 per
cent increase in hunger there is a 2 per cent increase
in migration. What is also very clear is that a Syrian,
like any other internally displaced person, will move
two, three or four times inside his or her country before
he or she will leave the country. The cost of feeding a
Syrian inside Syria, for example, is about 50 cents per
day, which is almost double the normal cost, because
the cost of war creates additional transportation and
logistics costs. By the way, because of conflict, we
incur an additional $1 billion in extra costs in terms of
just delivering food. But back to the point: 50 cents per
day for feeding a Syrian in Syria, €50 per day for the
total humanitarian support and costs, whether it is in
Switzerland or Germany or anywhere else in Europe.
As I tell my friends, if leaders today — wherever it
is in the world, but particularly in Europe — think they
had a problem with the migration issue, having been
infiltrated by a few elements from the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), from a nation of 20 million
people, with ISIS moving down into the greater
Sahel region — an area of 500 million people — and
partnering with Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab and
Al-Qaida, then they should consider that we cannot
stand and continue to take the old approach to address
the issues in this arena. We have got to rethink how to
use humanitarian dollars more effectively, how to use
development dollars more effectively to address hunger
in conflict, because humanitarian aid and development
are clearly related to one another. What we are seeing,
therefore, is that we have to get ahead of the curve
and work together as a team with better collaboration
and coordination.
For example, we feed almost 80 million people on
any given day, and we are feeding millions of people
on any given day in the greater Sahel region. We know
that last year alone, out of our 80 some odd million,
more than 10 million were involved with the food-forasset programme. What does that mean? When you
feed 80-something million people a day, as Mark can
tell you, you learn a lot. You listen to people; they
4/21

23/03/2018

hear things, they tell you things. They know what is
going on.
ISIS and terrorist groups want to use food as a
weapon of recruitment, a weapon of war — as Mark
was saying, a weapon of destruction. We think that the
Security Council, the United Nations in general and our
donors around the world, our Member States, should
use food as a weapon of reconstruction, a weapon of
peace, a weapon for bringing people together.
Let me just give some results in connection with
the 10 million people that we had engaged in a foodfor-asset programme. This shows what happens when
sustainability and resilience are created in areas that are
dramatically impacted for a variety of reasons — yes,
terrorism, but also climate impact. We see droughtstricken areas in the greater Sahel region and what
happens there; not just in the greater Sahel, but in
Ethiopia, in Kenya, in Somalia and other places.
I have yet to meet a single beneficiary who did not
want to improve his or her community and life position.
They do not want support only in terms of saving lives
but also in terms of changing lives. We reforested more
than 8,000 hectares of land just last year. More than
137,000 hectares of land were rehabilitated, as well
as more than 5,000 water ponds and shallow wells.
More than 11,000 kilometres of roads were rebuilt and
repaired, as well as feeder roads for markets and access.
The point is, it is not just about feeding people, it is
giving them resilience. The mothers will explain that they
did not want to see their husbands join ISIS, Al-Qaida,
Boko Haram or Al-Shabaab. But they will tell you also
that after their little girl or their little boy had not eaten
in two weeks, the husband had no choice but to join. So
they yield because of conditions of vulnerability, where
they do not have resilience or sustainable development.
But when we carry out the programmes effectively,
sustainable development and resilience are created,
giving families opportunities — not just saving lives
but changing livelihoods and giving opportunities.
Great things happen, and this minimizes the impact of
extremist groups in these very fragile areas.
Let me just give an example. When I was speaking
just two weeks with the Minister of Agriculture — we
all understand that there is a climate impact with regard
to the greater Sahel region — I was told that the Sahara
is moving down at the rate of 1.5 kilometres per year
into the pasturelands, the greenlands, the croplands.
What does that mean? On the surface, it may not seem
18-08141

23/03/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

that big of a deal. But the herders and the pastoralists
are having to move down 1.5 kilometres with it to have
vegetation for their cattle, their goats, their sheep, and
that means more conflict with farmers. We are seeing
that conflict continuing to destabilize the situation, and
the extremist groups are trying to take advantage of it.
I therefore plead with the Security Council to
help us first and foremost in the wars. The Council, I
believe, has a chance to do more to impact the world
than in any time period in our history, because we are
facing the worst humanitarian crisis in the history of
the United Nations. I believe that the men and women
in this Chamber, who are from various nations, may
have differences on some issues, but should not have
difference on all issues. Let us work together to end
conflict. Let us work together to make certain that we
have the access we need to provide humanitarian and
development support. Until we do so, we will never
solve world hunger, because hunger is directly related
to conflict, and conflict is directly related to hunger.
I think that Mark and I could probably answer
questions for hours upon hours and speak to this issue
from the heart all day long, but I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for allowing us this opportunity
to speak briefly and let the Council know what we
are seeing out there on any given day. The Council’s
support is vital and critical to our continued success.
The President: I thank Mr. Beasley for his briefing,
and, in my national capacity, both briefers for their very
compelling story, narrative and clear call to action.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as Minister for Foreign Trade and Development
Cooperation of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
I should like once again to reiterate our thanks
to Mark Lowcock and David Beasley for their
comprehensive and informative briefings.
It is very clear that one of the main causes of
hunger is conflict: man-made conflict. After decades
of a steady decline in the number of people suffering
from malnutrition and famine, today we are faced with
a dangerous setback, one that endangers Sustainable
Development Goal 2, a world of zero hunger. The
unthinkable is happening: hunger is again on the rise.
Last year, the Secretary-General called on the
Council to take action in response to no fewer than four
major new famines: in Somalia, South Sudan, Yemen
and Nigeria. These famines were directly threatening

S/PV. 8213

20 million people: men, women and children. These and
other examples of food insecurity have one important
factor in common, and one alone: conflict.
In our world of abundance, technology and big data,
famine is completely avoidable. Where it happens, it is
man-made. It occurs where people harm other people.
Regrettably, so-called man-made famine is almost
becoming a tautology.
While all-out famine has been barely averted in the
four countries I just mentioned, many people remain
extremely food-insecure. This entails grave risks
for regional stability, as conflict and hunger do not
respect national borders or boundaries. Rising levels
of hunger and conflict will lead to greater migration,
force displacement and put severe pressure on host
countries in the region and beyond. The fact that this
is happening in the twenty-first century, in an age of
unparalleled progress, technological possibilities and
wealth, is shameful.
If people are the main cause of famine and food
insecurity in conflict situations, then surely people are
able to resolve this issue. This means that the end of
famine depends on political will.
Armed conflict affects food security in many
ways. In modern warfare we see fields of crops being
destroyed, bakeries burned and markets hit. We see
parties to a conflict deliberately denying access to food
aid for civilians in need. We see indiscriminate bombing
that damages food sources and prevents civilians from
reaching them safely. We see this all too often, in too
many places.
I recently visited the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In the camp of Katanika, an older lady told
me that all her family members had had to flee their
villages, leaving everything behind. They do not have
enough to eat and no longer have a way of producing
their own food. Going back to their villages of origin is
impossible: everything has been destroyed.
In South Sudan, army checkpoints prevent aid
convoys from reaching their destination. The recent
report by the Panel of Experts stated in no uncertain
terms that starvation was being used there as a weapon
of war.
Elsewhere, as in Syria, we witness situations that
we would not have imagined possible in our era. UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock said in a briefing

18-081415/21

S/PV.8213

Maintenance of international peace and security

to the Council on 28 February, so very recently, that
without humanitarian access,
“we will soon see even more people dying from
starvation and disease than from the bombing and
shelling”. (see S/PV.8195, p. 3)
In Yemen as well, we see the denial of access
having grave consequences for the number of people
suffering from food insecurity.
Clearly, the problem is not a lack of rules. Rather,
it is the persistent failure of warring parties to comply
with those rules. That is what causes civilians in
conflict to suffer even more.
Together, we, the international community, have
agreed to regulate the conduct of warfare: to spare
civilians in conflict to the greatest extent possible and
to respect, above all, their human dignity. Flouting
the law of war not only turns these norms into hollow
phrases; it erodes the rules-based international order
itself. We cannot allow that to happen.
Hunger caused by conflict as well as starvation
reflect our collective failure, and the Council has a
collective responsibility to address it and to prevent it
from happening in future. For this we need a detailed
framework for action.
First, we should reaffirm the norms established
over the past 70 years: the prohibition of starvation
as a method of warfare, the protection of civilian
objects necessary for food production, and, above
all, guarantees for humanitarian access. International
humanitarian law, which all warring parties are obliged
to respect and comply with, defines our humanity. We
must not allow those rules to unravel.
Secondly, we should take a firm stance against
violations of international law by holding to account
those responsible for such violations. That can be
done within national jurisdictions; but where those
jurisdictions fail, international mechanisms come into
play. In such situations, the most serious cases should
be referred to the International Criminal Court.
Thirdly, we should step up our efforts to prevent
food insecurity in conflict. The Food and Agriculture
Organization and the World Food Programme and their
partners have the means and technology to issue early
warnings, which they regularly report on. In conflict
situations, it is up to the Council to follow up with early
action, not only to prevent conflicts from exacerbating
6/21

23/03/2018

food insecurity in the short-term by ensuring
humanitarian access, but also to save societies from the
perils of a generation raised in hunger. We therefore
need continuous engagement by the Council.
Finally, humanitarian aid in itself is not a sustainable
answer. It never has been. Only political solutions can
truly end suffering. Therein lies the most important
task for the Council.
Hunger is the most avoidable of disasters.
Starvation is the most heinous method of warfare. It
is incumbent upon us to ensure that the starvation of
civilians becomes a crime of the past — a practice both
forbidden and punishable. I am counting on the support
of those present and look forward to working together
to achieve that important goal.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Côte d’Ivoire thanks your country, Madam
President, for organizing this important discussion on
the topic of conflict and hunger. This highly relevant
theme is of great concern to the Security Council in the
light of the numerous conflicts taking place in the world
and the serious humanitarian crises they engender. Côte
d’Ivoire also extends its gratitude to Mr. Lowcock and
Mr. Beasley for their briefings on the matter at hand.
Not a day goes by without United Nations
humanitarian
agencies,
non-United
Nations
humanitarian organizations, the international media
and human rights organizations issuing urgent appeals
to the international community, particularly to the
Organization and the Security Council, on conflictrelated hunger and food insecurity. The latest report of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, published in 2017, which unfortunately
portrays a particularly alarming situation, clearly
highlights with evidence the strong correlation between
armed conflict, hunger and food insecurity, and appeals
to our conscience for us to commit to collective action
towards lasting conflict resolution. According to the
report, 489 million of the 815 million food insecure and
chronically undernourished people in the world live in
conflict-affected countries, including in Africa, Asia
and the Middle East.
While recognizing that armed conflict and hunger
are intertwined, my delegation believes that identifying
root causes and the nature of conflicts could provide
18-08141

23/03/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

a lasting solution to the problem. Certainly, finding
solutions to the underlying and various causes of conflict
is the best way to prevent the outbreak of conflicts
and reduce the risk of food insecurity. In that context,
Member States must continue their efforts to promote
democracy, the rule of law and inclusive development
and fight against corruption, the dividends of which
will benefit the entire population.
As for the United Nations, it must continue
relentlessly in the promotion of the Sustainable
Development Goals by encouraging Member States
to prioritize food security in their policy-making by
developing an agricultural policy that requires targeted
investments as a matter of priority with a view to
satisfying the basic needs of the populations. Such
agricultural policies must also take into account the
empowerment of women, who can play a leading role
in strengthening food security and combating climate
change. Eliminating hunger is therefore a collective
responsibility that requires us, in our opinion, to
fight upstream against all the factors that can lead to
poverty and food crises, which constitute real threats to
international peace and security.
It is regrettable to note that countries in conflict or
weakened by the persistence of political crises devote
a significant portion of their financial resources to
military spending, to the detriment of the agricultural
sector, while better targeted investments could
contribute to boosting resilience to food insecurity
and hunger. Furthermore, due to massive population
displacements and the resulting densely populated
concentrations, armed conflicts and violence lead to
the overexploitation and depletion of water resources
and arable lands, as well as increased strain on
the environment.
As evidence of that, the region of the Lake Chad
basin, which has experienced an alarming 90 per
cent drop in water volume over the past 40 years, has
recorded more than 2.2 million displaced people since
the 2009 Boko Haram insurrection. It is undeniable
that, in a context strongly marked by the effects of
climate change, such massive displacements of people
exacerbate the tensions between host communities and
refugees for control of arable lands.
As conflicts are one of the major causes of hunger
and food insecurity, we believe it is essential to work
towards strengthening the resilience of State and regional
actors to crises, specifically on the African continent.

S/PV. 8213

To that end, we must bolster cooperation among States
with a view to improving the living conditions of the
people who are in search of a better life.
Humanitarian access to populations facing hunger
and food insecurity is a sacred right, non-respect of
which constitutes a serious violation of international
humanitarian law. The perpetrators of hindering
international humanitarian assistance must therefore
be identified and held accountable before international
courts. All parties to a conflict must ensure respect
for peoples’ right to access humanitarian aid, which
means opening and securing humanitarian corridors is
essential for the delivery of such aid.
Finally, to be effective, emergency humanitarian
relief must be coordinated between the structures
involved in humanitarian operations, in addition to
being associated with long-term development goals in
order to address structural development challenges,
such as youth employment and social cohesion.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and for
the briefings by Mr. Mark Lowcock and Mr. David
Beasley, as well as the concept note prepared for this
occasion. We especially want to welcome the presence
of Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Minister for Foreign Trade and
Development Cooperation of the Netherlands.
Peru notes with deep concern the increase in
humanitarian crises throughout the world and in famine,
which threatens millions of people in conflict-affected
countries, such as Yemen, Somalia, South Sudan,
Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as in the Sahel and parts of Syria. Clearly, today’s
conflicts, which are taking place in a globalized and
interdependent world, have increasingly devastating
and complex humanitarian consequences and are a
major cause of the alarming increase in famines. It is
also clear that famines and situations of extreme poverty
and neglect by institutions in general may become
root causes of conflicts. They generate conditions
conducive to violent extremism and terrorism, as well
as to the recruitment of young people and children by
armed groups.
The vicious cycle of poverty and hunger, violence
and conflict is reflected in dramatic increases in human
vulnerability. Children are especially vulnerable to the
impact of malnutrition. Women are exposed to sexual
blackmail for food, among other abuses. Displaced
persons and refugees generate additional challenges.

18-081417/21

S/PV.8213

Maintenance of international peace and security

The theses of Amartya Sen and other social scientists
indicate that good governance and accountability could
prevent famines. That perspective is also consistent
with the concept of sustainable peace, which aims to
build inclusive institutions in order to prevent conflicts
and address their root causes. In that vein, we believe
that the promotion of labour-intensive agricultural
development is key, especially in rural areas, to ensure
food security and prevent the outbreak, escalation and
recurrence of conflicts.
We highlight the need for more consistent and
coordinated action by the United Nations system, in
particular with regard to its humanitarian assistance
operations, support for sustainable development and
peacekeeping on the ground. As far as possible, food
assistance must rely on locally produced foods.
In accordance with international humanitarian
law, the Security Council has the responsibility of
ensuring sustained, safe, rapid and unhindered access
to assistance in areas affected by conflicts and famines.
That includes essential imports and the protection of
the civil infrastructure needed for their distribution.
In addition to promoting political solutions to
conflicts, the Council must respond firmly to violations
of international humanitarian law involving obstacles
to access to humanitarian assistance and to the
atrocious crime of using hunger as a weapon of war. To
that end, the Secretariat should inform the Council in
a systematic and timely way about the risks of famine
associated with conflicts and about any obstacles to
access to humanitarian assistance and identify those
responsible. That should trigger specific sanctions,
including criminal punishment, within the framework
of due process. We also believe that food should be
distributed by women in order to prevent cases of
sexual blackmail and other abuses.
We wish to conclude by welcoming international
efforts to provide humanitarian assistance and indicate
the urgency of immediately disbursing the promised
funds. We also want to highlight the professionalism
and commitment of the humanitarian workers of the
United Nations system and other agencies.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are happy to see you,
Madam President, presiding over this briefing. I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
and David Beasley of the World Food Programme for
sharing their views on the link between conflict and
hunger and their experience in the field. We want to
8/21

23/03/2018

express appreciation to both for the very good work
they and their respective institutions and programmes
have been doing.
We recognize that slow and sudden-onset disasters,
including the impact of climate change, continue to be
one of the major triggers of food insecurity and hunger
in different parts of the world. As recognized in the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, as well as the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, disasterinduced food insecurity and hunger have an impact
on the overall development of a country and require a
development-oriented solution supported by enhanced
international cooperation. In our view, these issues
should continue to be considered within their primary
forums, particularly the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council.
Unresolved conflicts and certain measures taken
by parties to an armed conflict also continue to
exacerbate hunger and food insecurity in different
parts of the world. Lack of progress in resolving some
pressing conflict situations have also led to serious
humanitarian crises, including hunger and chronic
food insecurity. We are of the view that the focus of
the Council, including today’s briefing and possible
follow-up, should be limited to conflict-exacerbated
hunger and food insecurity. In that regard, we would
like to underline the following five points.
First, preventing conflict-exacerbated food
insecurity and hunger in different parts of the world
requires addressing the root causes of conflicts and
finding durable solutions aimed at preventing further
relapses. It is important for the Council to use all
available tools at its disposal, including through
enhanced engagement with regional and subregional
organizations, with a view to preventing and addressing
the root causes of conflicts in different parts of the
world. In that regard, of course, nothing meaningful
can be done without some level of unity within the
Council. That might seem trivial because of repetition,
but it is a fact that cannot be denied.
Secondly, pending durable solutions for the
root causes of conflicts, the provision of life-saving
humanitarian assistance to civilians remains critical.
While recognizing the minimal role of development
actors and development-oriented solutions in conflict
situations, humanitarian actors indeed play a significant
role in responding to food insecurity in complex
18-08141

23/03/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

situations. However, securing humanitarian access
has become a major challenge and has been one of the
issues that we keep on discussing in the consideration
of various conflict situations. In some situations, the
Council has been trying to facilitate humanitarian
access. In that regard, one cannot deny that political
differences have proved to be major obstacles, while
highlighting again the need to prioritize the unity
of the Council. How we can prioritize addressing
humanitarian tragedies, hunger and famine in the face
of deep political differences is the major challenge the
world faces today and that appears to be extremely selfevident.
Thirdly, peacekeeping missions continue to play a
significant role in the safe provision of humanitarian
assistance and facilitating humanitarian access. It is
also important to note that a lack of or limited resources
have, over the years, impacted the role of peacekeeping
missions to that end, thereby limiting their contribution
to efforts aimed at the prevention of conflict-induced
food insecurity and hunger. In our view, that requires
further consideration by the Council.
Fourthly, the Security Council could use some of
the subsidiary bodies, such as the Working Group on
Children in Armed Conflict or mandated sanctions
committees, to reduce and prevent conflict-induced
human suffering, starvation, hunger or food insecurity.
In conclusion, we believe that respecting the
principles of complementarity among the various
United Nations organs is important to ensure achieving
the goals enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations across the Organization’s various pillars. That
is why we believe there is a need for caution to avoid
overstretching the discussion and for limiting its scope
to conflict-exacerbated hunger and food insecurity.
Given that, using hunger as a weapon of war is a
gross violation of international law, which should be
vehemently condemned.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome today’s
presence of Her Excellency Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Minister
for Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation of the
Netherlands. Likewise, we express our gratitude for
the briefings by Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, and by Mr. David Beasley, Executive
Director of the United Nations World Food Programme,
to whom we would like to take this opportunity to

S/PV. 8213

express our unwavering support for the important work
that they do.
Food insecurity and the risk of famine in the world
are undoubtedly a problem that must concern us all and
include the involvement and joint action of the entire
international community so that they may be prevented
and mitigated through cross-cutting and comprehensive
measures, especially now, as we are on the path to
fulfilling the Sustainable Development Goals and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. However,
the predicament created by famine is more worrisome
when one of its causes and a main factor of its
persistence are the direct result of armed conflicts and
man-made violence. A tragic example of the latter are
the 74 million people at risk of acute food insecurity
who live in conflict areas, primarily in Africa and the
Middle East. Unfortunately, other victims who, upon
escaping violent situations, have abandoned their homes
and means of subsistence are dramatically adding to the
already alarming number of forcibly displaced persons
and account for more than 65 million people throughout
the world, according to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.
On the one hand, the constant flow of displaced
persons and refugees has undeniably resulted in the
stoppage of agricultural activities and the breakdown
of production cycles, as well as the loss of land and
livestock, thereby affecting the sustainable supply of
basic foodstuffs. While, on the other hand, it has had
a severe impact upon communities and States that
receive those refugees and displaced persons, as they
try the latters’ ability ensure their subsistence and
provide them with sufficient food. In some instances,
that fragile situation is further worsened owing to
the fact that, in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law, actors involved in and parties to
conflicts impose arbitrary restrictions on access roads,
ports and airports by which imported food and basic
humanitarian assistance arrives to meet the needs of
the people, as well as target humanitarian assistance as
military objectives — a practice that we condemn in the
strongest of terms. Armed conflicts are also responsible
for explosive remnants of war contaminating vast tracks
of land that could otherwise be used for agriculture.
It is important to consider that the high humanitarian
cost that conflicts entail goes hand-in-had with policies
aimed at waging war and the excessive military expenses
that they entail, and that they regrettably perpetuate a
cycle of poverty directly affecting the people. It is clear

18-081419/21

S/PV.8213

Maintenance of international peace and security

that the presence of famine in conflict areas is not owing
to a lack of resources for obtaining food, but to the lack
of parties’ political will to resolve their differences. In
that regard, my delegation calls on the Security Council
and the membership of the Organization, in general, to
maintain a united and firm stand in condemning acts
and campaigns of violence and belligerence that worsen
current conflicts and create harmful instability posing
a threat to the lives of millions of innocent people.
As Executive Director Beasley stated earlier,
Bolivia believes unequivocally that the best way to
avoid and stop the perpetuation of the vicious cycle of
war, conflict, famine and humanitarian catastrophes
lies essentially in prevention. The effective application
of mediation, negotiation, prevention and conciliation
for the peaceful settlement of disputes, as well as the
pre-eminent use of the provisions set forth in Chapters
VI and VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, are
indispensable to advance analysis and comprehensive
debate on conflicts, their root causes and their possible
consequences. Clearly, prevention must be considered
as an asset at the service of the people to strengthen,
and not to weaken or diminish, States. Accordingly, we
believe that the use of reports and briefings on food
insecurity and hunger that include status reports on
conflict areas, such as the Global Report on Food Crises,
published by the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and the World Food Programme, and
the European Commission report on the same subject
presented yesterday, are useful tools for prevention and
providing early warning of potential situations whereby
crises might worsen. It is also important that, within the
framework of their respective mandates, specific United
Nations bodies work in coordination with the various
agencies and programmes responsible for monitoring
levels of food supplies, particularly in conflict areas,
so that strengthening humanitarian assistance can be
planned for in a cross-cutting manner and efforts to
ensure post-conflict resilience are supported.
Lastly, we highlight the content of presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/14, of August 2017, which
reiterates that reports the Secretary General can provide
on humanitarian situations and responses, in particular
the risk of famine in areas affected by conflicts, are
extremely important in designing and implementing
prevention mechanisms.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): As we heard this
morning, the number of women, men and children in
our world who are suffering from food insecurity is
10/21

23/03/2018

increasing. At the same time, more and more people are
living in areas torn apart by war and conflict. This we
see every day in the Security Council. As this year’s
Global Report on Food Crises sets out, those are not
separate trends. The links between conflict and hunger
are clear and undeniable. Over the past year, in the 18
countries where 74 million, or 60 per cent, of those in
acute need live, conflict and insecurity were the main
driver of food insecurity. Conflict often also prevents
humanitarian access. At the same time, food insecurity
can trigger conflict, thereby creating a vicious cycle.
As we heard this morning from Mr. Lowcock, hunger
today is used as a weapon of war.
Let me therefore begin by thanking the Dutch
presidency, and you, Madam, for organizing today’s
meeting on this important issue, which we cannot
ignore if we are to meet our responsibilities to maintain
international peace and security. Let me also thank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Executive
Director Beasley for their candid and forthright
briefings today. They have clearly outlined the
challenges that they and their partners face on a daily
basis as they seek to meet the needs of people who are
trapped by mutually reinforcing conflict and hunger
across the world. They also pointed out opportunities
represented by the Council effectively shouldering
its responsibilities.
Last year, the Secretary-General came to us and
warned that 20 million people were at risk of famine.
In response, the Council heeded his early warning and
took early action to avoid disaster. Working together,
the international community managed to avert
famine, and we demonstrated the important role that
the Council has to play. However, as I said yesterday
during the briefing on the Lake Chad basin (see
S/PV.8212), our actions have addressed only the acute
symptoms of such crises. The situation for millions of
people around the world remains perilous. In South
Sudan, for example, the protracted conflict has led to
a shocking rise in hunger. While outright famine might
have been averted, many individuals are suffering
from famine-like conditions. Women and children are
particularly vulnerable, with women often being the
first to sacrifice their food consumption for others in
the family. Continued fighting and displacement have
disrupted planting and harvesting, which means that
next year there will be less food once again, thereby
making it still more unaffordable.
18-08141

23/03/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Food insecurity is being exacerbated by economic
collapse. Seven million people are now in need of
humanitarian assistance. Even when food is available
and humanitarians are ready to respond, assistance to
people in need is impeded and denied due to access
restrictions. The vicious cycle is now all too familiar
and all too common. In Somalia, violence and conflict,
combined with severe droughts, continue to cause
mass displacement. The denial of access is hindering
an effective response aimed at reaching 6.2 million
people. In Yemen, the disrupted and restricted delivery
of humanitarian assistance is affecting the 22.2 million
Yemenis desperately in need of humanitarian aid. More
decisive and long-term action is clearly needed. How
should the Council respond?
First, the role of the Council is to maintain
international peace and security, which entails
preventing conflicts, effectively working for their
cessation and contributing to sustaining peace. The
prevention of conflict requires a proactive approach
to addressing the deeper, underlying risks that prevent
sustainable development and peace. In order to
efficiently address the root causes and complex drivers
of conflict, such as those discussed today, we must
better understand the risks. Regular reporting on food
insecurity and early warning indications from agencies,
such as the World Food Programme and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
serve to highlight the link between conflict and food
insecurity. The Council can then take greater proactive
action to prevent human suffering.
Secondly, the Council also has an important role to
play in upholding and ensuring respect for international
law, including international humanitarian law. That
includes calling on parties to armed conflict to
ensure the protection of civilians and civilian objects,
including objects necessary for food production and
distribution, and firmly condemning them when such
basic norms are not respected. Parties must refrain
from attacking or rendering useless objects such as
foodstuffs, agriculture areas, crops, livestock, drinking
water installations and supplies.
Another fundamental element of ensuring respect
for international law includes ensuring rapid, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access to all those in need
of such assistance. Arbitrarily denying humanitarian
access to people in need is a violation of international
humanitarian law. Starvation as a method of warfare
is outlawed and unacceptable. As we have heard today

S/PV. 8213

from previous speakers, accountability for violations
of those fundamental norms is critical. The Council
must play its full role in ensuring that its demands are
adhered to.
Adequate and flexible funding is also essential for
an effective and swift humanitarian response. Sweden
is a long-standing donor to the Central Emergency
Response Fund and all United Nations humanitarian
appeals. We call on others to contribute in order
to ensure that sufficient funding is available for
time-critical assistance and protection for civilians in
need. However, humanitarian assistance should only
be a short-term solution to the immediate crisis. To
break the vicious cycle of hunger and conflict, we must
invest in building sustainable peace, allowing farmers
to return to their lands to rebuild their livelihoods and
for sustainable, resilient and inclusive food systems to
re-emerge.
In conclusion, the duty the Secretary-General
entrusted to the Council last year is far from completed.
In the presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/14) adopted
in August last year, facilitated by Sweden, the Council
committed to working with the Secretary-General to
pursue all possible avenues to end conflicts and to take
action to avert famine in conflict-affected countries. We
look forward to continued updates from the SecretaryGeneral on the matter. The Council must remain seized
of the issuse and consider further action.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Today our briefers
have sounded the alarm and warned us of the surging
levels of acute hunger, which are largely attributable
to conflict. But that is not for the first time. More than
a year ago, the Secretary-General drew the Council’s
attention to the change in the long-term trend in
global hunger: it was then rising for the first time in
a decade. He stated that the situation was critical. The
United Nations predicted four simultaneous famines,
threatening the lives of 20 million people. Through the
generosity of donors and the actions of humanitarian
and development organizations, international financial
institutions and regional Governments, famine itself
was prevented or, at least, contained.
But let us be clear. Over the past year, suffering and
hunger have increased. In the world today, one out of
every nine people is undernourished. That is a total of
815 million people — an increase of 38 million in the
past year. Conflict is the main reason for that increase
in hunger. Sixty per cent of hungry and malnourished

18-0814111/21

S/PV.8213

Maintenance of international peace and security

people live in countries affected by conflict. Almost
75 per cent of the world’s 155 million stunted children
under the age of five live in countries affected by
conflict. It is the most vulnerable, in particular women
and children, who are most affected by hunger. Those
statistics indicate that the actions we have taken in the
past year to reduce hunger have not been enough. As
so clearly stated by our briefers, we must examine and
address the root causes of the severe hunger crisis if we
hope to put an end to it.
Last August, the Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/14) that for the first time
acknowledged that hunger and conflict are linked.
That was a step forward, but it provides us with
only half the picture. In the statement the Security
Council emphasized:
“with deep concern that ongoing conflicts
and violence have devastating humanitarian
consequences and hinder an effective humanitarian
response in the short, medium and long term and
are therefore a major cause of famine”.
It reads as if hunger is just an inevitable consequence
of war or a by-product of the changing nature of conflict,
but that is clearly not the case. Hunger does not need
to be a product of war. I hope we can make that clear
in future Council products. We must understand and
acknowledge the true nature of the problem in order
to take the necessary collective actions to break the
deadly link between conflict and hunger. In that regard,
we see three key areas of responsibility for the Council.
First, we must redouble efforts to prevent and resolve
conflicts and build and sustain peace. Secondly, we must
uphold international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. We are quickly approaching a new
normal where warring parties believe it is acceptable
to destroy crops, interrupt markets and attack water
points, hospitals and schools. Too often, there is a lack
of accountability for State actors and other parties to
conflict who are responsible for increasing hunger.
Thirdly, we must actively safeguard humanitarian
access. In almost all of the crises before the Council,
people are denied or are unable to access essential aid,
often with the most vulnerable people being the worst
affected. The Security Council can, and must, play a
key role to enable the safe, unhindered and rapid access
of populations to humanitarian assistance. We must
engage with national and regional authorities to apply
diplomatic pressure and insist on the removal of access
12/21

23/03/2018

constraints. We must also pursue accountability for
any violations.
We must think creatively when responding to the
crisis. For example, to identify the most serious cases of
obstructed access objectively, we could use a model that
articulates access in terms of needs met by the delivery
of health-care protection and education, rather than
simply by the number of aid convoys. We could also
include the denial of access in the design of sanctions
mandated by the Council more routinely.
We are extremely grateful to you, Madam
President, and to the Kingdom of the Netherlands for
convening today’s meeting, because it is a subject
about which the United Kingdom — the third-largest
humanitarian donor — cares deeply and in which it
is deeply engaged. The scale of the challenge we face
is clear. The threat of famine remains. In a world of
abundance, 815 million people are still hungry. Their
hunger is used as a weapon of war. We must act and
use the tools at our disposal to show the world that it
is not acceptable and that we around this table do not
accept it. We must seek accountability and make the
consequences of those appalling actions clear.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like to thank you, Madam President, and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands for convening today’s
meeting, and we congratulate you on your presidency.
We also thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, and Mr. David Beasley, Executive
Director of the World Food Programme, for their
briefings and for the tireless efforts of their agencies to
provide humanitarian assistance, particularly given the
increasing number of violent conflicts around the world
over the past 10 years. That has been evident in the
countries that are facing food insecurity. The data show
that in 2017, 124 million in 51 countries were affected
by acute food insecurity. According to the Global
Report on Food Crises 2018, published by the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and the World Food Programme, that is an increase of
11 million people as compared to the previous year.
More than a year ago, on 21 February 2017, the
Secretary-General sent a letter to Member States in
which he highlighted the world food crisis and the risk
of famine in north-eastern Nigeria, Somalia, South
Sudan and Yemen. He also warned that if decisive
action was not taken, more than 20 million people in
18-08141

23/03/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8213

those countries would face the risk of famine within
six months. The Security Council therefore began
paying more attention to the risk of famine in many
countries on its agenda. On 9 August 2017, the Security
Council issued presidential statement S/PRST/2017/14,
in which it expressed its grave concern about the risk
of famine and called on Member States to provide
resources and funding to prevent that possibility. The
international community responded rapidly to the
Secretary-General’s appeal, donating approximately
70 per cent of the required funds by October 2017,
when the Secretary-General reviewed the most recent
developments related to the risk of famine and a world
food crisis in the Security Council (see S/PV.8069). The
State of Kuwait also responded by donating $15 million
towards addressing the food insecurity crisis in northeastern Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen. In
our deliberations today, I would like to underscore three
of the main elements in the link between hunger and
conflict — prevention, compliance and urgent action.

operations and establishing impartial investigations and
accountability mechanisms. Where there are violations
and disregard for such international norms, hunger
and poverty increase people’s need for humanitarian
assistance. When peace prevails, there is less need for
humanitarian assistance. Conflicts are man-made and
are a driver of misery. Political settlements, preventive
diplomacy and addressing the root causes are therefore
the best solutions.

First, on prevention, we believe that the aspect
of morality should be paramount in addressing food
insecurity. There can be no moral justification for
allowing people or groups to die of hunger. The early
warning from the Secretary-General is part of the
interaction between the Security Council and the
Secretary-General and helps us to guard against the
advent of serious humanitarian crises, especially
those driven by conflict. We should take into account
the fact that the effective and speedy implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the Sustainable Development Goals will help to
prevent future conflicts resulting from hunger. We
should also focus on addressing issues such as poverty,
unemployment, climate change and inequality. It is
hardly surprising, therefore, that one of the first of the
Sustainable Development Goals is eradicating hunger,
which is achievable given the abundant resources in the
world today.

Mr. Kononuchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We would like to welcome you, Madam
President, to today’s meeting of the Security Council.
We thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. David Beasley,
Executive Director of the World Food Programme,
for their briefings assessing the issue of food security
in countries in situations of conflict. We have also
taken note of the reports published by the World Food
Programme (WFP) and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) on this
topic following presidential statement S/PRST/2017/14,
issued by the Security Council in August last year.

Secondly, with regard to compliance, respect
for international law is crucial to breaking the link
between conflict and hunger. We should ensure
respect for international humanitarian law in situations
of conflict. The Security Council has a number
of measures at its disposal to ensure such respect
when Member States fail to fulfil their obligations,
such as encouraging parties to a conflict to comply
with international law and the relevant resolutions,
including civilian protection mandates in peacekeeping

Despite our collective efforts to prevent famine in
many countries, the food-insecurity crisis continues.
Many people throughout the world, particularly women
and children, are unable to meet their basic needs.
The risk of famine has highlighted the need for better
coordination and increased early-warning mechanisms.
The State of Kuwait stands ready to work with other
Member States in actively contributing to international
efforts to achieve a comprehensive solution to the
problem of conflict-related hunger around the world.

As those reports rightly note, armed conflicts
are by no means the only reason for the increasing
numbers of hungry people in the world, although they
undoubtedly have a negative impact on the ability to
ensure food security for needy populations. However,
we see a clear desire on the part of some countries
to entrench and promote the link between conflict
and hunger both in the work of the Security Council
and more generally. We feel that is problematic
chiefly because in practice it effectively pushes the
key drivers of food insecurity — volatile world food
prices, global economic stagnation, unequal access to
agricultural and agro-industrial technology, lack of
investment, weak progress in the areas of sustainable
consumption and production, unfavourable weather
conditions and others — into the background. There

18-0814113/21

S/PV.8213

Maintenance of international peace and security

is no justification for ignoring such factors, especially
their underlying causes.
In response to that, it is argued that a focus on
conflict favours strict compliance with the Security
Council’s mandate. If our colleagues are indeed guided
by that objective, we can only welcome such efforts,
since we ourselves consistently object to overburdening
the Security Council’s agenda with issues beyond its
purview. However, we have participated in a series
of discussions on the links between hunger and
conflict, and having studied the arguments for possible
response measures on the part of the Council, we have
concluded that considering this issue generally cannot
be productive. Each conflict has its own specific
characteristics, participants, reality and plans for
a resolution. It is hardly likely that we in the Security
Council will be able to come up with some universal
formula — a panacea, if you like — for solving the
problem of food security in such circumstances.
We have not heard any groundbreaking ideas in that
regard so far. Basically, all the proposals boil down to
affirming and reaffirming the principles of international
humanitarian law, but that work is already being done
in the framework of country-specific topics. Where is
the added value in this case?
In that connection, we firmly maintain the position
that the Security Council should consider problems of
food security only in the context of specific country
situations that pose a threat to international peace and
security. There are qualified experts working on all of
these situations who can make objective assessments of
the causes underlying local threats in the area of food
security support and propose various solutions, assuming
any are possible. The same applies to the international
legal aspects of hunger in the context of conflicts. The
Security Council’s responses should be planned and
implemented in conjunction with the country dossiers
that the Council addresses. Incidentally, all four issues
that the President outlined today are being attended to
within the framework of country-specific areas that are
on the Council’s agenda. We are ready for more active
collaboration with experts from the United Nations
specialized agencies within the framework of existing
formats and negotiation platforms.
With regard to the humanitarian response to threats
related to food security, we would like to express
our gratitude to the humanitarian organizations that
have been taking steps to prevent hunger in Nigeria,
Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen. Unfortunately, the
14/21

23/03/2018

situation in those countries remains tense, which does
not exclude the possibility that the alarming situation
that arose last year will recur. We will continue to
provide donor support to the efforts of the WFP, the
FAO and their partner organizations. We hope that
their activities will always be conducted in accordance
with the humanitarian principles defined in General
Assembly resolution 46/182.
We believe that as a rule, freely interpreting those
principles and exploiting the humanitarian agenda for
short-term military and political purposes in practice
lead only to increasingly confrontational rhetoric,
politicization and thereby to aggravating the suffering
of the millions of people who have become victims
of protracted military conflicts — and the famous
“fighters for justice and democracy” have played a
not insignificant role in fuelling those conflicts. It is
worth adding something about the consequences of the
unilateral sanctions and economic blockade policies of
certain countries, including self-styled humanitarian
rights champions. All of us, including humanitarian
agency personnel, are familiar with the negative effects
that such irresponsible measures can have for entirely
innocent populations, to the discredit of the initiators
of such steps. We hope that these factors that are
aggravating the humanitarian situation will receive as
much attention as all the others in our public work.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We are pleased to see you here in the
Chamber again, Madam President, and we would like
to thank the Netherlands for convening today’s meeting
on such an important subject. I would also like to
thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. David Beasley,
Executive Director of the World Food Programme, for
their thorough briefings on the relationship between
conflict and hunger around the world, as well as the
ongoing efforts to alleviate the suffering that those two
terrible problems inflict on their victims.
Armed conflicts are one of the main obstacles to
the realization of the right to adequate nourishment
in many parts of the world, since they often interrupt
the various stages of the production, harvesting and
distribution of food. In Africa, where the livelihoods
of 60 per cent of the population depend on agriculture,
conflicts can have a disastrous effect on their countries’
economies and plans for sustainable development.
Equatorial Guinea is deeply concerned about the
increasing exploitation of hunger in armed conflict.
18-08141

23/03/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is a deplorable fact that in the twenty-first century,
11 per cent of the world’s population — 815 million
people — are suffering from hunger or starvation, and
that more than half of those people — 489 million — are
living in situations of armed conflict. And of all them,
243 million are African and represent 20 per cent of the
continent’s total population.
Through the implementation of our Horizon
2020 national plan, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063 of the African Union,
my Government is continuing to work to achieve the
total eradication of hunger in Equatorial Guinea and
Africa as a whole. Our brother countries are making
similar efforts. However, one of the challenges in our
subregion is in helping to reach a peaceful settlement
of the conflicts in two of those brother countries, the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where some 7 million people are affected,
many of them displaced and exposed to hunger. That
situation is complicated by the porous borders between
our countries and the presence of terrorist organizations
and armed rebel groups that exploit this vulnerability
for illegal purposes.
Despite the progress that African countries have
made to achieve the Millennium Development Goals
and preserve peace, there are 215 million hungry
people in Africa, where eight of the 15 United Nations
peacekeeping missions are also located. Although
there are fewer conflicts between countries globally,
the numbers of internal conflicts are growing and
are exacerbated by the presence and intervention of
terrorist and extremist groups. Exploiting hunger and
access to food and humanitarian aid as weapons of war
in these situations is deplorable and Equatorial Guinea
vehemently condemns such practices.
While conflicts are determining factors in 10 of the
13 worst food security crises in the world, they are not
necessarily the cause of such crises, or the only one.
Conflicts themselves also result from poverty and a lack
of access to basic needs such as food, from the lack of
opportunities that enable countries to achieve equitable
economic growth and sustainable development in areas
such as the industrialization of the agricultural sector,
which supports two thirds of Africa’s population, a
lack of access to markets, and abnormal climatic events
such as El Niño. For those reasons, Equatorial Guinea
encourages the international community to consolidate
its efforts to ensure the sustainable financing of the
zero-hunger Sustainable Development Goal, the

S/PV. 8213

Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Programme and the African Union’s 2014 Malabo
Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth and
Transformation for Shared Prosperity and Improved
Livelihoods. In that regard, Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the recent plans to strengthen the partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations to end hunger
in Africa by 2025. We also note that Equatorial Guinea
and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations have established the Africa Solidarity
Trust Fund, which has been fully funded to the tune of
$30 million.
Equatorial Guinea commends the courageous work
of humanitarian personnel and condemns all attacks on
them as well as violations of international humanitarian
law with regard to the protection of civilians. We
believe that in order to ensure the protection during
conflicts of the most vulnerable civilians, such as
women, children and people with disabilities, and of
humanitarian personnel, the Security Council, while
always respecting States’ sovereignty, should redouble
its efforts to find ways to resolve conflicts through
dialogue and uphold international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea endorses the
recommendations of the 9 August 2017 presidential
statement on this topic (S/PRST/2017/14). We
encourage the various United Nations agencies,
especially those dedicated to humanitarian work and
development cooperation in order to help prevent
conflict and maintain peace following conflict, to work
more closely with one another and with regional and
subregional organizations, as well as with States, to
find sustainable solutions.
We call on international public opinion and the
private, business and academic sectors to continue to
seek solutions to food waste. The 2015 United Nations
Food and Agriculture Organization report entitled The
State of Food Insecurity in the World noted that a 25 per
cent reduction in food waste in developed nations would
cover the needs of the 870 million people worldwide
who suffer from hunger. Let us get to work.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
I would like to thank you, Minister Kaag, for joining
us today and for convening this important meeting. I
also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
and Executive Director Beasley for their always cogent
and pointed presentations. We appreciate their ongoing
contributions to the work of the Security Council.

18-0814115/21

S/PV.8213

Maintenance of international peace and security

The connection between hunger and armed conflict
is undeniable. The majority of the world’s hungry
people today live in conflict-affected States, and that
number is growing. That means people are starving
not because of a drought or a natural disaster, but
because conflicts are preventing food from getting to
those who desperately need it. This is a man-made food
security crisis.
Hunger and war zones quickly turns into a vicious
cycle. Relentless violence, which defines far too many
conflicts today, drives countless civilians from their
homes, fields and livelihoods. Fighters prevent food
from getting to those in need or destroy the markets and
the infrastructure needed to distribute food. This wave
of hunger forces more people to flee their homes, who
often cross borders in search of ways to feed their loved
ones. Or they take up arms to fight back against the
forces that are starving them. Fighting gets worse and
then still more people go hungry. Therefore, conflict
causes hunger and hunger leads to more conflict. This
cycle is devastating, but because hunger and conflict is
a man-made crisis, we have the power to solve it. We
on the Security Council, together with all responsible
Members of the United Nations, can act to keep
civilians from starving. At an absolute minimum, we
must demand an end to medieval and barbaric siege
tactics, arbitrary denials of humanitarian access and
attacks that violate international law, humanitarian
law and human rights law. The connection between
these violations and threats to international peace and
security is also undeniable, and an equally appropriate
topic for the Council.
In South Sudan, the situation became so extreme
last year that famine was declared in certain parts of
the country. The Government of South Sudan and other
armed groups blocked the World Food Programme and
other humanitarian agencies from reaching civilians
with life-saving aid. For years, fighters from all sides
slaughtered and plundered livestock, and they have
assaulted and murdered women and children who leave
internally displaced persons camps to search for food.
Civilians who fear for their lives have chosen to stay
hidden in marshes, eating nothing but plants in order
to avoid being killed by armed groups. Although we
narrowly managed to avert famine last year in South
Sudan, the forecast for the year ahead has only worsened.
The threat of famine will remain as long as the parties
continue paying no regard to the basic welfare or basic
human rights of the South Sudanese people.
16/21

23/03/2018

In Syria, the Al-Assad regime and its backers have
relentlessly used sieges and starvation to pummel the
civilian population in opposition areas. For years,
the regime has denied even the most basic deliveries
of food aid to hundreds of thousands of civilians in
besieged areas, including right now, in blatant defiance
of conflict resolution 2401 (2018). The Council has
spoken at length about the Al-Assad regime’s actions
in Syria, and we will not repeat all the details here.
But as we saw in eastern Ghouta, despite the Council’s
demand for a ceasefire, the regime decided to cut off
deliveries of food and medicine and unleash an allout assault on the nearly 400,000 people living there.
Denying the people of eastern Ghouta food was a key
part of the Al-Assad regime strategy. This is a barbaric
tactic that any responsible member of the Council must
stand up and condemn. We will not stop working to
hold Al-Assad and his backers accountable for trying
to starve the Syrian people into submission.
Yemen has become the world’s largest food security
emergency by number of people in need. Again, the
link between conflict and hunger is obvious. Fighting
has decimated Yemen’s economy, which means Yemen
cannot import enough food for the country’s people.
Yemen is 90 per cent dependent on imports for food,
so the disruption caused war, quickly leading to a
devastating hunger crisis.
There is no question that all parties must allow
unhindered humanitarian access to help alleviate those
needs. But for Yemen, humanitarian aid is not enough.
Agencies like the World Food Programme cannot
tackle hunger in Yemen on their own. We also need to
protect the support and flow of life-saving commercial
imports of food. If we improve humanitarian access
and facilitate imports, we can start to address Yemen’s
dire needs. That is why the United States supported the
delivery of mobile cranes to Al-Hudaydah port, and why
we continue to promote the work of the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism for Yemen.
The United States welcomes Saudi Arabia’s recent
commitments to expand the delivery of humanitarian
and commercial goods. We look forward to the plans
for their development with humanitarian partners and
encourage a rapid expansion of access.
Hunger and conflict are also linked in the Lake
Chad basin. The terror of Boko Haram and the West
African affiliate of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) has devastated communities throughout
the region. Their continued terror prolongs the
18-08141

23/03/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

humanitarian crisis and displacement of millions
who face food insecurity and the very real threat of
famine. The United States continues to work closely
with Nigeria and its neighbours to defeat Boko Haram
and ISIS in West Africa once and for all. But we need
to make sure that the fight does not exacerbate food
insecurity for civilians. That is why we urge Nigeria
and the other Governments of the Lake Chad basin to
step up their cooperation with humanitarian agencies.
A successful response to the crisis depends on
access to the communities in need throughout the entire
region. We reiterate calls on Governments of the region
to do all they can to help secure and maintain that
access. They can also do more to bolster grass-roots
support for the international humanitarian response by
reinstating legitimate Governments across the region
and reassuring the region’s people that they have a just
and secure future in their home communities. To echo
our Ethiopian friends, that means the Council needs to
take a more serious approach to conflict prevention and
preventive diplomacy rather than waiting to act until a
situation reaches a full-blown emergency.
When conflict is the common denominator for so
many places that are food insecure, this issue must be
on the Council’s agenda. The specifics of each conflict
may be different, but we must acknowledge how often
the denial or violation of basic human rights and
fundamental freedoms are at the root of these conflicts.
If the Security Council is to live up to its mandate, we
must be consistent, principled and strong in demanding
that conflict should be no excuse for perpetuating
hunger, and the prevention of such conflicts should be
our highest goal.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, the
delegation of Kazakhstan would like to express
appreciation to the Kingdom of the Netherlands for
convening today’s briefing. We are particularly pleased
to see you, Minister Kaag, presiding over today’s
meeting. We would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock and the Executive Director of
the World Food Programme, Mr. David Beasley, for
their very insightful briefings on the stark and painful
reality of the suffering caused by conflict and hunger.
The statistics we are hearing today are shocking
and should awaken our conscience, because what we
witness today is the worst food security crisis since
the end of the Second World War and the founding of
the United Nations. After a prolonged decline, world

S/PV. 8213

hunger appears to be on the rise again, leading to
the re-emergence of famine. According to the latest
edition of the Global Report on Food Crises, published
yesterday, the vast majority of the chronically food
insecure and malnourished live in countries affected
by conflicts. The 11 per cent increase in the number
of food-insecure people in 2017 is largely attributable
to new or newly intensified conflicts combined with
droughts and floods. Ongoing armed conflict and
violence impede livelihoods and access to markets
and create widespread displacement, which is further
aggravated by climate change. Moreover, it is obvious
that unemployment, poverty, underdevelopment, the
unsustainable use of land and water and the exploitation
of natural resources further escalate the potential of
widespread food insecurity. While we express grave
concern, we need to go beyond expressions of solidarity
and immediately address the problem with the following
workable strategies.
First, it is clear that the response to food insecurity
and hunger requires strengthened connections between
political solutions and long-term development strategies.
We need to strengthen the security/development nexus
through implementation of development programmes
in conflict areas, including making major investments
in rural development and agriculture, natural-resources
management and social protection.
Secondly, we must strengthen the capacity of the
United Nations in preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention and resolve situations of conflict, including
through the implementation of the proposals set out in
the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace (S/2018/43). Instead of having
to respond to crises, we need to greatly increase our
investments in prevention. The Security Council
underlined the importance of that principle by
adopting, last August, a presidential statement that
reiterates the Council’s commitment to working with
the Secretary-General to pursue all possible avenues
to end conflicts, including through addressing their
underlying root causes in an inclusive and sustainable
manner (S/PRST/2017/14).
Thirdly, it is of vital importance that the SecretaryGeneral and the Secretariat alert the Security Council
on worrying levels of food insecurity and hunger,
including through existing reporting mechanisms.
Because of the Secretary-General’s early warning
in February 2017 and a swift humanitarian response,

18-0814117/21

S/PV.8213

Maintenance of international peace and security

famine was averted in Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia
and the north-east of Nigeria.
Fourthly, we must enhance coordination both within
the United Nations and with regional and subregional
organizations and financial organizations, in order to
address immediate needs, the recovery stage, long-term
development and sustaining peace in a comprehensive
and sustainable manner. All those institutions have
different tools and expertise that should be used in a
complementary way to achieve desired outcomes.
Fifthly, we need not only to respect, but also ensure
respect for, international humanitarian law by providing
full, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access. This is
a process to be engaged in by the entire United Nations
system, in particular its peacekeeping missions and
country teams, working with both Governments and
armed groups. We should also seek the support of
neighbouring countries with influence for their timely
interventions, along with donors, partners and, most of
all, civil society and local populations.
Last but not least, we cannot tolerate or consider
the food-insecurity and hunger situation with an
attitude of business as usual. Urgent collective efforts
are needed if the international community wants to
achieve the ambitious goal of a world without hunger
and malnutrition by 2030.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes you to New York, Madam President,
to preside over today’s open meeting. I thank UnderSecretary-General Lowcock and the Executive Director
of the World Food Programme, Mr. Beasley, for
their briefings.
For some time now, some African and West Asian
countries and regions have seen droughts and the effects
of climate change, among other challenges, and have
suffered from severe famine. Helping the countries
concerned to cope with famine and settle the issue will
help eliminate the root causes of war and conflict. The
United Nations, the World Food Programme and other
relevant agencies have made great efforts to alleviate
disasters, which China greatly appreciates. The
international community should continue to provide
help to the countries and regions concerned.
First, it is necessary to promote inclusive and
balanced development that benefits all. Development
is a top priority and the fundamental policy objective
if various global issues are to be resolved. The
18/21

23/03/2018

United Nations system must play a coordinating
role to promote the effective implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, give
priority to the elimination of poverty and hunger
and continue to increase input into the development
of developing countries. The principles of extensive
consultation, joint contributions and shared benefits
should be adopted in global governance to guide
the globalization of the economy towards healthy
development, properly respond to climate change issues
and actively help developing countries to enhance their
capacity for independent development with a view to
achieving development.
Secondly, efforts should be stepped up for the
resolution of regional hotspot issues to help the regions
in conflict realize peace and stability at an early date
and embark on the road to sustainable development.
The Security Council and the international community
should have a greater sense of urgency in finding
political solutions to relevant hotspot issues, act in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, assist countries in
conflict in advancing the peace process and national
reconciliation and in resolving their disputes through
such peaceful means as dialogue and consultation, with
a view to building together a world of lasting peace and
universal security for all to share and to create a good
environment for common development.
Thirdly, all United Nations organs should perform
their respective functions and observe the division of
labour while strengthening cooperation. The Security
Council, which has the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security issues,
should focus its efforts on helping relevant countries and
regions to respond to peace and security issues, while
the World Food Programme and the United Nations
humanitarian agencies should respond to the needs of
Member States in a timely manner and actively carry
out food aid and other humanitarian relief activities.
The strengths of and the roles played by regional and
subregional organizations should be fully tapped
to foster synergy in the international community to
resolve the problem of famine.
China remains committed to the resolution of
disputes to dialogue and consultation and plays a positive
and constructive role in seeking political settlements
for international and regional hotspot issues. In the
meantime, China is actively helping other developing
countries in poverty eradication and the elimination of
18-08141

23/03/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

hunger. In 2017, China actively fulfilled its international
obligations by providing non-stop multiple batches of
emergency food assistance to 38 countries in Africa
and Asia and to four international organizations
through mulitilateral and bilateral channels. We have
also carried out 158 projects of various kinds under
the World Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture
Organization and other international organizations,
effectively alleviating disaster situations in relevant
countries and regions. China stands ready to continue
to work with the international community to promote
the building of a community of shared future for
humankind and make our contributions for achieving
lasting peace and common prosperity in the world.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Mr. Mark Lowcock and Mr. David Beasley for their
very comprehensive briefings. I would also like to
congratulate the Netherlands, treasurer of the Group of
Friends on Food and Nutrition Security, for initiating
a series of discussions on conflict and hunger. We
need to continue this debate and raise the interlinked
issues of conflict and hunger in various relevant
international forums.
I would like to quote a South African proverb:
“Abundance does not spread; famine does”. Indeed,
we are observing a worrying trend: after declining for
more than two decades, hunger is on the rise again.
Moreover, estimates predict a further deterioration
in food security, which is threatening the realization
of Sustainable Development Goal 2, namely, to end
hunger by 2030.
Africa and the Middle East are especially affected
by famine. In particular, we notice that the deteriorating
situation in such countries as South Sudan, Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic, Nigeria, specifically its north-eastern region,
Mali, Syria and Iraq. Hunger, undernutrition and food
insecurity are to a large degree the result of conflict.
They are on the rise and are closely interlinked with
famine and food crises. Conflict and hunger reinforce
each other. The vast majority of malnourished people
worldwide live in countries affected by conflict. Ten
of the 13 major food crises in the world were driven by
conflict. More than half of the population in conflictaffected countries live in rural areas, where livelihoods
depend largely on agriculture and land and livestock
are two key agricultural assets.

S/PV. 8213

Hunger and undernutrition are significantly worse
where conflicts are prolonged. On the other hand, food
insecurity itself can trigger violence and instability,
particularly in conflicts marked by inequality and fragile
institutions. The link between conflict and hunger
is complex and therefore requires a comprehensive
response and a collaborative approach. In keeping with
the Council’s presidential statement issued in August
2017 (S/PRST/2017/14), Poland is strongly committed
to working with the Secretary-General to pursue all
possible avenues to ending conflict, including through
addressing its the root causes in an inclusive and
sustainable manner. We are convinced that in order for
the Security Council to ensure early action, we need an
early-warning information system on food insecurity
and hunger and on any escalation of deepening conflicts.
This largely depends on access. Our main goal
should be to protect civilians in armed conflict and
ensure that their basic needs are met. This is of the
utmost importance in discussing the deterioration of
the situation in, for example, Syria. Access to adequate
food, or the right to food, is a core human rights and
binding on all States. We should promote its better
implementation; in this regard, we cannot stress
enough the importance of respect for international
humanitarian law.
Another issue is the accountability of States or
parties to armed conflict, as well as individuals, that
violate international humanitarian law by using food
insecurity and starvation as a method of warfare
or through attacks on food-producing factories or
destroying crop fields. Such violations must be
investigated and the perpetrators held to account.
In conclusion, I should like once again to thank the
Netherlands for having convened this meeting and to
reiterate Poland’s commitment to continuing to work to
reduce conflict and hunger worldwide.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank you for having convened this
meeting of the Security Council to address the link
between hunger and conflict. I wish also to thank Mark
Lowcock and David Beasley for their briefings.
The Secretary-General was the first to alert us, in
February 2017, as to the tragic humanitarian situation
of the almost 20 million people in Africa and in Yemen
on the brink of famine. His observation was clear:
armed conflicts are both the common denominator and
the leading cause of these humanitarian disasters. In

18-0814119/21

S/PV.8213

Maintenance of international peace and security

response to that appeal, France, together with the World
Bank, took an initiative last June to organize an Arria
Formula meeting to address the issue. In addition to the
World Bank, whose commitment is to be commended,
several Member States joined us in this undertaking,
which was aimed at beginning consideration of this
issue by the Council. Building on these exchanges,
we adopted a presidential statement last summer
(S/PRST/2017/4), and then heard a briefing by the
Secretary-General in October (see S/PV.8080). Six
months later, it is important that we meet once again
to identify concrete measures that can be envisaged by
the Council.
A number of important factors have already been
underscored, so I will therefore focus my statement on
three points: an observation, a reminder and several
avenues towards specific solutions.
First, it has been proved and documented that
famine is often linked to armed conflict, which is either
its leading cause or significantly aggravates it. The
humanitarian situation in South Sudan, Yemen, Somalia,
Burma and north-east Nigeria are sad reflections of
this link. Sixty per cent of people suffering from food
insecurity worldwide live in conflict zones.
Persistent drought can play a major role. This is
true in East Africa, for example, where drought has led
to smaller harvests in countries affected by high levels
of food insecurity. United Nations and World Food
Programme reports are categorical, as our briefers have
clearly and strongly reminded us. Conflicts remain the
leading causes of the risk of famine, setting in motion a
vicious circle: conflict increases food insecurity, which
in turn fuels violence. Civilians are the main victims
of this vicious circle of food insecurity and armed
conflict. Often people’s livelihoods are the direct
targets of by violence. Civil infrastructure, aid convoys
and humanitarian workers are also being targeted.
Yemen is witnessing an alarming number of
obstacles to the free, prompt and ongoing access of
humanitarian assistance to civilians. France recalls
the need to open all ports and airports to humanitarian
assistance and commercial imports so as to alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people.
Hunger is not a natural disaster but the consequence
of a combination of human factors. It can even be the
result of a deliberate strategy, as Mark Lowcock and
David Beasley underscored. Access to food is used by
armed groups as a recruitment tool in areas where hunger
20/21

23/03/2018

is widespread. The United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights recalled that in Burma, where ethnic
cleansing of the Rohingya minority has forced more
than 670,000 people to flee the country since August
2017, that phenomenon is continuing today. What is new
is that it now includes deliberate starvation, deprivation
of access to basic services and the destruction of means
of production. We condemn these intolerable violations,
which must immediately be brought to an end.
In Iraq’s Nineveh governorate, one of the country’s
agricultural centres, Da’esh, before being driven
out, destroyed more than 90 per cent of irrigation
infrastructure, thereby delaying by several months or
even years a solution to the food-insecurity situation. In
eastern Ghouta, one of the most fertile regions of Syria,
the Bashar Al-Assad regime has been using the same
methods, shelling civilian infrastructure and besieging
entire cities to starve the people.
Famine used as a weapon of war against civilians
constitutes a violation of international humanitarian law
and can even constitute a war crime. Today it is more
important than ever before to arrive at lasting solutions
to the conflicts that lie at the heart of these humanitarian
tragedies. This is our collective responsibility, which
the Council must steadfastly shoulder.
Secondly, in the light of this observation, a
legal reminder is necessary: namely, violations of
international humanitarian law must be condemned and
cannot go unpunished. It cannot be overemphasized that
humanitarian access must be secure, comprehensive
and unfettered. That is far from being the case
everywhere. In Yemen, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Syria, as well as in South Sudan and
Somalia, red tape and security-related obstacles prevent
not only humanitarian assistance from reaching people
in need but also humanitarian workers from doing
their work. Humanitarian workers themselves are also
being targeted.
In this context, the protection of humanitarian
staff and medical professionals must be prioritized.
In October 2017, the Secretary-General alerted us to
an uptick in violence against humanitarian workers.
In the first 10 months of 2017, humanitarian workers
suffered more than 130 attacks. This is completely
unacceptable. Let us not mince words: these attacks
are war crimes that must not go unpunished. Medical
personnel deliver assistance to the ill and wounded, at
18-08141

23/03/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

the epicentre of conflict, at the risk of their own lives.
Their commitment obliges us to act.
It is for that reason that the French Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Jean-Yves Le Drian, proposed last
October a political declaration to protect medical
personnel in conflict zones that to date has been
endorsed by 13 countries; France calls upon all Member
States to join this initiative. Beyond this, we wish to
work to better protect humanitarian staff in this respect,
as Minister Le Drian indicated yesterday during our
national humanitarian conference, in which Ms. Ursula
Mueller took part.
Thirdly, under those circumstances, the International
Committee of the Red Cross has called for a surge
of protection to improve the behaviour of the parties
to conflicts, as well as people’s livelihoods. Let us
see what the Security Council can do to that end.
In Somalia, north-east Nigeria, Sudan and Yemen,
large-scale famines have been averted thanks to a
prolonged humanitarian response. There are three
courses of action that can be pursued.
First, we could work on improving prevention and
early-warning systems to act more effectively to prevent

S/PV. 8213

cases of hunger. We could systematically include in
our monitoring mechanisms data on alarming food
insecurity levels and the restriction of humanitarian
access to populations in the form of hunger indicators.
Such indicators could be integrated, for example, into
peacekeeping operations and country reports submitted
to the Security Council.
Secondly, investments in health services and water
supply could be an integral part of a strategy to eradicate
hunger in conflict zones. In food and humanitarian
crises, infectious diseases, such as cholera or measles,
are a major cause of death as public services collapse
and populations become more vulnerable to disease.
Thirdly, ending and preventing hunger in conflict
zones requires a multifaceted, coordinated response
and close cooperation between humanitarian relief
and development efforts as part of the humanitariandevelopment nexus.
As the Secretary-General has said, we have a
moral obligation to do better. The Security Council has
the tools. France will continue to play its full part in
that regard.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

18-0814121/21
