A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/136
10 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 86
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/51/593 and Corr.1)]
51/136.

Comprehensive review of the whole question
of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other
relevant resolutions,
Recalling in particular its resolution 50/30 of 6 December 1995,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Organization,1
Welcoming the statement of 28 March 1996 by the President of the
Security Council on the arrangements for improved consultation and exchange of
information with troop-contributing countries,2
Affirming that the efforts of the United Nations in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, including through its peacekeeping operations, are
indispensable,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to continue to improve its
capabilities in the field of peacekeeping and to enhance the effective and
efficient deployment of its peacekeeping missions,

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement
No. 1 (A/51/1).
2

Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-first Year, Resolutions
and Decisions of the Security Council, 1996, document S/PRST/1996/13.
97-76495

/...

A/RES/51/136
Page 2

Considering the contribution that all States Members of the Organization
make to peacekeeping,
Taking note of the widespread interest in contributing to the work of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations expressed by many Member
States, including troop-contributing countries,
Bearing in mind the continuous necessity of preserving the efficiency
and strengthening the effectiveness of the work of the Special Committee,
1.
Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations;3
2.
Endorses the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the
Special Committee contained in paragraphs 29 to 85 of its report;
3.
Urges Member States, the Secretariat and relevant organs of the
United Nations to take all necessary steps to implement the proposals,
recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee;
4.
Decides to expand the membership of the Special Committee in
accordance with the provisions of its report; those Member States which are
past or present personnel contributors to United Nations peacekeeping
operations and those which were observers at the 1996 session of the Special
Committee shall, upon request in writing to the Chairman of the Committee,
become members at its 1997 session;
5.
Decides also that those Member States which become personnel
contributors to United Nations peacekeeping operations in years to come or
participate in the future in the Special Committee for three consecutive years
as observers shall, upon request in writing to the Chairman of the Committee,
become members at the following session of the Committee;
6.
Decides further that the Special Committee, in accordance with its
mandate, shall continue its efforts for a comprehensive review of the whole
question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects, and shall review the
implementation of its previous proposals and consider new proposals so as to
enhance the capacity of the United Nations to fulfil its responsibilities in
this field;
7.
Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to
the General Assembly at its fifty-second session;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-second
session the item entitled "Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects".
83rd plenary meeting
13 December 1996

3

A/51/130 and Corr.1.
