S/2003/574

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 May 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 15 May 2003 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), established by the Security Council
in its resolution 1279 (1999) of 30 November 1999.
The Security Council has been kept regularly informed through the briefings
by the Secretariat of the recent dramatic developments in the Ituri region,
particularly in Bunia, where MONUC has deployed a 700-strong guard contingent
from Uruguay in support of the ongoing Ituri Pacification Commission process.
I am deeply concerned about the rapidly deteriorating situation in and around
Bunia, which has become the stage of major violent clashes between Hema- and
Lendu-based militia groups, and which has been exacerbated by outside
interference. In view of the likely further worsening of the situation and its serious
humanitarian consequences, I should like to request that the Security Council
urgently consider my proposal for the rapid deployment to Bunia of a highly trained
and well-equipped multinational force, under the lead of a Member State, to provide
security at the airport as well as to other vital installations in the town and to protect
the civilian population. The force would be deployed for a limited period until a
considerably reinforced United Nations presence could be deployed. Clearly, such a
multinational force should be authorized by the Security Council under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations. All parties, in particular the Member States
involved in the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, should desist from
any interference in the affairs of the region and fully cooperate in the efforts,
including those of the multinational force, aimed at stabilizing the situation in
Bunia.
In the face of the current crisis in Ituri, which affects the future of the peace
process of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and thus threatens international
peace and security, the international community must act decisively. Combined
efforts by all concerned could offset the looming humanitarian catastrophe in Bunia
and rescue the nascent political process, which offers a real chance for peace and
reconciliation in this long-suffering region.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-37366 (E)

280503

*0337366*
