UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/56
22 December 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
At the 3844th meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 December 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
between Iraq and Kuwait", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of 17 December 1997
from the Executive Chairman of the United Nations Special Commission
(S/1997/987) on his discussions with officials of the Government of Iraq,
which took place in Baghdad 12 to 16 December 1997.
"The Security Council recalls all its relevant resolutions, including
resolution 1137 (1997) of 12 November 1997, and the statement of its
President on 3 December 1997 (S/PRST/1997/54). The Council reiterates its
demand that the Government of Iraq cooperate fully with the Special
Commission in accordance with all relevant resolutions and that the
Government of Iraq allow the Special Commission inspection teams immediate,
unconditional access to any and all areas, facilities, equipment, records
and means of transportation which they wish to inspect in accordance with
the mandate of the Special Commission.
"The Security Council stresses that failure by the Government of Iraq
to provide the Special Commission with immediate, unconditional access to
any site or category of sites is unacceptable and a clear violation of the
relevant resolutions.
"The Security Council expresses its full support for the Special
Commission and its Executive Chairman, including in his ongoing discussions
with officials of the Government of Iraq. The Council acknowledges that
discussions are continuing on practical arrangements for implementation of
all its relevant resolutions. The Council reiterates that the
effectiveness and speed with which the Special Commission may accomplish
its responsibilities is, above all, determined by the degree to which the
Government of Iraq cooperates in disclosing the full extent and disposition
of its proscribed programmes and in granting the Special Commission
unimpeded access to all sites, documents, records, and individuals. The
Council calls upon the Government of Iraq to cooperate fully with the
Special Commission in the implementation of its mandate.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter."
----97-37712 (E)

221297
