We have obtained all the information and explanations that we have required, and we certify, as a
result of the audit, that, in our opinion, the financial
statements are correct",
adding, should it be necessary:
"subject to the observations in our report".
10. The Board of Auditors shall have no power
to disallow items in the accounts, but shall draw
to the attention of the Secretary-General for appropriate action any transaction concerning which it
entertains doubt as to legality or propriety.

Annex B
Joint system of external audit
1. In principle there should be a panel of external
auditors of the United Nations and the specialized
aiencies composed of persons having the rank: of
Auditor-General (or its equivalent in the vanous
Member States).
2. Such a panel should consist of the auditors
appointed by the United Nations and the specialized
agencies, c)i.osen by common consent for a period of
three years in such a manner that the members of
the panel would not exceed six in number, and
bearing in mind the location of the specialized
agencies, the ability of the governmental audit staffs
to undertake the total audit load within the appropriate time-limits, and the desirability of securing
continuity of audit.
3. Each organization should select one or more
members of the panel to perform its audit. Payments of salaries, fees or honoraria should be a
matter for settlement between the parties directly
concerned.
4. Each auditor ( or the auditors) performing an
audit should sign his ( or their) own report or
reports.
5. Members of the panel selected to perform the
audit should be requested to take appropriate steps,
in particular by meeting together annually, to coordinate their audits and to exchange information
on methods and findings. The panel of auditors
should be invited to submit from time to time any
observations or recommendations which it might
wish to make on the co-ordination and standardization of the accounts and financial procedures of
the United Nations a,id the specialized agencies.
6. Cost of the annual meetings of active members
of the panel should be borne by the participating
organizations.

Alternates:
Miss Carol C. Laise;
Dr. A. Nass;
Mr. P. Ordonneau;
2. Declares these members and alternate members to be appointed for a three-year term to
commence on 1 January 1950.
255th plenary meeting,
24 November 1949.

349 (IV). Appointment to fill a va•
cancy in the membership of the
Investments Committee
The General Assembly
Confirms the appointment by the SecretaryGeneral of Mr. Ivar Rooth as a member of the
Investments Committee for a three-year term
to commence on 1 January 1950.
255th plenary meeting,
24 November 1949.

350 (IV). Headquarters of the United
Nations
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the Secretary-General's report13 on the Headquarters of the United Nations;
2. Decides that the Headquarters Advisory
Committee, established by General Assembly
resolution 182 (II) 14 of 20 November 1947, shall
be continued with the existing membership ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to
the fifth regular session of the General Assembly
on the progress of the construction of the Headquarters;
4. Draws the Secretary-General's attention to
the observations and suggestions made by the
representatives of Member States during the discussion of the Secretary-General's report on the
United Nations Headquarters at the fourth regular session of the General Assembly.
255th plenary meeting,
24 November 1949.

351 (IV). Establishment of a United
Nations Administrative Tribunal

348 (IV). Appointments to fill vacan•
cies in the membership of the
United Nations Staff Pension Com•
mittee

A
The General Assembly
Resolves that the fol,lowing Statute shall be
adopted for the United 'Nations Administrative
Tribunal to come into force on 1 January 1950:

The General Assembly
1. Appoints the persons named below as members and alternate members of the United Nations
Staff Pension Committee, in accordance with the
provisions of article 20 of the Regulations for the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund:
Members:
Mr. R. T. Cristobal;
Mr. E. de Holte Castello;
Mr. N. I. Klimov;
11 See Official Records of the fovrlh ses.rion of the Cmn-al Assembly, Annex to the Fifth Committee, document
A/1009.

STATUTE OF THE UNITED NATIONS ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ARTICLE 1

A Tribunal is established by the present Statute
to be known as the United Nations Administrative
Tribunal.
ARTICLE 2
1. The Tribunal shall be competent to hear
and pass j udgment upon applications alleging
. ,-,.non:-Q~ce
of contracts of employment of
; -,,-/J.v~- ,-U-H See Official R,cords of tlu seco,wJ 6'Ssion of flu
General Assembly, Resolutions, page 1S1.

49
