Decides:
(a) To call upon the parties concerned to implement
immediately Security Council resolution 338 (1973);
(b) To renew the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for another period of six
months, that is, until 30 November 1985;
(c) To request the Secretary-General to submit, at
the end of this period, a report on the developments in
the situation and the measures taken to implement
resolution 338 (1973).

At its 2582nd meeting, on 31 May 1985, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Lebanon, Malta
and the Syrian Arab Republic to participate, without
vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "The situation in the Middle East: letter dated 30 May 1985 from
the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17228)". 15

Adopted unanimously at the
2581st meeting.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, by a
vote, that an invitation should be accorded to the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
to participate in the debate and that that invitation
would confer upon it the same rights of participation as
those conferred on a Member State when it was invited
to participate under rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

Decisions

At the same meeting, following the adoption of
resolution 563 (1985), the President made the following
statement: 13
"In connection with the resolution just adopted on
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, I have been authorized
to make the following complementary statement on
behalf of the Security Council:
'"As is known, the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force" states, in paragraph 26: "Despite
the present quiet in the Israel-Syria sector, the situation in the Middle East as a whole continues to be
potentially dangerous and is likely to remain so,
unless and until a comprehensive settlement covering all aspects of the Middle East problem can be
reached." That statement of the Secretary-General
reflects the view of the Security Council."'

Adopted by 10 votes to 1
(United States of America),
with 4 abstentions (Australia,
Denmark, France,
United
Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland).

Resolution 564 (1985)
of 31 May 1985

The Security Council,
Recalling the statement made by the President on
24 May 1985 14 on behalf of the members of the Council
on the heightened violence in certain parts of Lebanon,
Alarmed at the continued escalation of violence involving the civilian population, including Palestinians in
refugee camps, resulting in grievous casualties and
material destruction on all sides,
1. Expresses anew its deepest concern at the heavy
costs in human lives and material destruction affecting
the civilian population in Lebanon, and calls on all concerned to end acts of violence against the civilian
population in Lebanon and, in particular, in and around
Palestinian refugee camps;
2. Reiterates its calls for respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon;
3. Calls upon all parties to take necessary measures
to alleviate the suffering resulting from acts of violence,
in particular by facilitating the work of United Nations
agencies, especially the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
and non-governmental organizations, including the International Committee of the Red Cross, in providing
humanitarian assistance to all those affected and emphasizes the need to ensure the safety of all the personnel
of these organizations;
4. Appeals to all interested parties to co-operate
with the Lebanese Government and the Secretary-

On 24 May 1985, after consultations with the
members of the Council, the President issued the following statement'• on behalf of the members of the Council:
"The members of the Security Council express their
serious concern at the heightened violence in certain
parts of Lebanon in the past few days.
"They take note of and fully support the statement
issued on 22 May 1985 by the Secretary-General,
which also refers to the situation in and around the
Palestinian refugee camps, and his appeal to all concerned to make every possible effort to put an end to
violence involving the civilian population.
"They reaffirm that the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Lebanon must be
respected.
"In response to their humanitarian concern, they
strongly appeal for restraint, in order to alleviate the
sufferings of civilians in Lebanon."

15 See Official Records of the Security Council, Fortieth Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1985.

13 S/17206.
14 S/17215.

3

At its 2619th meeting, on 10 October 1985, the Council decided to invite the representatives of Israel, Kuwait
and the Syrian Arab Republic to participate, without
vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "The Middle
East problem, including the Palestinian question: letter
dated 30 September 198S from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/17507)". 1 •

General with a view to ensuring the implementation of
this resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to
report to the Security Council thereon;
S. Reaffirms its intention to continue to follow the
situation closely.
Adopted unanimously at the
2582nd meeting.

Decisions

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, by a
vote, that an invitation should be accorded to the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
to participate in the debate and that that invitation
would confer upon it the same rights of participation as
those conferred on a Member State when it was invited
to participate under rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

At its 2604th meeting, on 12 September 198S, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Israel,
Jordan and Qatar to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the item entitled "The situation in the occupied Arab territories: letter dated 11 September 1985
from the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17456)". 16

Adopted by 10 votes to 1
(United States of America),
with 4 abstentions (Australia,
Denmark, France,
United
Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland).

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, by a
vote, that an invitation should be accorded to the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
to participate in the debate and that that invitation
would confer upon it the same rights of participation as
those conferred on a Member State when it was invited
to participate under rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

At the same meeting, the Council further decided to
extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to the Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

Adopted by 10 votes to I
(United States of America),
with 4 abstentions (Australia,
Denmark, France,
United
Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland).

At its 2620th meeting, on 10 October 1985, the Council decided to invite the representatives of Algeria,
Czechoslovakia, Morocco, Pakistan and Yugoslavia to
~articipate, without vote, in the discussion of the quest10n.

At the same meeting, the Council further decided, at
the request of the representative of Qatar, 11 to extend an
invitation to Mr. Clovis Maksoud under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at the
request of the representative of Kuwait, 11 to extend an
invitation to Mr. Clovis Maksoud under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

• At its 2605th meeting, on 13 September 1985, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of the
Islamic Republic of Iran and the Syrian Arab Republic
to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
question.

At its 2621st meeting, on 11 October 1985, the Council decided to invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, Democratic Yemen, the German Democratic Republic and Indonesia to participate, without
vote, in the discussion of the question.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure, to the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
16 Ibid., Supplement for July, August and September 1985.
11 Document S/17461, incorporated in the record of the

18 Document S/17558, incorporated in the record of the 2620th
meeting.

2604th

meeting.
4
