S/2015/944

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 December 2015
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
Further to the notes by the President of the Security Council (S/26015,
S/1997/451, S/2002/199 and S/2010/507) concerning the Council’s documentation
and other procedural questions, including the annual report of the Council to the
General Assembly, and taking into account the views of the Member States
expressed during the debate on the agenda item entitled “Report of the Security
Council” at the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, and in the thematic
debates of the Security Council on its working methods, as well as during the
intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council reform, the members of the
Council decided as follows:
The Security Council reiterates its willingness to take the necessary action to
ensure the timely submission of its report to the General Assembly in accordance
with Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Security Council will continue with the existing practice whereby the
annual report is submitted to the General Assembly in a single volume. However,
the report to be presented to the General Assembly at its seventy -first session will
cover the period from 1 August 2015 to 31 December 2016. Thereafter, the period of
coverage for all future reports shall be from 1 January to 31 December.
The report shall consist of an introduction, containing an agreed concise
summary prepared on behalf of the Council under the coordination of t he President
of the Council for the month of July. In the case of the presidency for the month of
July ending its tenure on the Council that year, the task of coordinating the
introduction of the report shall then devolve on the member of the Council next in
English alphabetical order and who will not be leaving the Security Council that
calendar year. The introduction to the report should continue to be approved by all
members of the Council who served on the Council during the reporting period. The
introduction, which should not exceed 10,000 words, may contain, inter alia, a brief
description of the key activities and trends, and the nature of decisions taken by the
Security Council during the period covered by the report. The introduction shall be
completed no later than 31 January so as to allow the Secretariat enough time for
translation.
The remainder of the report shall be prepared by the Secretariat in accordance
with paragraph 72 (a)-(e) of presidential note S/2010/507. Information contained in
part VI of the report, pertaining to the work of subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council, including counter-terrorism committees, sanctions committees, working
groups and international tribunals established by the Security Council, as
15-21793 (E)

111215

*1521793*

S/2015/944

appropriate, shall be presented by means of references and hyperlinks to the
separate annual reports of the subsidiary bodies of the Council.
The Secretariat should submit the draft report to the members of the Council
no later than 15 March, immediately following the period covered by the report, so
that it may be discussed and thereafter adopted by the Council in time for
consideration by the General Assembly in the spring of that calendar year.
The Secretariat should, subject to regular review, in a timely manner and in all
the official United Nations languages, prepare and post on the United Nations
website information related to the Security Council activities that could have been
contained in annexes to the annual report, including:
(a) Activities and items relating to each question considered by the Security
Council under its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security;
(b) Information about the work of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council,
including counter-terrorism committees, sanctions committees, working groups and
international tribunals established by the Security Council, as appropriate;
(c) Other information on activities relating to all questions considered by the
Security Council under its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security.
The report will continue to be adopted at a public meeting of the Security
Council, at which members of the Council who wish to do so may comment on the
work of the Council for the period covered by the report. The President of the
Council for the month in which the report is presented to the General Assembly will
also make reference to the verbatim record of the Council’s discussion prior to its
adoption of the annual report.
The Secretariat should continue to post the annual report of the Security
Council on the United Nations website. The relevant web page should be updated to
provide the information as necessitated under future notes issued by the President of
the Council with respect to the annual report.
The members of the Security Council recognize the value of a monthly
assessment of each presidency, which can be useful in the preparation of the annual
report. Each presidency is encouraged to include a concise summary in its monthly
assessment.
If appropriate, the President of the Security Council will continue the practice
of not scheduling meetings or informal consultations of the Council on the first day
of the debate on the report in the General Assembly.
The Secretariat is encouraged to advise, at least once a year, the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions on the
preparation of the draft annual report, including ways to improve its structure in a
cost-efficient way and taking into account the publication of relevant information on
the United Nations website.
The members of the Security Council will continue their consideration of other
suggestions concerning improvements to the annual report and related activities.

2/2

15-21793
