S/PV.8999*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8999th meeting

Friday, 18 March 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abushahab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Nanga
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Ms. Muigai
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

*Reissued for technical reasons 30 March 2022.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-29264 (E)
*2229264*

S/PV.8999

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance with
rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I am aware that the Russian
Federation has submitted documents regarding
allegations of biological weapons programmes in
Ukraine. As I informed the Council last Friday (see
S/PV.8991), the United Nations is not aware of any such
biological weapons programmes.
I would also like to note that the United Nations
currently has neither the mandate nor the technical or
operational capacity to investigate that information.
As I previously informed the Council, the relevant
instrument of international law is the 1972 Biological
Weapons Convention (BWC), which effectively
prohibits the development, production, acquisition,
transfer, stockpiling and use of biological and toxin
weapons. The Russian Federation and Ukraine are both
States parties to the Biological Weapons Convention.
The Biological Weapons Convention contains
several measures to which concerned States parties can
have recourse in order to address situations in which
they have concerns or suspicions about the activities of
their peers. Pursuant to article V of the Convention, its
States parties undertake to consult one another and to
cooperate in solving any problems.
Such consultation and cooperation can take place on
a bilateral basis between the concerned States parties, or
it can be undertaken through appropriate international
procedures. One such international procedure that has
been elaborated within the framework of the Biological
Weapons Convention is the convening of a consultative
meeting. Other possibilities for addressing concerns
between States parties also exist under article V of the
Convention, as well as under article VI.
2/13

18/03/2022

As I mentioned last week, the BWC needs to be
operationalized and institutionalized to ensure that
it is properly equipped and resourced to face future
challenges. The Convention’s upcoming ninth review
conference presents the ideal opportunity for its States
parties to comprehensively strengthen the Convention.
The United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
stands ready to support any procedures under the
Biological Weapons Convention that States parties may
decide to use.
Turning to the issue of the safety and security
of Ukraine’s nuclear power facilities, the DirectorGeneral of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) has reported that, according to the Ukrainian
authorities, all safety systems at the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant remained fully functional as of
yesterday, following the site’s loss of connection to
a third external power line linking it to the national
electricity grid. Although officials from Russia’s State
nuclear power company were present at the facilities in
southern Ukraine, Ukrainian staff continue to operate
the plant.
The Chornobyl power plant remains connected to
the national electricity grid, following reconnection on
14 March. However, Ukrainian operators and guards
have not been able to rotate for three weeks now.
The IAEA has reported that, according to the
Ukrainian authorities, 8 of the country’s 15 reactors
remained operating. I understand that, with regard
to nuclear safeguards, the IAEA is still not receiving
remote data transmission from its monitoring systems
installed at Chornobyl, but such data was being
transferred to IAEA headquarters from the other
nuclear power plants in Ukraine. I take this opportunity
to reiterate the Secretary-General’s support for efforts
by the IAEA to establish a framework on the safety
and security of Ukraine’s nuclear facilities and urge all
parties to work towards this end.
I also wish to highlight the terrible toll this
conflict is having on civilians. The civilian casualties
continue to rise: as of 16 March, the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights had recorded 2,032
civilian casualties, including 780 killed, of whom
58 were children. The actual number of casualties is
believed to be much higher. Most of these casualties
are caused by the use of explosive weapons with a
wide impact area. These include attacks using heavy
artillery, multiple-launch rocket systems, ballistic and
22-29264

18/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

cruise missiles and air strikes. I also want to reiterate
that attacks directed at civilians are prohibited by
international humanitarian law.
We must find a diplomatic solution to this war
to put an end to the violence. As Secretary-General
Guterres said:
“We need an immediate cessation of hostilities and
serious negotiations based on the principles of the
United Nations Charter and international law. We
need peace — peace for the people of Ukraine,
peace for our world. We need peace now.”
The President (spoke in
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, allow me to express our deep and
sincere condolences to the Permanent Representative
of Ireland, Ms. Geraldine Byrne Nason, and all of the
Irish Mission following the sudden passing of Deputy
Permanent Representative of Ireland Mr. Jim Kelly.
This is obviously a loss to the Irish Mission and for all
of us, so I would ask that they accept our condolences.
We have already said that, during Russia’s special
military operation in Ukraine, information was
discovered about the implementation, by the Ukrainian
authorities and with the support and direct supervision
of the United States Department of Defence, of
dangerous projects as part of their military biological
programme. This activity was carried out on the
territory of Ukraine, in the centre of Eastern Europe
and on the western borders of Russia, which has created
a real threat to the biosecurity of our country and the
whole region.
A week ago, at the request of the Russian
Federation, there was a first Security Council meeting
held on this topic (see S/PV.8991). In that meeting, we
asked our Western colleagues a series of questions, to
which they have not yet responded. The representative
of the United States was unable to explain how the
official American statements asserting that there are
no United States-controlled biological laboratories in
Ukraine tally with the proffered documentary proof of
such cooperation between Kyiv and Washington.
I recall in this context that we are talking about an
agreement signed in 2005 between the United States

S/PV. 8999

Department of Defence and the Ministry of Health
of Ukraine, in which the Pentagon fully supports
engaging in joint biological research involving
dangerous pathogens located in facilities on Ukrainian
territory. Although the American delegation cannot and
does not want to respond to our questions, the Russian
Defence Ministry is studying the materials it received
from Ukrainian laboratories to understand the military
biological programme the United States and its NATO
allies have been engaging in on Ukrainian territory.
Over the last week, new details have come to
light which allow us to state that components for
biological weapons were being created on the territory
of Ukraine. The implementation of the aforementioned
2005 American-Ukrainian agreement — about which
we are still waiting for comment from the United
States Mission, has been going full steam for all these
years. However, notwithstanding the document, it is
clear that our American colleagues were not helping
the Ukrainian Ministry of Health, as they claimed, but
rather the Ukrainian Ministry of Defence.
It can be seen in the document that we distributed in
the Security Council this morning the so-called technical
assistance plan for certain recipients of the Ukrainian
Ministry of Defence. I recommend that members look at
this document very carefully. It confirms the Pentagon
and its Cooperative Threat Reduction Programme’s
direct funding of and supervision over of military and
biological projects in Ukraine.
The overall quantity of the funding was $32 million,
and the money went directly to the following laboratories
affiliated with the Ukrainian Ministry of Defence:
in Kyiv, the 10th Regional Health Epidemiological
Department of the Central Health Epidemiological
Department of the Ukrainian Ministry of Defence;
in Odesa, the 27th Regional Health Epidemiological
Department of the Central Epidemiological Department
of the Ukrainian Ministry of Defence; in Lviv, the 28th
Regional Health Epidemiological Department of the
Central Epidemiological Department of the Ukrainian
Ministry of Defence; in Kharkiv, the 108th Regional
Health Epidemiological Department of the Central
Epidemiological Department of the Ukrainian Ministry
of Defence.
I would also like to draw the Council’s attention to
another vitally important point. The representatives of
the United States Department of State cannot get their
story straight and assert that the United States allegedly

22-292643/13

S/PV.8999

Threats to international peace and security

does not operate in any biological laboratories in the
territory of Ukraine, but the facts show otherwise.
According to the technical assistance plan that I
mentioned, the donor — the United States Department
of Defense — was funding the projects, establishes
the tasks and the workload undertaken on Ukrainian
territory, provided a list of the necessary equipment,
and delegates significant authority to an affiliated
contractor company Black & Veatch in cooperation
with Ukrainian authority.
The recipient of United States assistance — the
Ukrainian Ministry of Defence — was obligated to
provide timely access for Pentagon personnel and its
contractor staff to laboratories in Ukraine to carry
out their work within the framework of those projects,
as well as to provide access to the facilities, together
with Pentagon employees, to foreign scientists. The
projects themselves were intended to be implemented
not by Ukrainian scientists, but with their participation.
Simply put, the Ukrainian authorities gave the Pentagon
carte blanche on Ukrainian territory and allowed
them to conduct dangerous biological experiments
there independently. The United States contractor was
exempt from taxes of all kind under Ukrainian law.
What did Ukrainian scientists — that is the
Ukrainian people — get in return under this plan? They
received full compensation for travel to international
conferences, based on food and accommodation
expenses as per the rules for business trips by United
States Government officials, which is compensation
for conducting the most dangerous kind of biological
research on the side. That is not the noble aid to Ukraine
that the United States representatives continue to talk
about. It is the cynical use of its territory and population
for dangerous research that Washington does not want
to conduct on its territory so as not to expose its own
population to the related risks.
It would not surprise us if similar facts about the
activities of United States-supervised laboratories
in other parts of the world came to light. We urge
countries that have made their territory available for
such Pentagon experiments to carefully examine their
contractual obligations with regard to their cooperation
with the United States in the biological arena. We fully
support China’s demand that the United States disclose
the data on the activities of the 360 laboratories under
United States control throughout the world.
4/13

18/03/2022

With regard to Ukraine, the biological laboratories
mentioned earlier, in Kyiv, Odesa, Lviv and Kharkiv
were selected by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency
of the United States Department of Defense for a
reason. These laboratories were the same ones that
carried out the UP-8 project to study Crimean-Congo
fever, leptospirosis and hantavirus pathogens. We
believe that the interest of the United States military
biologists in those particular pathogens is related to
the fact that they are naturally present in both Ukraine
and Russia so that their spread could be disguised as a
natural outbreak. At the Kharkiv laboratory, the P-781
project to study the pathways of disease transmission
to humans through bats was also carried out. Work on
that project was carried out in collaboration with the
infamous Lugar Research Center in Tbilisi.
In that context, the contractor Black & Veatch,
which was chosen by the Pentagon to carry out work
in Ukraine, deserves special attention. It is far from
being an ordinary company. It has been working for the
United States military for more than a century. It has
built military bases for it, including the laboratories at
Los Alamos, where nuclear weapons were developed.
Research in the area of the transmission of diseases to
humans through bats in Ukrainian biolaboratories has
been systematic and has been conducted for at least
13 years under the direct supervision of United States
specialists. In the course of those projects, six families
of viruses were isolated, including coronaviruses and
three types of pathogenic bacteria: plague, brucellosis
and leptospirosis pathogens. Those are the most
attractive pathogens for use as infectious agents, given
their resistance to drugs and rapid rate of contagion
from animals to humans.
As part of the Flu Fly Away project, the Kharkiv
Institute of Veterinary Medicine carried out research
on wild birds as a vector for the transmission of avian
influenza. At the same time, the conditions under which
transmission processes could become uncontrollable,
cause economic damage and create risks to food safety
were assessed. Documents show the involvement of the
Kharkiv Institute in the collection of strains of avian
influenza viruses with high epidemic potential and the
possible ability to spread from one species to another.
The Russian Ministry of Defence continues to
receive an increasing number of new documents
concerning the transfer of blood serum samples from
Ukrainian citizens to third countries, including Great
Britain, Georgia and Germany. Our analysis of the data
22-29264

18/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

justifies our assertion that Ukrainian specialists are
unaware of the potential risks involved in transferring
biomaterials, are essentially kept in the dark and have no
real idea of the true purpose of the research carried out.
That is not surprising, given that, in accordance with
the contractual documentation that I mentioned earlier,
they were delegated to a strictly subordinate role.
There is also new evidence of attempts to
destroy biomaterials and documentation in Ukrainian
laboratories in order to hastily cover up the tracks of the
implementation of the military biological programme.
We know that during the liquidation measures at
the veterinary medicine laboratory in the village of
Khlebodarskoye, its staff members — citizens of
Ukraine — were not even allowed into the building.
The laboratory works in collaboration with the
Mechnikov Anti-Plague Research Institute in Odesa,
which conducts research with plague, anthrax, cholera
and tularemia pathogens.
In an attempt to cover up biological waste from
the laboratory in Khlebodarskoye, it was moved 120
kilometres away towards the western border near
Tarutino and Berezino. The Russian Ministry of
Defence has recorded all of that information with a view
to investigating its legal ramifications at a later date.
Documents were expeditiously destroyed in the
Kherson biolaboratory. We believe that the reason for
such haste was the desire to hide from Russian experts
the information about the outbreak of dirofilariasis in
Kherson in 2019 — a disease that is transmitted by
mosquitoes. Four cases of the disease were detected in
February, which is unusual given the life cycle of those
insects, even while taking into account the incubation
period of the disease. At the same time, we know that,
in April 2019, representatives of the Pentagon visited
local health facilities, where they reviewed the results
of the epidemiological research and made copies of
medical records.
While they stand at the ready to use the fakes
supplied by the Ukrainian authorities with the support
of their Western patrons, the Western media express
their doubts about the reliability of the materials
published by the Russian Ministry of Defence.
I would like to draw attention to the following
fact. The documents we have published include the
authentic signatures of United States officials. In
particular, many of them are signed by Joanna Wintrall,
head of the Ukraine division of the Defense Threat

S/PV. 8999

Reduction Agency. That Pentagon official is well
known in non-proliferation circles. Before Ukraine,
she supervised the destruction of chemical weapons
in Libya. If journalists are truly interested in the
authenticity of the documents that we have provided, I
suggest that they ask her directly if that is her signature.
I want to stress once again that we are not just
talking about the violation of the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction (BWC) by Ukraine
and the United States. I am talking about the fact that
there is increasing evidence that, until very recently,
dangerous military and biological activities were taking
place at the heart of Eastern Europe, the consequences
of which could at any time have spilled over the borders
of the country and even the region. In such a scenario, it
is difficult to imagine the scope of casualties, including
among the populations of European countries; perhaps
even the coronavirus epidemic would have faded into
the background.
There are already alarming signs of such a
threat. For example, in 2018, the number of cases of
tuberculosis among citizens living in the Luhansk and
Donetsk Peoples Republics rose sharply, as a result
of a new multidrug-resistant strain. During the mass
outbreak recorded near Peski, more than 70 cases of the
disease were detected and quickly led to fatalities. That
does not appear to be an accident.
In conclusion, I would like to comment on the
statements made by representatives of the Secretariat
that it has no evidence of the implementation of
military biological programmes on the territory of
Ukraine. In accordance with the BWC, its States
parties provide information to the United Nations on
facilities and ongoing biological activities. Those are
confidence-building measures, which are published in
order to monitor the implementation of the Convention.
Since 2016, when the projects I mentioned earlier
began, including UP-4, UP-8 and R-781, the United
States and Ukraine have deliberately remained
silent about them in their reporting, despite their
clear military biological orientation. That is why, for
many years, Russia has called for the regime of the
Biological Weapons Convention to be strengthened
and for the adoption of a legally binding protocol to
the Convention that would allow for the creation of an
effective mechanism of verification and include in the

22-292645/13

S/PV.8999

Threats to international peace and security

reporting from States parties information on biological
military activities conducted abroad.
For almost 20 years, the United States has blocked
efforts of that kind, while refusing to provide such
information. Indeed, that is yet another issue that the
representatives of the United States have time and
again refused to address. The other issues I again
mentioned on 11 March (see S/PV.8991) are just the
tip of the iceberg. Our Ministry of Defence continues
to receive additional material, which it is analysing.
We will continue to keep the international community
informed about the unlawful activity carried out by the
Pentagon on Ukrainian territory.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me express our shock
over the sudden death of our colleague, Ambassador
Jim Kelly, Deputy Permanent Representative of Ireland
and a seasoned diplomat. We convey to our Irish
colleagues and to Mr. Kelly’s family our most heartfelt
condolences on this terrible loss.
We thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
providing us with the same information as last Friday
(see S/PV.8991) on the matter. We have heard nothing
new from the United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs because there is nothing new. We take issues of
weapons of mass destruction extremely seriously, but
there needs to be an issue.
We heard last Friday, and it was repeated here
today, that the United Nations is not aware of any
alleged programme in Ukraine that is inconsistent
with international treaty obligations, including on
chemical or biological weapons. So what are we
doing this morning? What are we talking about here?
Are we talking about non-existent chemical weapons
programmes in Ukraine, developed in non-existent
laboratories and financed by non-existent programmes?
Russian claims — and we listened to the statement
by its delegation — remain unverified, unsubstantiated,
uncorroborated and not independently verified. In a
word, they are not credible. It is hard not to believe that
today’s meeting comes as a last-minute replacement
plucked from a drawer and is therefore a waste of time
and an abuse of the Council.
I am afraid that we find ourselves, in the best-case
scenario, with an attempt by Russia to shift attention
from its crimes and prolong the invasion by sowing fear
of the dreadful prospect of chemical warfare; or, at the
worst, given Russia’s track record of accusing others
6/13

18/03/2022

of the very crimes that it has perpetrated, including
attempted assassinations and poisoning of its own
citizens, Russia intends to use disinformation tactics
as a pretext for further escalation and possible use of
chemical or biological weapons in Ukraine. We have
seen that the longer the invasion is stalled, the deadlier
the missile attacks and bombardments become. That is
the real issue, and it is a serious one.
Let us recall that Russia has been saying one thing
and doing the opposite, and that Russia is blatantly
breaking international law. Whenever its representatives
speak about Ukraine, they just distort reality. Claims
need to be properly and fully investigated. We know
how that is and can be done. Russia should first agree
to an immediate ceasefire throughout the territory of
Ukraine. It should withdraw all military forces from
within a radius of 40 kilometres of suspected locations
and ask United Nations security forces to secure a
40-kilometre radius to allow diagnostic research teams
to conduct proper investigations. Instead, we are of the
impression that Russia is talking to itself.
With the sole exception of Russia, everyone around
this table — everyone without exception — as well
as 140 members of the General Assembly, have been
clear on the absolute need to respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, stop the war,
protect civilians and deal with issues and concerns,
not by bombarding indiscriminately; not by killing
innocent people; not by destroying a country; not by
wreaking economic havoc on the entire world, but
through negotiation and diplomatic channels and
mechanisms. That is what needs to be done. That is
what Russia should be doing, not abusing the Council
with pop-up subjects of convenience, trying to create
the illusion of truth out of repeated lies. In the words
of Beaumarchais, “Calumniate, calumniate; there will
always be something that sticks.”
The world looks to the Security Council and for
good reason. It looks to it for hope and solutions as the
body responsible for peace and security. It should not
be abused for propaganda and irrationality.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
joining us today to repeat exactly what she gave us last
week (see S/PV.8991).
Last week, we heard a tirade of bizarre conspiracy
theories from the Russian representative. This week,
we are hearing a whole lot more where that came
22-29264

18/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

from — things that sound like they were forwarded
to him on a chain email from some dark corner of the
Internet. President Biden has a word for that kind of
talk — malarkey.
As I said one week ago, Ukraine does not have a
biological weapons programme. There are no Ukrainian
biological weapons laboratories — not near Russia’s
border, not anywhere. There are only public health
facilities, proudly — and I say proudly — supported
and recognized by the United States Government, the
World Health Organization and other Governments and
international institutions.
In fact, it is Russia that has long maintained
a biological weapons programme, in violation
of international law. It is Russia that has a welldocumented history of using chemical weapons. It
is Russia that is the aggressor here. It was Russian
operatives who poisoned Alexei Navalny and Sergei
and Yulia Skripal with nerve agents. It is Russia that
continues to support the Al-Assad regime in Syria and
shield it from accountability when the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons have confirmed that Al-Assad has used
chemical weapons over the past several years.
Let us not forget why we are really here today. We
are here because Russia knew that its cynical ploy to
adopt an exculpatory resolution had failed. Today’s
meeting is the result of its isolation in the Council and
on the world stage. We are not buying what it is selling,
literally or figuratively.
I will reiterate the United States deep and serious
concern about the fact that Russia’s calling of today’s
meeting is a potential false-flag effort in action.
Russia has repeatedly accused other countries of the
very violations it plans to perpetrate. We continue to
believe that it is possible that Russia may be planning
to use chemical or biological agents against the
Ukrainian people.
We will not dignify Russia’s disinformation or
conspiracy theories, but we will continue to sound the
alarm and tell the world where we think Russia is headed.
We will remind the world that Russia has repeatedly
lied to the Council over recent weeks. Despite all the
evidence we could see with our own eyes, Russia told us
that it would not invade Ukraine; that it was engaged in
war games; that it was interested in diplomacy. I asked
the Russian Permanent Representative: Where are the
100,000 troops who were sitting on the Russian side of

S/PV. 8999

the border now? Sadly, I believe that many of them have
given their lives in this senseless, unconscionable war
against the Ukrainian people.
Russia has also lied to its own people, while
shutting down media to try and hide the truth. I will
not repeat the slurs and false accusations that Russia
has hurled against the Ukrainian people and the United
States repeatedly at this table.
We know that Russia’s disinformation is a sign of
its desperation. That is the truth, and we will continue
to ensure that the world sees and hears it.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to say at the
beginning how much the Irish delegation appreciates
the messages of condolence we have received on the
sudden loss of an outstanding Irish diplomat, colleague
and friend. May he rest in peace.
I would like to thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Ireland deeply regrets the decision of the Russian
Federation to call for today’s meeting. It has done
so yet again for no other reason than to promote its
spurious claims against Ukraine and others. It is deeply
troubling to hear the Russian Federation spreading
unsubstantiated, unfounded allegations. The only socalled proof provided is to point to transparent projects
necessary for biosecurity and for human or animal health.
That kind of research is carried out by many countries
to advance global health, benefiting humankind.
I urge the Russian Federation to cease its campaigns
of disinformation and attempts to distract from what is
really happening because of its war in Ukraine. That
behaviour is disturbingly consistent with the Russian
Federation’s own track record of using disinformation
in multiple multilateral forums to dissemble and deny
its activities.
Russian military forces in Ukraine have already
demonstrated reckless disregard for nuclear safety
and security since the start of their invasion. That
pattern of recklessness raises real fears of a significant
radiological, chemical or biological accident.
It is unacceptable to make unfounded accusations
against Ukraine, a State party in good standing to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention.

22-292647/13

S/PV.8999

Threats to international peace and security

The use of chemical or biological weapons in
Ukraine would inflict untold additional suffering on
the Ukrainian people, who have already suffered so
much from the actions of the Russian Federation. The
use of those heinous weapons is immoral and illegal in
any circumstance. There will be no impunity for those
who use them.
We urge the Russian Federation not to violate or
undermine the essential multilateral disarmament
and non-proliferation instruments upon which our
collective security depends.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to extend my condolences to the Irish Mission and
to the family of Jim Kelly, who was an exceptional
colleague. The French delegation wishes to express its
solidarity with its Irish friends.
I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her intervention.
I will be very brief, given that everything has
already been said last week. Indeed, I have heard
no new information this morning — at least, no
credible new information. Russia is indeed mounting
a disinformation campaign. Today’s meeting is not
based on any facts. Ukraine does not possess any
biological weapons programmes. It complies with its
obligations under the Biological Weapons Convention.
The United Nations made it clear last week and again
this morning that it has no knowledge of the existence
of such programmes.
Russia, on the other hand, has used chemical
weapons repeatedly in recent years. It has supported
the Syrian regime and has itself used such weapons in
the United Kingdom and on its own territory in targeted
assassination attempts. By inventing an alternative
reality, Russia seeks to hide its responsibility and cover
up its own crimes.
France is very concerned that the disinformation
campaign may be a prelude to the use of a chemical or
biological weapon in Ukraine. If such attacks were to
take place, there would be only one party responsible,
namely Russia. The use of such weapons, prohibited
under international law, would constitute an intolerable
escalation of the conflict. The French Minister of
Europe and Foreign Affairs, Jean-Yves Le Drian, has
stated unambiguously that such attacks would lead to
even more severe economic sanctions in response.
8/13

18/03/2022

Finally, I regret that the Security Council is
being used by one of its permanent members as a
propaganda platform.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
wish to join others in expressing our deep condolences
to the Irish Mission and to the family of Jim Kelly. He
was an exceptional and very well-loved colleague. We
will miss him.
I also thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing today.
Only yesterday, the Council discussed Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine (see S/PV.8998). We heard from
United Nations briefers about the devastating impacts
on Ukraine, its people and its cities; on the region, to
which 3 million refugees have fled; and on the wider
international community, facing higher economic
prices, as well as the consequences for countries in
need of the Council’s attention.
Today, however, we have had a rehash of amateurish
disinformation that we discussed and debunked last
Friday (see S/PV.8991). It was nonsense then and it is
nonsense now. As I said then, laboratories in Ukraine
carrying out research on public health hazards are not a
threat to international peace and security.
By contrast, President Putin’s illegal and inhumane
invasion of Ukraine is the most significant threat to
international peace and security we face today. Today’s
charade is really not worthy of a permanent member of
the Security Council. The only thing the Council needs
to hear from the Russian Federation — and we did not
hear it yesterday, nor have we heard it today — is that
Russia’s troops are leaving Ukraine.
Ukraine does not want war. Russians and Ukrainians,
soldiers and civilians, mothers and children are dying.
Russia is isolated diplomatically, isolated economically
and bogged down in Ukraine. We therefore urge Russia
to stop the invasion now, before any more damage is
done to Ukraine and to Russia itself.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): My delegation would
also like to convey its sincere condolences to the Irish
Mission and to Jim Kelly’s family on the sad occasion
of his passing.
My delegation is grateful to the High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for
her briefing to the Council.
We have taken note of the information provided to
the Council. Once again, we reaffirm our belief that
22-29264

18/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8999

a conclusive determination of Ukraine’s biological
programmes can be made only after due assessments
by the relevant internationally accredited bodies. As we
have previously stated, the weaponization of chemical
or biological agents in the war in Ukraine — or
anywhere else — would be unconscionable and should
not be contemplated by any party.

Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Like other speakers, let
me begin in conveying to our friends at the Permanent
Mission of Ireland our very deep condolences for the
premature loss of Ambassador Jim Kelly. I would kindly
ask the delegation to convey to Ambassador Geraldine
Byrne Nason, to all the Mission and to the family of Jim
Kelly our deepest condolences.

The international community must forge consensus
towards the establishment of a verification regime for
the Biological Weapons Convention in view of the
recent global developments, including the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.

We maintain that the possession or proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, including chemical and
biological weapons, does not assure either international
peace or national security. We must work collectively to
ensure the elimination of all such weapons.
What is pressing is the urgent need for the cessation
of hostilities and the unconditional and immediate
withdrawal by the Russian Federation of all its invading
troops from the internationally recognized borders
of Ukraine.
Increasingly, this conflict is having ramifications
beyond the borders of Ukraine. The consequent price
hikes in food and gas are impacting in a negative way
the already fragile global economy, which is yet to
recover from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The lives of many across the world have been put in
peril by this unjustified war. We therefore welcome the
Secretary-General’s intention to mobilize global action
to mitigate the impact of the war and support all efforts
to enhance international solidarity.
We bemoan the rapidly deteriorating humanitarian
situation and call on the warring parties to respect,
and comply with, their commitments and obligations
under international law, international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. Civilians must be
protected from harm. Civilian infrastructure must not
be the target of military bombardments. Safe passage
must be provided for the people who are fleeing to
safety. We call for an immediate end to the attacks
on medical and other critical facilities and for the
protection of humanitarian and medical personnel.
We encourage the sustenance of the ongoing talks
between the negotiators of the two sides and hope that
they will yield an early breakthrough for the peaceful
settlement of this conflict.

Before beginning my statement, let me kindly
request other members of the Council to kindly refrain
from attempting to interpret Brazil’s position on an
issue on which Brazil is perfectly capable of presenting
its own views in this organ and in other bodies of the
United Nations.
Fifty years ago, we adopted the Biological Weapons
Convention, determined, for the sake of humanity,
to completely exclude the possibility of biological
agents and toxins being used as weapons. We took that
important step, and I quote the Convention:
“Convinced that such use would be repugnant
to the conscience of humankind and that no effort
should be spared to minimize this risk”.
Today, for the second time in a week, we gather
here to once again discuss extremely serious allegations
regarding the development, production and stockpiling
of such abhorrent weapons. As we stated last Friday
(see S/PV.8991), Brazil believes that accusations of
such gravity must be thoroughly substantiated by solid
evidence, which must be presented to, and confirmed
by, an independent and impartial authority, as foreseen
in article VI of the Biological Weapons Convention.
Brazil has long favoured the negotiation of a
multilateral verification protocol as a complement to
the Convention, with additional measures to guarantee
protection and security against emerging biological
threats. The situation before the Council today only
reinforces the urgency and the necessity to establish
such a mechanism.
Brazil looks forward to the convening of the
ninth Review Conference of the States Parties to the
Biological Weapons Convention. We need to restart
negotiations on strengthening the regime, including
by establishing a verification protocol. That will also
be an opportunity to deepen discussions on biosafety
and biosecurity.

22-292649/13

S/PV.8999

Threats to international peace and security

Brazil is of the view that legitimate scientific and
technological research should be kept distinct and
separate from possible violations of the prohibition
against the development and production of biological
weapons if we wish to preserve the Biological
Weapons Convention regime. Research into new
and dangerous pathogens should be subject to strict
transparency mechanisms.
Finally, I would like to reiterate what we said
last week. Brazil condemns, in the strongest possible
terms, the use or threat of use of all weapons of mass
destruction, including biological and chemical weapons,
anywhere, by anyone, under any circumstances.
Ms. Muigai (Kenya): We join other speakers in
expressing our deepest condolences to the Permanent
Mission of Ireland and the family of Ambassador Jim
Kelly over his shocking demise.
I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-SecretaryGeneral and High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for her briefing.
It is regrettable that the armed conflict in Ukraine
rages on at an intolerable cost to the people of Ukraine
and, increasingly, to the entire world, especially the
global South, as the prices of essential commodities
rise sharply because of shortages and the impacts
of sanctions.
We are gravely concerned by the sustained targeting
of civilians and objects indispensable to the survival
of the civilian population, including residential homes,
health facilities and shelters, as well as power and water
infrastructure, in violation of international law and
international humanitarian law.
At this point, the Council should be focused on
getting a cessation of the military campaign in Ukraine.
We appeal to those concerned to do so immediately so
as to allow humanitarian action and facilitate a muchneeded dialogue towards a sustainable political solution.
Any allegation of the development of biological
weapons in contravention of the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction must not be taken
lightly. We call on all States parties to the Convention
to make use of the established mechanisms so that
any concern or suspicion of the presence of those
extremely dangerous weapons can be verified. In
situations of armed conflict, we must point out that
10/13

18/03/2022

such verifications demand a cessation of the conflict
for them to be carried out.
We urge States parties to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons to seize the opportunity of the ninth Review
Conference later this year to strengthen the biological
weapons regime.
In conclusion, Kenya reaffirms its recognition of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me also express our
deepest condolences to the Irish Mission for the very
sad passing of our dear colleague Jim Kelly.
At the outset, I would like to thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
We were called here today at the request of
the Russian delegation to again discuss claims of a
biological weapons programme in Ukraine. Yet we
heard from the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs last week, and it was repeated today: “The
United Nations is not aware of any biological weapons
programmes [in Ukraine].” (S/PV.8991, p.3) Russia
has failed to offer any credible evidence for its claims,
providing us instead with unsubstantiated information,
allegations and interpretations.
We have trouble understanding the rationale behind
the last-minute call to have further discussions today.
We find it unacceptable that Russia continues to repeat
its unsupported claim that Ukraine is preparing to use
biological weapons. It is becoming quite clear that that
is just another smokescreen tactic to draw attention
away from Russia’s role as an aggressor in this illegal
invasion of Ukraine.
Norway remains a firm supporter of the Biological
Weapons Convention and we are determined, together
with our partners in the international community, to
uphold a total ban against biological weapons. Norway
condemns any use of such weapons. They cannot and
must not be used under any circumstances. That would
constitute a clear violation of international law.
We deeply regret that Russia, by calling these
meetings, seeks to undermine the Council and its
vital role in peace diplomacy. Exactly eight years ago,
we were shocked by the Russian illegal annexation
of Crimea. And now, Russia is waging an unlawful
war against another Member State, with devastating
22-29264

18/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

humanitarian consequences. The sole responsibility for
the war falls on Russia. Russia must end it now.
Mr. Nanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation expresses its condolences to the
Permanent Mission of Ireland to the United Nations.
I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
In the absence of new developments since our
most recent meeting on the same topic last Friday (see
S/PV.8991), let me reiterate the essence of my country’s
statement then with regard to the grave mutual
accusations regarding the lingering risk of the use of
chemical weapons in the war in Ukraine.
My country calls on the parties to abide by
the relevant positions of the Biological Weapons
Convention (BWC), which strictly prohibits the use of
broad-spectrum weapons as well as their development,
production and stockpiling.
As a State party to the BWC, my country reaffirms
its opposition to the use of any form of biological
weapon and calls on the warring parties to abstain from
the use of such weapons and to respect international
law. Gabon reiterates its commitment to the peaceful
resolution of disputes among the States Members of the
United Nations and we continue to call on the parties to
the conflict to de-escalate and to commit, in good faith,
to the negotiations under way in order to put an end
to this war, whose consequences can already be seen
beyond the territory of Ukraine.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): We express our deepest
condolences to the family of Ambassador Jim Kelly and
to the members of the Permanent Mission of Ireland to
the United Nations.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her
briefing. We have carefully noted the points she made
regarding biological activities relating to Ukraine.
India attaches high importance to the Biological
and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC) as a key
instrument for global and non-discriminatory
disarmament, as it prohibits an entire category of
weapons of mass destruction. It is important to ensure
the full and effective implementation of the BTWC, in
letter and spirit.
We also believe that any matter relating to
obligations under the Convention should be addressed
pursuant to its provisions and through consultation and
cooperation between the parties concerned.

S/PV. 8999

As outlined yesterday, India remains deeply
concerned about the progressively deteriorating
situation in Ukraine. We welcome the latest round of
diplomatic talks between the Russian Federation and
Ukraine. We believe that an immediate cessation of
hostilities and the diligent pursuit of the path of dialogue
and diplomacy is the only way forward. It is important
to undertake that engagement keeping in mind the need
to respect the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law and the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): On
behalf of all of the members of the Permanent Mission
of China to the United Nations, I wish to express our
deep sadness at the passing of the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Ireland, Ambassador Jim Kelly, and
extend our sincere condolences to his family and to our
colleagues in the Permanent Mission of Ireland.
China has stated its position on the Ukraine issue
many times. Under the current circumstances, it is the
shared desire of the international community to achieve
a ceasefire as soon as possible in order to avoid further
civilian casualties and prevent a massive humanitarian
crisis. That is also China’s wish.
Direct negotiations between the parties concerned
are the fundamental way to solve the problem. Russia
and Ukraine have held four rounds of negotiations and
are maintaining an open line of communication. With
negotiations continuing, there is hope for a ceasefire
and a peaceful future. China will continue to facilitate
dialogue for peace. We support the United Nations and
all parties in ramping up mediation efforts and hope
that all parties can take actions to promote peace talks
rather than adding fuel to the fire.
Behind the Ukraine crisis is the issue of European
security. It is our hope that the United States, the
European Union and NATO can sit down with Russia
for in-depth and comprehensive dialogue in order to
explore ways to put in place a balanced, effective and
sustainable European security architecture, based on
the principle of indivisible security, so as to achieve
lasting peace and stability in Europe.
China’s position on weapons of mass destruction
and biological security is clear and consistent. China
stands for the complete prohibition and total elimination
of all weapons of mass destruction, including biological
and chemical weapons. China resolutely opposes the
development, possession or use of biological or chemical

22-2926411/13

S/PV.8999

Threats to international peace and security

weapons by any country, under any circumstance, and
urges countries that have not yet done so, to destroy
their chemical weapons stockpiles as soon as possible.
Complying with the Biological Weapons Convention
(BWC) is the obligation of all States parties. We
call for early negotiations on the establishment of a
BWC verification regime, which will help improve
global biosecurity.
China was once a victim of chemical and biological
weapons. China believes that any information or leads
on biological-military activities should trigger the
heightened concern and attention of the international
community in order to prevent irreparable harm.
In that regard, the relevant parties should take a
responsible approach.
Russia has further revealed newly discovered
relevant documents in that regard. The party concerned
should respond to questions and offer timely and
comprehensive clarifications so as to remove the doubts
of the international community. We do not consider it
too much to ask. No double standards should be applied
on this issue.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, let me join my colleagues in
expressing our heartfelt condolences to the delegation
of Ireland for this irreparable loss.
We appreciate High Representative Nakamitsu’s
briefing and take note of the information she shared
with us, especially her renewed confirmation that the
United Nations has no knowledge of biological weapons
programmes in Ukraine.
As we mentioned in a previous meeting, Mexico
considers the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
their Destruction to be the fundamental instrument of
the multilateral disarmament regime. The Convention
contains mechanisms for the settlement of disputes
through consultations and cooperation, which must be
used when any State party deems it necessary. If there
are so many doubts or so much new information, as has
been suggested, why can we not proceed in accordance
with the terms of the Convention?
The Security Council cannot be held hostage to
contradictory signals. One day one matter is raised; the
next day it is postponed; the next day it is substituted for
something else. Mexico will remain open to dialogue
12/13

18/03/2022

and to constructive negotiation. However, in order to
make progress, reciprocity is needed in this effective
commitment to dialogue.
Less than 24 hours have passed since the most
recent Council meeting on Ukraine (see S/PV.8998),
and the humanitarian needs continue to grow. What is
urgently needed is a cessation of hostilities to ensure
the unhindered provision of humanitarian assistance to
whoever needs it, without restrictions or exclusions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
At the outset, I offer our sincere and deepest
condolences to the Mission of Ireland and its staff
over the passing of Deputy Permanent Representative
Mr. Jim Kelly. We also express our condolences to
his family.
I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
The use of biological weapons or any type of
weapons of mass destruction by anyone and under
any circumstances cannot be justified at all. It is an
aggression on humankind as a whole. The use of these
prohibited weapons demands an international response.
Those responsible for the use of such weapons must be
held accountable, as it constitutes a grave violation of
international law.
The prohibition of these weapons, including through
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction, is one of the most important achievements
of the international community. Therefore, maintaining
the consensus on which this prohibition was established
is part of our responsibility to maintain international
peace and security.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates
its call for all diplomatic means to be used to alleviate
the suffering of civilians and to stop the hostilities. That
would allow this conflict to be resolved peacefully, in
accordance with international law and international
humanitarian law.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
22-29264

18/03/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Propaganda, disinformation, amateurism,
unfounded imaginings and false-flag operations are
what we have heard today. Some representatives have
literally repeated their statements from our meeting on
11 March (see S/PV.8991). If representatives have heard
nothing new in our statement today, it is because they
were not listening to us.
We did not provide fiction based on conspiracy
theories and found on the dark web, but rather new
material and documents, which we have distributed.
These documents have signatures and were prepared
on the basis of cooperation between Ukraine and the
United States in the biological field. I ask members
to take a look these documents. I believe that anyone
who needs to see this information will do so. If
Council members can refute it, they should do so. They
should not make unfounded accusations of Russian
propaganda, but instead should reply to the questions
that we asked. Representatives have refused to reply
simply because they have nothing to say. Instead,
they are trying to accuse us of intentions to deploy
biological and chemical weapons against Ukraine. That
is true cynicism. We have already officially warned
that we know and have information about Ukrainian
nationalists bringing chemical agents to some regions
to create a provocation and then blame Russia for it.
That is a false-flag operation.

S/PV. 8999

Council members, in particular the representative
of the United States, did not listen to us properly. We
did not say, as the representative of the United States
claimed, that Ukraine itself had a military biological
programme. The programme, we said, based on the
documents that we have, is run by the United States,
not Ukraine. In this case, Ukraine is being kept in the
dark. We already provided the Security Council with
facts, and talked Council members through them, about
the spike in dangerous lethal diseases in Ukraine,
for which there is no explanation based on the usual
factors. However, the spike could be linked to this kind
of activity.
Today again, we have heard heard that the most
powerful argument to prove that no biological activity
has taken place in Ukraine is the view of the Secretariat. I
have already stated that the United Nations cannot know
about these secret military biological programmes, as
those who carry them out do not share this information
with the United Nations or with anyone else.
As I have said before, we will keep this item on the
agenda as new facts emerge. We will keep the Security
Council and the international community abreast of
these facts, which I am sure will be come to light in the
near future.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

22-2926413/13
