United Nations

S/PV.6291

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6291st meeting
Monday, 22 March 2010, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Issoze-Ngondet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Du Xiacong
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Mugoya
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone
Fourth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (S/2010/135)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-28245 (E)

*1028245*

S/PV.6291

I invite Mr. McNee to take a seat at the Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
table.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
Fourth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (S/2010/135)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration of the item without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Davies
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Von der Schulenburg to take a seat at
the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. John McNee, Chairperson of the Sierra
Leone
country-specific
configuration
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission
and
Permanent
Representative of Canada.
It is so decided.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/135, which contains the fourth report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg and
Mr. John McNee. I give the floor to Mr. von der
Schulenburg.
Mr. von der Schulenburg: I thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to introduce the fourth report
(S/2010/135) of the Secretary-General on the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). As members of the
Council have the full report before them, let me here
only highlight recent developments in relation to the
three critical issues for Sierra Leone’s peace and
stability that are regularly reviewed by this Council:
youth unemployment, illicit drug trafficking and
corruption. Let me also introduce, for the first time, a
fourth issue for future reference and review: the 2012
elections. At the end, I would like to make three brief
additional points.
With respect to fighting youth unemployment,
despite the magnitude and political significance of this
social problem, relatively little progress has been
made. Over the past two years, there have been many
plans and assessments, but they have resulted in
relatively few tangible programmes that would
significantly impact the lives of a sizable number of
young people. I believe that the responsibility for this
must be equally shared by the Government and its
international development partners.
Largely as a result of the recent visit of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to Sierra Leone, the
relevant Government ministries and all relevant
development partners have come together over the past
few days and agreed to develop one integrated national
programme in support of creating employment
opportunities for young people in various economic
sectors. On the Government side, this integrated
national employment programme will be led by Sierra

10-28245

S/PV.6291

Leone’s Youth Commissioner and include a number of
line ministries and national authorities; on the
international side, the programme will include
technical and financial support from the World Bank,
the
Deutsche
Gesellschaft
für
Technische
Zusammenarbeit, the United Nations Development
Programme, the International Labour Organization, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
and the European Community. The joint outline for this
integrated programme will be presented to the
Peacebuilding Commission on Friday this week.
This will be only the second time that
development partners have agreed with the
Government on one joint programme in a crucial area
for peacebuilding, and I would like to stress here the
important role that the PBC can play, and indeed has
played, in rallying international support behind a
critical development issue.
With regard to fighting illicit drug trafficking,
over the past six months tangible progress has been
made in the fight illicit drug trafficking. The
Government has established the Joint Drug Interdiction
Task Force, which has now begun its work. With the
help of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), and in accordance with the West Africa
Coast Initiative, the Task Force will now be upgraded
to a transnational crime unit. UNODC and UNIPSIL’s
Police Unit coordinate international assistance coming
from the United Kingdom, the United States, Germany
and Italy, making this an example of international
cooperation for other countries in the subregion. Sierra
Leone’s model character in building strong institutions
to fight illicit drug trafficking and other international
crime was underlined during a recent conference that
brought together ministers from Guinea-Bissau, Côte
d’Ivoire and Liberia in Freetown under the leadership
of Antonio Costa, Director General of UNODC.
Closely linked to fighting international crime is
the urgent need to beef up coastal security to combat
illicit maritime drug trafficking, illegal fishing and the
beginnings of human trafficking and piracy. In October
of last year, the PBC launched an appeal for two
decommissioned 30-metre patrol vessels, one for Sierra
Leone and one for Liberia. We still hope that we will
be successful with this appeal, as that would allow
these two countries to work together in fighting a
common threat to their peace and development. Such
bilateral cooperation could form the nucleus for wider
regional cooperation that would not only benefit the

10-28245

security of West Africa, but would also help improve
the security in Europe and other countries bordering
the Atlantic.
With regard to fighting corruption, over the past
few months Sierra Leone has taken some
unprecedented bold steps in fighting corruption. A
string of arrests and convictions on corruption charges
have taken place that not only concentrated on lowerranking officials, but that also targeted senior
Government officials and cabinet ministers, including
close political associates of the President. In January,
the Director of the National Revenue Authority was
suspended following an investigation by the
Anti-corruption Commission; on 11 March, the former
Minister of Health was sentenced to five years in
prison on corruption charges; and, on 15 March, the
Permanent Secretary and the Minister of Fisheries were
indicted on corruption charges and relieved of their
duties. The last case, in particular, is of great political
significance, as the indicted Minister of Fisheries has a
strong following within the governing party, the All
People’s Congress, and played a crucial role in
securing the President’s party nomination for the 2007
elections.
Closely connected to the issue of corruption is the
need for the proper management of the country’s rich
mineral and natural resources. A recently concluded
contract on mining iron ore has raised considerable
criticism and concerns among knowledgeable experts.
Sierra Leone’s newly enacted mining law should apply
to all mining contracts, and I urge the Government to
fully comply with the requirements of the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative. The United Nations
stands ready to provide all necessary legal advice and
technical support to help protect Sierra Leone from
being unfairly taken advantage of while seeking
foreign investments for its development.
With regard to preparing for the elections, in
2012 Sierra Leone will hold three important elections:
presidential, parliamentary and local. All internal and
international observers agree that these elections will
pose some very difficult and complex challenges for
the country and that special efforts will be required by
all stakeholders to ensure that these elections are fair,
transparent and free from violence. Unfortunately,
politics in Sierra Leone have become increasingly
ethnic-based and the country is today largely divided
North-South along tribal and political loyalties. Recent

3

S/PV.6291

by-elections would indicate that this trend is further
deepening.
For these reasons, we have agreed with the
Government to start the process of preparing for the
2012 elections early. An election needs assessment
team has recently visited Sierra Leone and will be
followed by an election programming mission to
develop the required technical and financial assistance
package. In parallel, we are engaging in a series of
multi-party talks with the aim of identifying and
mitigating major political, economic and social
problem areas that could negatively impact the conduct
of the 2012 elections. The joint communiqué that was
signed by political parties a year ago forms the basis of
this dialogue. In the dialogue, we have also taken up
more sensitive issues such as ethnic loyalties in party
politics, the winner-takes-all syndrome and political
party financing.
Allow me to make here three additional points.
First, today we are less worried that the situation in
neighbouring Guinea will spill over into Sierra Leone.
However, with the situation in Guinea improving, we
now have to think more about taking a regional
approach to peacebuilding and peace consolidation. In
this context, the Mano River Union is of great interest
to us, as it brings together four West African countries
that have either come out of civil wars or that are in the
process of ending internal conflicts.
Secondly, so far we have not been successful in
raising the necessary financial resources to implement
our peacebuilding strategy, the Joint United Nations
Vision. This poses fundamental credibility issues for
us; ultimately, the lack of funding could even
jeopardize our new approach to peacebuilding. The
additional funding that we are seeking to mobilize
through our multi-donor trust fund is only $200
million. In other words, the additional funding required
for four years of peacebuilding would be equivalent to
the costs of only four months of the previous
peacekeeping operation back in 2004. In this context, I
would like to thank the French Ambassador for having
taken up this key issue in the Security Council debate
last month. I hope that the Council will continue to
debate this important issue and consider not only the
institutional aspects of such a transition from
peacekeeping, but also its financial implications.
Thirdly, I feel that Sierra Leone is a good
example of why the Peacebuilding Commission, the

4

Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office are so important to what we as an integrated
peacebuilding mission want to achieve on the ground. I
would like to thank in particular the chair of the PBC’s
Sierra Leone configuration, Ambassador John McNee,
and his colleagues from the Canadian mission, for their
unwavering support. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Liberia, Poland, Peru
and the Republic of Korea — and, of course,
Ambassador Mayr-Harting of Austria, who is present —
for having taken the trouble of travelling all the way to
Sierra Leone despite their busy schedules. Let me also
recognize the excellent work that is being done by Judy
Cheng-Hopkins and her team of the Peacebuilding
Support Office. We now feel truly supported.
Finally, but most importantly, I would like to
thank the President of Sierra Leone, Ernest Bai
Koroma, and his colleagues in the Government,
members of the opposition and indeed all Sierra
Leoneans for their support of the work of UNIPSIL and
the United Nations country team. Any success that we
have is ultimately only their success.
The President (speaking in French): I thank
Mr. Von der Schulenburg for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. McNee.
Mr. McNee: It is a great pleasure to participate in
the Security Council’s consultations in my capacity as
Chair of the Sierra Leone configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Last week, we
returned from visiting Sierra Leone with a PBC
delegation consisting of the Permanent Representatives
to the United Nations of Austria, the Czech Republic,
the Republic of Korea, Liberia and Peru. The size of
this delegation, with all of its members at the level of
permanent representative, amply demonstrates the
international community’s interest in Sierra Leone.
As I indicated in my last briefing, the Sierra
Leone configuration of the PBC has aligned its
engagement with the peacebuilding priorities in Sierra
Leone’s Agenda for Change and decided to focus on
good governance, youth employment and illicit drug
trafficking. The recent visit provided an opportunity to
take stock of progress and consider the Peacebuilding
Commission’s future contribution in these areas. The
delegation’s discussions with President Koroma,
national and district officials, political parties, civil
society, youth and the diplomatic corps underlined the
progress made in recent years, highlighted major

10-28245

S/PV.6291

challenges, and provided insight into current political
and societal dynamics.
The situation in Sierra Leone remains calm.
Important steps have been taken to follow up on the
joint communiqué signed by the major political parties
in March, 2009. The Independent Review Panel into
the causes of the political violence has started work.
With support from the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone and the United
Nations Development Programme, the Political Parties
Registration Commission has also engaged with the
political parties to foster constructive dialogue and
mitigate the possibility of politically motivated
violence. Campaigns to promote tolerance have also
been conducted outside Freetown and with the youth
wings of the political parties.
But notwithstanding that progress, the promotion
of inclusive democratic politics is becoming
increasingly important. The meetings of the
Peacebuilding Commission’s delegation with the
political parties revealed significant divisions. Mutual
trust and inter-party dialogue remain limited. The trend
towards growing regional and ethnic polarization, as
well as increasing politicization of paramount
chieftaincy elections, is cause for some concern.
Similarly, isolated incidents of political violence, most
recently in Tongo Fields, illustrate the potential for
further instability. As the 2012 general elections
approach and political stakes rise, the temptation to
depart from peaceful and inclusive politics will also
increase. All political actors must continue to follow up
on the joint communiqué and work towards a more
tolerant and cooperative form of politics.
Progress on peacebuilding will help buttress
those efforts. With respect to good governance, Sierra
Leone should be commended for its efforts to combat
corruption. The suspension and removal of three
cabinet ministers over the last year sends a strong
signal. The Anti-Corruption Commission also
continues to use its independence and authority to
prosecute graft, improve public systems and conduct
outreach. Sierra Leone’s rise in the Transparency
International Index is a concrete sign of this success.
Nonetheless, corruption remains a serious problem
throughout Sierra Leonean society, not in the least due
to its inhibiting effects on foreign direct investment.
Sierra Leone has also improved other aspects of
governance. Decentralization is bringing public

10-28245

services to districts outside Freetown and enhancing
the responsibility of local governments in matters of
national development. Critical work is under way to
improve the capacity of the Sierra Leone police,
particularly with respect to public disturbances and
drug interdiction. The central importance of a trusted,
capable and adequately resourced police force ahead of
the 2012 elections cannot be overemphasized.
Youth unemployment is an issue requiring special
attention. One third of Sierra Leone’s population is
between 15 and 35 years of age. Many idle youth are
concentrated in urban areas, unable to find jobs and
frustrated by social marginalization. That clearly
represents a latent risk of political instability.
Both the Government and its international
partners are moving to address the challenge. The
Parliament of Sierra Leone passed the National Youth
Commission Act in December 2009, and the
Government is in the process of establishing the
Commission as a focal point for youth policy. A
sectoral working group involving key Government
departments and international partners is also working
to
enhance
employment
creation.
Following
constructive discussions during the delegation’s visit,
the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission will meet on March 26 to identify
outstanding needs and consider how to support this
welcome and growing momentum.
Drug trafficking is a third area of concern. Sierra
Leone has developed an integrated approach that is a
model for the region. It is also a key participant in the
West Africa Coast Initiative, and it hosted a
ministerial-level conference in Freetown in February
2010. The meeting reiterated the regional commitment
to the regional action plan on drug trafficking of the
Economic Commission of West African States and
considered the operationalization of transnational
crime units in each of the pilot countries. Sierra Leone
is in the process of transforming its Joint Drug
Interdiction Task Force into a transnational crime unit.
While these efforts are commendable, more support is
needed to ensure that the subregion has the necessary
capacity and resources to combat drug trafficking and
organized crime.
In our view, Sierra Leone is a multilateral success
story, and Sierra Leoneans have made remarkable
progress. The United Nations presence has also
gradually transformed itself from a major peacekeeping

5

S/PV.6291

operation into the current Integrated Peacebuilding
Office. The remaining peacebuilding priorities
represent the final obstacles before the country
proceeds to long-term development.
It would be a mistake, however, to underestimate
those obstacles. Sierra Leone requires continued
attention and assistance, particularly in the period prior
to the 2012 elections. International partners provided a
welcome indication of their continued support at the
Consultative Group meeting held in London last
November. Nonetheless, more is needed, especially
with respect to filling specific gaps. In-kind
contributions of patrol vessels or police vehicles would
enhance Sierra Leone’s ability to monitor its maritime
borders and manage internal tensions. Financial
contributions to the United Nations multi-donor trust
fund in support of the Agenda for Change and the
United Nations joint vision for Sierra Leone would
enable much-needed peacebuilding efforts to take
place. That funding would also directly reinforce the
excellent and innovative work carried out by Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone and the entire United Nations family.
The integrated approach adopted by the United
Nations in Sierra Leone deserves the international
community’s strongest support. It is a successful model
of how national and international actors, including the
Security Council and Peacebuilding Commission, can
work together to build sustainable peace after even the
most devastating conflict. The international community
must ensure that this remains the case. It would be a
great shame if complacency at these later stages of
peace consolidation undermined the considerable
progress made to date. For this reason the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
remains fully committed to supporting Sierra Leone as
it moves towards long-term sustainable development.

extends its appreciation to the Secretary-General for
that comprehensive and well-coordinated report. We
also thank him for his excellent analysis of the current
situation in Sierra Leone, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1886 (2009), which mandated him to submit
a report on the activities of UNIPSIL every six months.
I also take this opportunity to convey my
gratitude to members of the Sierra Leone countryspecific configuration, and especially to its Chair,
Ambassador John McNee, for his outstanding
leadership and for his lucid statement this morning. My
gratitude also goes to the Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, for his productive and inspiring briefing
today and the skilful manner with which he is handling
matters in Sierra Leone. On behalf of my delegation, I
extend thanks and appreciation to the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Fund for their determined and
untiring efforts to keep the process in full gear.
As we meet to consider the review of the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Mission in Sierra Leone — a
process designed to lead us to another extension of the
UNIPSIL mandate for twelve months — I am gratified
to note that significant progress is being made to
combat daunting challenges facing the nation. The
Government remains fully committed to pursuing
efforts aimed at consolidating peace and promoting
sustained economic growth.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sierra Leone.

We concur with many of the issues raised by the
Secretary-General in the report before us. Laudable
progress has been made in the Government’s
commitment to promote good governance, as
evidenced by the strategic framework and concerted
actions that the Government continues to take to
facilitate the promotion of human rights, gender
equality, decentralization, and transparency and
accountability in government, and the crackdown on
corruption, drug trafficking and cross-border organized
crime.

Mr. Davies (Sierra Leone): Permit me,
Mr. President, to extend, on behalf of my delegation,
my heartfelt congratulations to you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March and to thank you for organizing this debate
on the fourth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) (S/2010/135). My delegation

The Government is also determined to establish a
culture of political tolerance among the country’s main
political parties. These measures have led to a
relatively peaceful political climate, one favourable for
investments and improvement in the conduct of trade
and commerce throughout the country. The joint
communiqué signed by the two main political parties —
the opposition Sierra Leone People’s Party (SLPP) and

6

10-28245

S/PV.6291

the ruling All People’s Congress (APC) — in April last
year continues to encourage peaceful coexistence and
dialogue among the main political parties, despite
periodic incidents of minor clashes between the
supporters.
The recent appointment of the former SLPP
Minister for Information and Communication,
Professor Septimus Kaikai, as Chairman of the Board
of Trustees of the newly constituted independent
national broadcaster, the Sierra Leone Broadcasting
Corporation, is a manifestation of the Government’s
commitment to political tolerance and the building of a
strong democratic communications system. Sierra
Leone also boasts today of having one of the most
vibrant and independent media systems, with over 20
registered newspapers representing all shades of
political and social persuasion. The present climate of
press freedom in Sierra Leone is promoting open and
inclusive dialogue about the future of the country.
As already mentioned by the Executive
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General,
the
Government has over the past months demonstrated its
commitment to ensuring transparent and accountable
governance by dismissing from service two more
cabinet ministers and a number of public officials,
including the Commissioner-General of the National
Revenue Authority, after they were accused of
corruption and abuse of office by the Anti-Corruption
Commission.
President Ernest Bai Koroma remains committed
to the pledge he took on his assumption of office in
2007, that there would be no sacred cows in
Government and that any minister or official found
wanting in moral probity in the handling of the
country’s meagre resources would be relieved of his or
her position and also made to refund whatever he or
she misappropriated, in addition to facing legal action.
The Anti-Corruption Commission is relentless in its
enforcement of the 2008 anti-corruption laws, which
are considered to be among the toughest in Africa. In
recognition of the Government’s acknowledgement that
corruption is a major threat to economic growth and
prosperity, the Anti-Corruption Commission has
instituted 15 successful prosecutions and recovered
over 2 billion leones from stiff fines imposed on
perpetrators, and as a result Sierra Leone moved up 12
places in the Transparency International Corruption
Perceptions Index for 2009.

10-28245

During the period under review, the Government
completed the Bumbuna hydroelectric project, which,
in addition to restoring power to a nation that has been
in darkness for over a decade, holds the potential of
providing much-needed impetus to socio-economic
improvement and improving the quality of life of the
people.
The Government has also taken strong measures
to improve security. Joint police-military patrols under
the Military Assistance to Civil Power Act have been
stepped up to tackle the recent spate of armed robberies
in the city. That has helped to improve the security
situation considerably.
The Government, in its continued efforts to give
relevance to the joint communiqué signed last year by
the two main political parties, continues to take
effective measures to ensure that the injustices of the
past that led to the destructive 11-year war do not
regain a foothold in the society. In a further attempt to
get to the root causes of the clashes between the SLPP
and APC in Freetown last year, the Government has
established an Independent Review Panel, composed of
members nominated by both the SLPP and APC, to
further investigate the clashes. The panel is presently
in session and on conclusion of its sittings will present
its recommendations to the Government on measures
needed to forestall a recurrence.
The showcasing of the Sierra Leone National
Action Plan to eradicate gender inequality,
discrimination and injustice, which was unveiled at the
United Nations two weeks ago during the session of
the United Nations Commission on the Status of
Women, was another major achievement by the country
in addressing the injustices of the past and a giant step
towards ensuring that abuse, violence and
discrimination against women are no longer tolerated
in our society. In addition, the Human Rights
Commission has been doing its utmost to monitor and
to bring awareness of the human rights situation in the
country, especially those of women and children.
The Consultative Group meeting on Sierra Leone
held in November in London was meant to foster and
advance investor confidence in the country in order to
generate wealth and create employment for the
youthful
population,
particularly
through
a
re-energized private sector and implementation of the
Agenda for Change. The endorsement of the aid policy

7

S/PV.6291

constitutes one of the major milestones of the
Consultative Group meeting, and the Government has
reiterated its firm commitment to its full
implementation. We remain highly hopeful that
partners will endeavour to scale up and deliver on their
commitments in a timely and predictable manner.
The Government has made such impressive
strides that it also received favourable ranking from the
Mo Ibrahim Index of African Governance for being the
most improved country in Africa in the area of
governance over the past two years. In addition, a
recent World Bank study concluded that standards of
governance, political stability and the ability of
citizens to hold government accountable has improved
more significantly in Sierra Leone than in many other
countries around the world.
Despite these significant strides in promoting
responsible and responsive governance as well as in
accelerating the wheels of socio-economic and political
renaissance, the Government is aware of the fact that
significant challenges still remain and continue to
undermine its best efforts to improve the lives of its
people.
One of the thorniest areas that continue to require
urgent attention from stakeholders and Sierra Leone’s
development partners is youth unemployment. A
significant percentage of youth continue to be
unemployed, and this predicament poses a serious
threat to efforts to consolidate peace and stability in
Sierra Leone. A Youth Commission has been
established, though it is not yet operational. We
commend the German Agency for Technical
Cooperation — the GTZ — for a pilot project to
engage youths in some form of gainful employment in
garbage disposal in the capital of Freetown. However,
the urgent need for resource mobilization to more
meaningfully tackle this nagging problem of youth
unemployment cannot be overemphasized.

In this respect, I wish to appeal to our
development partners to honour their pledges and
provide not only the projected $350 million needed by
the Government to implement its Agenda for Change,
but other resources and job-creation opportunities
required to ameliorate the problem of youth
unemployment. My delegation also continues to
believe that Sierra Leone’s peace and stability still
remains at the mercy of subregional socio-political
instability — as evidenced by the present political
crisis in neighbouring Guinea, which has the potential
to spill over into our country.
While the Government continues working with
the Joint Drug Interdiction Task Force to make Sierra
Leone and the West African subregion drug-free, the
narcotic trafficking menace in West Africa and
organized cross-border crime remain real threats and
require UNIPSIL’s continued engagement in Sierra
Leone for many more years to come, especially with
the fast-approaching 2012 presidential, legislative and
local government elections.
Let me conclude by reiterating our gratitude to
the United Nations, our bilateral partners and the
international community at large for their continued
engagement in Sierra Leone to ensure maximum
success in our socio-political and economic recovery
and the consolidation of peace. Let me take this
opportunity to also reassure this body of the
determination of the Sierra Leone Government to work
cooperatively with the United Nations, our
development partners and the international community
to ensure that we surmount the many challenges facing
us as a nation.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of the
subject.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

8

10-28245
