A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/231
25 June 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 112
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/51/922)]
51/231.

Procurement reform

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 49/216 C of 23 December 1994 and its decision
50/479 of 11 April 1996, as well as its previous relevant resolutions,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on procurement
reform1 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,2
Having also considered the reports of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on procurement for the period from 1 July 1995 to 30 June 1996,3 on
the audit of procurement handled by the Contracts and Procurement Service of
the Department for Development Support and Management Services of the
Secretariat,4 on the investigation of the alleged misappropriation of United
Nations assets at the United Nations Gift Centre5 and on the audit of
Headquarters catering operations,6

1

A/C.5/49/67, A/C.5/50/13/Rev.1 and A/C.5/51/9.

2

A/50/7/Add.13 and A/51/7/Add.3; see Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fiftieth Session, Supplement No. 7A and ibid., Fifty-first Session,
Supplement No. 7.
3

A/51/432, annex, sect. II.C.

4

See A/50/945.

5

See A/50/1004.

6

A/51/802, annex.

97-77311

/...

A/RES/51/231
Page 2

Having further considered the concise summary of the principal findings,
conclusions and recommendations of the Board of Auditors,7 especially
paragraphs 20 to 36 thereof, as regards procurement, in conjunction with
comments on the subject contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions8 and the measures proposed by the
Secretary-General to implement the recommendations of the Board of Auditors
concerning procurement,9
Noting the progress made in the efforts to prepare a new procurement
manual,
Noting with concern the continuing weaknesses and deficiencies in the
area of procurement,
Emphasizing the importance of establishing a supplier roster on as wide
a geographical basis as possible,
Noting the observation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions in paragraph 20 of its report,10
1.
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on procurement
reform1 and the reported actions already taken or in progress to implement the
reform measures;
2.
Regrets that more progress has not been made, in particular, in
improving the procedures and the cost-effectiveness of the procurement process
and in broadening the representativeness of the supplier base;
3.
Welcomes the review by the Board of Auditors of the implementation
of the recommendations previously made by the General Assembly in its
resolution 49/216 C on measures to improve the procurement process;
4.
Takes note of the observations and recommendations contained in
the reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,2 and endorses in particular the recommendation that procurement
reform should be given the highest priority in the United Nations and its
funds and programmes;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to expedite efforts to develop a
single format for the provision of data and a common reporting system for
procurement undertaken in the field and at Headquarters under the
responsibility of the Secretary-General, in order to produce a complete set of
statistics to be included in future reports on procurement to the General
Assembly;
6.
Expresses concern that over the last two years eight procurementrelated arbitration claims have been instituted against the United Nations,
totalling more than 90 million United States dollars, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-second
session a comprehensive report on procurement-related arbitration cases,

7

A/51/283, annex.

8

A/51/533, paras. 20, 21, 34-36 and 52-60.

9

A/51/488, paras. 15-19 and A/51/488/Add.1, paras. 4-7, 14-21 and 26.

10

A/51/7/Add.3; see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first
Session, Supplement No. 7.
/...

A/RES/51/231
Page 3

taking into account the obligations of the United Nations under the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law;11
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to include in future reports on
procurement also information on arbitration cases and the related costs;
8.
Decides to revert to the question of the structure of the
Procurement and Transportation Division of the Secretariat and the request of
the Secretary-General that the Division be headed by a Director at the D-2
level during its consideration of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 1998-1999;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to fill the vacant posts relating
to procurement as soon as possible;
10.
Notes that there are officers on loan in the Procurement and
Transportation Division, and decides to revert to this question during its
consideration of the report of the Secretary-General on gratis personnel;
11.
Notes also that a proposal is under consideration to introduce in
the United Nations procurement system an incentive regarding equally qualified
vendors from Member States;
12.
Welcomes the efforts made to improve coordination within the
United Nations procurement system, and encourages the further strengthening of
such coordination;
13.
Requests the Secretary-General to take further steps to improve
the availability and timeliness, including through electronic access, of
information relating to current and forthcoming procurement opportunities;
14.
Welcomes the electronic announcement of United Nations contract
awards through Procurement Update, issued by the Inter-Agency Procurement
Services Office on the Internet, and encourages the Secretary-General to make
further use of this medium;
15.
Requests the Secretary-General to report through the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to the General Assembly at
its fifty-second session on the establishment of a standard procedure for the
preparation of performance evaluation reports on vendors, in particular those
with major contracts;
16.
Expresses its concern about the insufficient use of expertise in
procurement planning in eight peacekeeping missions, including the United
Nations Protection Force and the United Nations Operation in Somalia, which
led to payments for aircraft services not utilized, assessed at 2.4 million
dollars in the United Nations Angola Verification Mission and 0.4 million
dollars in the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia;
17.
Regrets that, owing to deficiencies in procurement planning and
failure to indicate specifications clearly, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees suffered a financial loss of about 3 million
dollars;
18.
Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal
Oversight Services with the investigation of the situation mentioned in
paragraphs 16 and 17 above and to report thereon through the Advisory

11

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.V.6.
/...

A/RES/51/231
Page 4

Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to the General Assembly at
its fifty-second session;
19.
Endorses the concern of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions about the use of suppliers recommended by
requisitioners, notes that this practice undermines the principle of
segregation of responsibilities between requisitioning and procurement
entities, and requests the Secretary-General to discontinue the practice;
20.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that in no case will a
consultant who has been engaged to prepare specifications and to assist in
technical evaluation be allowed to recommend vendors for invitations to bid;
21.
Also requests the Secretary-General to redouble his efforts to
streamline all aspects of the decision-making process in procurement at
Headquarters;
22.
Notes that the local committees on contracts have the authority to
consider cases ranging from 50,000 dollars to 200,000 dollars, while the
Headquarters Committee on Contracts will consider cases in amounts above
200,000 dollars;
23.
Takes note of the information supplied in paragraphs 93 and 94 of
the report of the Board of Auditors,12 indicating that 48 per cent of
suppliers were from one Member State;
24.
Invites Member States to encourage their national suppliers to be
registered in the supplier roster;
25.
Requests the Secretary-General to expedite the steps being taken
to establish a supplier roster on as wide a geographical basis as possible and
to submit a report thereon, including a revised list of suppliers, through the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to the General
Assembly at its fifty-second session;
26.
Emphasizes that concerted efforts should be made to identify
potential vendors in the developing countries and countries with economies in
transition and to increase the representation from those countries in the
bidding for and award of contracts, so as to develop a supplier base that is
more representative of the membership of the Organization;
27.
Takes note of paragraph 13 of the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,10 and decides to revert to this
question during its consideration of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 1998-1999;
28.
Requests the Secretary-General to take immediate action to ensure
compliance with the established procedures for procurement, based on
international competitive bidding and the widest possible geographical base of
procurement;
29.
Appreciates the efforts being made to address the problem of ex
post facto cases, in particular for those offices away from Headquarters, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the approval of contracts on an
ex post facto basis is kept to the minimum, with full justification for each
such case;

12

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement
No. 5 (A/51/5), vol. I, sect. II.
/...

A/RES/51/231
Page 5

30.
Requests the Secretary-General to review the possibility of
consolidating the procurement functions at Headquarters and to report thereon
to the General Assembly as soon as possible and no later than September 1997;
31.
Also requests the Secretary-General to develop an intensified
training programme for all procurement personnel of the Secretariat and all
its offices, including field offices of peacekeeping operations, to develop
the capacity to dispatch in a timely manner qualified and trained procurement
personnel to new or expanded missions and to report to the General Assembly at
its fifty-second session on measures taken to enhance the training programme;
32.
Further requests the Secretary-General to establish annual
consolidated procurement plans as a part of procurement reform;
33.
Requests the Secretary-General to complete the preparation of a
new procurement manual as soon as possible and to provide the necessary
training for procurement personnel;
34.
Requests the Board of Auditors to monitor and report on the
completion of the new procurement manual in its next report and to monitor
closely the implementation of its recommendation that the Procurement and
Transportation Division should establish detailed guidelines on methods of
invitation to bid covering all aspects of procurement, including open
tendering;
35.
Also requests the Board of Auditors to report in the next audit
report on peacekeeping operations, in January 1998, on the status of the
implementation by the Secretary-General of its recommendations concerning the
administration of letters of assist;
36.
Welcomes the reports of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services,13 notes that the Secretary-General concurs with the recommendations
of the Office, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full
implementation;
37.
Notes with concern the observations of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services in paragraphs 37 to 42 of its report,4 and requests the
Secretary-General to report on the precise action taken in this regard to the
General Assembly at its fifty-second session;
38.
Endorses the recommendations contained in the report of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services on the audit of Headquarters catering
operations,6 and requests the Secretary-General to take action to achieve
consistency in policy and practice with regard to catering operations at
Headquarters and at Geneva.
101st plenary meeting
13 June 1997

13

A/51/432, annex, sect. II.C; A/50/945, annex; A/50/1004; and A/51/802,
annex.
