UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/2000/4*
11 February 2000
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND
SPANISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 4100th meeting of the Security Council, held on 9 February 2000, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "Protection of
United Nations personnel, associated personnel and humanitarian personnel in
conflict zones", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council is gravely concerned at continued attacks
against United Nations and associated personnel,1 and humanitarian
personnel, which are in violation of international law including
international humanitarian law.
"The Security Council recalls its resolution 1265 (1999) of
17 September 1999, and reaffirms the statements of its President of
31 March 1993, on the safety of United Nations forces and personnel
deployed in conditions of strife (S/25493), of 12 March 1997, on
condemnation of attacks on United Nations personnel (S/PRST/1997/13), of
19 June 1997, on the use of force against refugees and civilians in
conflict situations (S/PRST/1997/34), and of 29 September 1998, on
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations (S/PRST/1998/30). The Council also recalls General Assembly
resolution 54/192, on the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel.
"The Security Council also recalls the report of the Secretary-General
on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian
assistance of the United Nations, and its Addendum on the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations
personnel (A/54/154 and Add.1), and looks forward to the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 54/192 of 17 December 1999, to be
submitted to the General Assembly in May 2000, which should contain a

* Reissued for technical reasons.
1

As defined in the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel of 9 December 1994.

00-29295 (E)

110200

/...

S/PRST/2000/4
English
Page 2

detailed analysis and recommendations addressing the scope of legal
protection under the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel of 1994.
"The Security Council notes with satisfaction the entry into force of
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel of
1994, recognizes its importance for addressing the security of such
personnel and recalls the relevant principles contained therein. The
Council encourages all States to become party to and respect fully their
obligations under the relevant instruments, including the 1994 Convention
above referred.
"The Security Council recalls that, on a number of occasions, it has
condemned attacks and the use of force against United Nations and
associated personnel, and humanitarian personnel. It strongly deplores the
fact that incidents of violence have continued, leading to a rising toll of
casualties among United Nations, associated and humanitarian personnel.
The Council strongly condemns the acts of murder and various forms of
physical and psychological violence, including abduction, hostage-taking,
kidnapping, harassment and illegal arrest and detention to which such
personnel have been subjected, as well as acts of destruction and looting
of their property, all of which are unacceptable.
"The Security Council also recalls that the primary responsibility for
the security and protection of United Nations and associated personnel, and
humanitarian personnel, lies with the host State. The Council urges States
and non-State parties to respect fully the status of United Nations and
associated personnel, and to take all appropriate steps, in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
rules of international law, to ensure the safety and security of United
Nations and associated personnel, and humanitarian personnel, and
underlines the importance of unhindered access to populations in need.
"The Security Council urges States to fulfil their responsibility to
act promptly and effectively in their domestic legal systems to bring to
justice all those responsible for attacks and other acts of violence
against such personnel, and to enact effective national legislation as
required for that purpose.
"The Security Council will continue to stress in its resolutions the
imperative for humanitarian assistance missions and personnel to have safe
and unimpeded access to civilian populations and, in this context, is
prepared to consider taking all appropriate measures at its disposal to
ensure the safety and security of such personnel.
"The Security Council welcomes the inclusion as a war crime in the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, of attacks intentionally
directed against personnel involved in a humanitarian assistance or
peacekeeping mission as long as they are entitled to the protection given
to civilians under the international law of armed conflict, and notes the
role that the Court could play in bringing to justice those responsible for
serious violations of international humanitarian law.
/...

S/PRST/2000/4
English
Page 3

"The Security Council expresses the view that improving the security
of United Nations and associated personnel, and humanitarian personnel, may
require, inter alia, the development and strengthening of all aspects of
the current safety and security regime in place, as well as the adoption of
effective action to address the impunity of those who commit crimes against
such personnel.
"The Security Council recognizes the importance of issuing clear,
appropriate and feasible mandates for peacekeeping operations, to ensure
that they are applied in a timely, efficient and objective manner, and of
ensuring that all new and ongoing United Nations field operations, include
appropriate modalities for the safety and security of United Nations and
associated personnel, and humanitarian personnel. The Council underscores
that United Nations personnel have the right to act in self-defence.
"The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General to complete the
process of conducting a general and comprehensive review of security in
peacekeeping operations, with a view to elaborating and undertaking further
specific and practical measures to increase the safety and security of
United Nations and associated personnel, and humanitarian personnel.
"The Security Council considers it important that a comprehensive
security plan be developed for every peacekeeping and humanitarian
operation and that, during early elaboration and implementation of that
plan, Member States and the Secretariat cooperate fully in order to ensure,
inter alia, an open and immediate exchange of information on security
issues.
"The Security Council, bearing in mind the need to reinforce the
responsibility of the host State for the physical security of United
Nations and associated personnel, also underlines the importance of
including in each status-of-forces agreement and status-of-missions
agreement specific and practical measures based on the provisions of the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel of
1994.
"The Security Council recalls the obligations of all United Nations
personnel and associated personnel, and humanitarian personnel, to observe
and respect the national laws of the host State in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
"The Security Council believes it is essential to continue to
strengthen security arrangements, to improve their management, and to
allocate adequate resources to the safety and security of United Nations
and associated personnel, and humanitarian personnel."

-----
