Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Seeond Committee

Centre for Economic and Social Information of the
Office of Public Information:~n
(a) Successful information programmes in support
of development may require the use of modern techniques, mass media and specialized personnel, in many
cases will have to be unprecedented in approach, scope,
diversity and initiative, and must encourage full understanding of the relevance, complexity and urgency, as
well as the long-term nature, of the problems and processes of development;
(b) The mobilization of public opinion has to be
the responsibility mainly of national bodies;
( c) The formulation of concrete aims by the competent authorities can make a significant contribution
to the mobilization of public opinion;
(d) The role of the organizations of the United
Nations system will be to assist the national information media and meet their varying needs, in particular
by supplying adequate and appropriate basic information from which those media may draw both substance
and inspiration for their work;
(e) Information from international sources will have
to be aimed primarily at strengthening the sense of
interdependence and partnership implicit in the concept
of the Second United Nations Development Decade;
2. Further endorses in general the activities now
being undertaken in support of the aims of the Second
United Nations Development Decade, and notes with
interest the proposals for future action outlined in the
report of the Centre for Economic and Social Information of the Office of Public Information;
3. Recommends to the Secretary-General, in order
to further the aims of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1357 (XLV), that appropriate consultations
at the technical level be pursued as soon as possible
with representatives of the specialized agencies and
other organizations dealing with the preparation and
dissemination of information material, in order to explore the best means of co-ordinating and focusing the
activities in support of the aims of the Second United
Nations Development Decade;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
appropriate non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, in
categories I and II and on the Roster, as to how those
organizations could support the economic and social
goals of the Second United Nations Development
Decade, particularly through the mobilization of public
opinion;
5. Urges Governments to give consideration, in the
light of their individual circumstances, to the establishment of new national bodies designed to mobilize
public opinion, or to the strengthening of existing ones,
and, as a long-term measure, to give increasing development orientation to educational curricula.
1832nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1969.

2568 (XXIV). Proposed amendment to the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly
The General Assembly
Defers sine die consideration of the proposed amendment to the rules of procedure of the General Assembly
29 A/ AC.141/L.l l.

recommended by the Economic and Social Council in
resolution 1374 (XLV) of 2 August I %8.
1832nd plenary 11/('Ctini.
13 Decemhn / 969.

2569 (XXIV). Spcei:11 mea;.;11rc•s in fmour of the
lancJ-loeked dev-..loping <·oun!i·it·-.
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2086 (XX) of 20 December

1965 on the transit trade of land-locked count riL'S,
Recalling further resolution I I ( 11) of 23 March
1968, adopted by the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development at its second session, concerning the special problems of the land-lncknl countries, 30
Taking note of resolution 50 (Vlll) of 4 February
1969, adopted by the Trade and Development Board
at its eighth session,~ 1 hy which the Secretary-General
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development was invited to convene a group or experts to
carry out a comprehensive examination of the special
problems involved in the promotion of the trade and
economic development of the land-locked developing
countries,
1. Welcomes the agreement reached in the Trade
and Development Board whereby specific measures in
favour of land-locked developing countries will he
elaborated in the context of the contribution of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Dc-vc-lopment
to the international development strategy;
2. Requests the Board to consider. on the basis,
inter alia, of the report to be submitted by the group
of experts, the adoption of practical measures for the
implementation of all the provisions of resolution 11
(II) of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development;
3. Urges all States Members of the United Nations.
particularly the developed countries. to make an active
contribution to the elaboration of those specific measures;
4. Further urges all Member States which wrre
invited to become parties to the 1965 Convention on
Transit Trade of Land-locked States~~ that have not
yet done so to investigate the possibilities of ratifying
or acceding to that Convention and to make it effective
at the earliest possible date.
JR32nd plenary 1111','ting.
13 Dece111her 1969
2570 (XXIV).

United

Nation~

(~onff'n•nf'P

ou

Trade and Developmn1t
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2402 (XXIII) of 13 December 1968, in which it drew the attcntio11 of the
States members of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development to the tasks which rem;iined
ao Proceedings uf the United Nations Co11ferc11ce on
Trade and Dcl'clopment, Second Session, voL i and Corr.1
and 3 and Add.I and 2, Report and Anu.1,·s (U:1it<-d Nations
publication, Sales No.: E.68.ILD.14), p. ,O
31 Official Records of the General
Assemb/1', Twrnty.
fourth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/7616), p_ 7~.
32 United Nations, Treaty 'Series, , , ,,. VJ r 1. l "f• , , ; _ 86; L
0
