S/PV.7722

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7722nd meeting

Tuesday, 21 June 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Mahmoud
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2016/532)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-18577 (E)
*1618577*

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2016/532)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Australia,
Canada, Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Italy, the Netherlands, Pakistan, Sweden and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Chargé d’affaires of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I would like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2016/532, which contains
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Afghanistan and its implications for international
peace and security.
Before giving the floor to Mr. Haysom, I would
like to take this opportunity, as this will be his final
briefing to the Council as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, to thank him
warmly for his outstanding service. The Council wishes
him every success in his future endeavours.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: In my previous statement to the
Security Council in March (see S/PV.7645) I said that
in 2016 the survival of the National Unity Government
would be an achievement. I stressed that the Government
2/38

21/06/2016

had to overcome five distinct hurdles to prevail. The
Government would need to tackle a potent conflation
of political, economic and security challenges. To
do so, it would also need to face two additional
challenges, namely, that of securing medium-term
financial and military assistance from the international
communityand that of making headway in laying the
foundation for an effective peace process. A failure
to overcome any of those distinct hurdles could have
significant consequences for the country.
This is not to downplay the real progress
that Afghanistan has made over the past decade,
especially, for example, in education, human right, and
especially women’s rights, and in the emergence of a
vibrant, democratic culture. That progress is widely
acknowledged, and rightly so. Rather, the objective
was to draw attention to the formidable obstacles
that Afghanistan faces and to underline the need
for a concerted response to the challenges from all
stakeholders, including the international community.
I am pleased to note that there have been positive
steps in meeting some of those five challenges since
I last addressed the Council. On the economic front,
we have noted progress in revenue collection, in
meeting International Monetary Fund benchmarks
and in developing thoughtful medium-term plans for
reform and for economic development under difficult
conditions. There has also been distinct progress in the
management of public finances. And, as we did only
two years ago, we do not fear an imminent default in
civil-service salary payments.
We should acknowledge some of the milestones
that have been reached on some of the most ambitious
projects, developed in collaboration with other countries
in the region. The past month has seen the inauguration
of the Salma hydroelectric dam, the CASA 1000
electricity project and a trilateral economic agreement
among Afghanistan, India and Iran. The agreement
on the development of the Chabahar Port will open
up a major new corridor for regional trade. Those
developments come on the back of the earlier launch of
the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India natural
gas pipeline project. Projects of such scale take time to
deliver, but have real potential to transform Afghanistan
into the regional hub it aspires to be. They show what
can be achieved through regional partnerships.
On the security front, there has been a deliberate
response by the security forces to the lessons learned
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

from the dynamics and developments of last year. The
battlefield in many areas is in a state of flux, with
gains and reversals but with neither side effecting
clear dominance. The security forces continue to face
serious challenges, including in addressing questions
of morale, leadership, attrition and logistics. For now,
though, they are holding their ground.
I am pleased to note that the nominees for the
positions of Minister of Defence and head of the National
Directorate of Security were confirmed by the Wolesi
Jirga only yesterday. That is a positive development
that ends a protracted period of uncertainty, and which
will hopefully have both a positive operational impact
and boost morale.
Quite correctly, Afghanistan has been canvassing
support for a regional counter-terrorism strategy,
while recognizing that peace in Afghanistan and
stability in the region demand and deserve a regional
effort. I believe that the region accepts that logic and
that responsibility.
However, I remain deeply concerned about the
impact that the high level of violence is having on
the civilian population. There has been no let-up
during Ramadan, during which period there have
been some reports of disturbing brutality, including
attacks on worshippers. Only yesterday, an incident in
Badakhshan caused the deaths of 10 civilians, among
them several children. Civilian casualty levels remain
high and conflict-related displacement continues. I
am especially concerned about the trend of targeted
attacks on civilians working in the judicial sector and
on journalists.
In my view, there is a risk that the conflict could
enter a new phase, which could see retaliatory acts of
vengeance and an escalating spiral of violence. I remind
all parties to the conflict of their obligations to protect
civilians from the impact of hostilities. Perpetrators of
human rights and humanitarian law violations must be
held to account, both to ensure justice for victims and
to effectively reduce harm to the civilian population
through deterrence. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has especially had
cause recently to draw attention to the inviolate status
of schools and medical clinics during conflict.
Progress in the areas of the economy and security is
imperative so that the Afghan people have confidence
in their Government, and it is especially important at
this time, as the Government seeks to secure, in Warsaw

S/PV.7722

and in Brussels, a firm and longer-term of international
support — the third hurdle.
Serious engagement on the part of the Government
with donors to address the issues that would promote
success at those meetings is acknowledged. We would
strongly support the Afghan appeal that development
assistance is a more effective way of dealing with
migration than bearing the expense of integrating
migrants in host countries. However, what is expected
of Afghanistan is not proof of its considerable needs,
but of its demonstrable capacity to utilize resources
effectively so that aid has a real impact.
There have been real attempts to meet donor
expectations, as we have seen through progress in
refreshing mutual accountability indicators and in
providing an Afghanistan development framework.
Efforts to counter corruption are moving beyond
statements of intent. The establishment by President
Ghani of the high council on governance, justice
and anti-corruption is a first step in that regard, as
is the setting up of the anti-corruption justice centre.
The appointment of a new Attorney General was
another positive step. The challenge ahead will be
to demonstrate results, not only on paper and in the
machinery of governance but also in the everyday lives
of Afghans.
While we remain hopeful that the Warsaw meeting
will be successful, preparations for the Brussels
conference are still a work in progress. Afghanistan
needs increasingly to appreciate the range of compelling
demands from other countryies competing for donor
dollars. The donor community, for its part, needs
to recognize that its expectations of reform should
be realistic when measured against the full range of
challenges facing the Afghan State.
With regard to the establishment of a viable peace
process, with the failure, so far, of the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group to midwife such a process, and
the recent death of Taliban leader Akhtar Mohammad
Mansoor, such a process seems unlikely in the short
term. We believe, however, that there are elements
within the Taliban movement who are questioning
whether they can win militarily — at least in the short
term — and wondering whether a purely military goal
is desirable.
During my tenure, UNAMA has engaged
intensively in the pursuit of peace, both by supporting
others’ initiatives and by proposing and pursuing our

16-185773/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

own. Most recently, we teamed up with the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation to insist jointly to the Taliban on
the need for a viable peace process and to emphasize
that a peaceful resolution of the long and bitter conflict
was not a second prize, but a preferable outcome. A
continued refusal to accept that will earn them only
outcast status.
We maintain our view that peace is not a luxury,
but a necessity without which Afghanistan as we know
it is not sustainable. Afghans must eventually agree
the arrangements by which they can live together in
peace and harmony. I am disappointed that there has
not yet been any traction on peace efforts, but I remain
optimistic that such a process will eventually emerge.
Finally, on the political front, slow progress in
advancing electoral reforms and setting an election
calendar is one indicator of the need for greater political
cohesion and a need for the members of a fragmented
political class to acknowledge their shared destiny.
On 13 June, the Wolesi Jirga voted against the draft
structure law, thereby necessitating further review and
discussions. The date of 17 June — the last date for
announcing, pursuant to Constitutional requirements,
the electoral calendar for the promised elections
on 15 October — has come and gone, and there still
appears to be no agreement on the way forward.
Continued uncertainty about the electoral calendar
will contribute to challenges to the legitimacy of both
the National Unity Government and the Parliament,
which has long overstayed its term of office. An
increasingly vocal opposition, drawing on the
dissatisfaction prompted by the economic and security
downturn but otherwise divided in its aspirations,
appears to be coalescing around a common demand for
a new Government arrangement.
A political confrontation is the last thing
Afghanistan needs as it endeavours to cope with
its current challenges, particularly in the period
immediately preceding the Brussels conference, when
Government effectiveness will surely fall under the
spotlight. I, together with my international colleagues,
have urged all political leaders to adopt a broader,
more collaborative approach, rather than allowing
the current fragmentation and division to stand. That
applies to the cohabitation between the legislature and
the executive, among the elements within the National
Unity Government, and with the political opposition
outside of it.
4/38

21/06/2016

Looking forward with the insights I have gained
over the past four years, I remain optimistic that
Afghans can meet the challenges that they face. For
that I rely on an appreciation of two qualities. The first
is the resilience of the Afghan people in facing down
their difficult challenges. The second is the existence
of a real pan-Afghan patriotism, which survives in the
face of sectarian loyalties. That is a quality that, from
my experience in other war-afflicted countries, should
not be undervalued. Because it is endowed with those
two qualities, it is possible for Afghanistan not only to
prevail to survive in 2016 but also to grow stronger as
a result.
As this is my last briefing to the Security Council in
my capacity as Special Representative for Afghanistan,
I would like to thank my colleagues for their dedication
to the work and values of the United Nations. A
mission functions on the enthusiasm, professionalism
and commitment of its staff, and in UNAMA I was
extremely well served.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Haysom for his briefing. We would once again
extend our warm thanks to him for all that he has done,
as well as our very warm wishes for success in his
future endeavours.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan) (spoke in French): I
would like to congratulate the President for the very
able way he has been leading the work of the Security
Council this month.
(spoke in English)
I express my gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his recent report (S/2016/532) on the situation in my
country. I would also like to thank my friend Mr. Nicholas
Haysom for his last briefing as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan. I pay tribute
to his contribution to the life of our country during
the crucial years of transition. I would also like to
welcome another good friend Ambassador Tadamichi
Yamamoto as the incoming Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, with whom I have had the
pleasure of working in Kabul.
I also wish to convey my deepest condolences in
connection with the tragic atrocity that occurred in
Orlando last week and yesterday’s attacks in Kabul and
Badakhshan. Our thoughts and prayers are with the
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

victims and their families. We welcome the statements
of condemnation that the Security Council issued
following each of those attacks.
I am pleased to report that the country has shown
greater resilience in countering the ongoing challenges
since the Council’s deliberations on Afghanistan in
March (see S/PV.7645). As I speak here today, we have
just left behind us the spring season with high casualties
and setbacks for the Taliban and other terrorist
groups. Actors from Afghanistan’s region, along with
international partners, are coming together to give a
more collective response to the violent extremism and
terrorism emanating from the region. A number of
multinational development projects have either been
launched or come to fruition, creating new hope for
peaceful coexistence, connectivity and prosperity in
the region.
Afghanistan and its regional and international
partners appear more determined than ever to prevent
the continuation of violence from taking development
hostage. The re-emergence of Afghanistan as a
symbol of international cooperation and partnership
is gaining momentum. Nevertheless, the increased
civilian casualties and internal displacement and the
ramifications of the cowardly behaviour of the Taliban
and their supporters to compensate for their losses have
been alarming.
Last winter, the Quadrilateral Coordination Group
(QCG) — made up of Afghanistan, Pakistan, China
and the United States — finalized a road map for the
peace process. New opportunities were presented to
those willing to engage in talks. The QCG members
agreed to take all the necessary measures against those
who refused to engage in a political resolution of the
conflict in Afghanistan.
The expectation was that the Taliban would
use that opportunity and join the process. Sadly, on
12 April, they responded with their so-called spring
offensive, launched simultaneously across 42 different
locations in our country and causing heavy civilian
suffering and proving once again that they cannot be
reconciled to peaceful political initiatives. Given the
brilliant performance of the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces, the Taliban suffered heavy losses
during the first stage of the Taliban onslaught. To
avenge their losses, the Taliban plotted, and claimed
responsibility for, the deadly Kabul terrorist attack

S/PV.7722

on 19 April, killing and wounding 411 persons,
mostly civilians.
On 25 April, President Mohammad Ashraf Ghani
Ahmadzai addressed a joint meeting of the National
Assembly of Afghanistan. He called on Pakistan to
respect the QCG agreements and take action against
terrorists who, according to the credible intelligence
from our own agencies as well as from our international
partners and from publicly recorded confessions by
Pakistani authorities themselves, have their bases
and leaders in that neighbouring country. President
Ahmadzai said that if Pakistan refused to carry out
military operations on its soil against the terrorists,
then it should surrender them to our courts to face
justice. We believe that there is a need for political will
and honest police action, rather than nuclear deals or
F-16s, to fulfil that task. President Ahmadzai added
that, despite our desire and efforts to advance regional
cooperation, we would have no choice but to refer the
case to the Security Council and take serious diplomatic
measures, unless there was a change in the policy of
using terrorist proxies against Afghanistan.
In contrast to the unforthcoming attitude of a
certain neighbouring country, other QCG members
have remained committed to giving — or have even
already given — effect to their words. On 22 May,
Taliban leader Mullah Akhtar Mansour was tracked and
killed by a United States airstrike in the Balochistan
province of Pakistan. The incident also exposed his
Pakistani passport with a fake name, which he had used
to fly from Pakistani airports numerous times. Despite
that, the charade of plausible deniability, duplicity and
blaming Afghan weaknesses continue. That must come
to an end if we are to succeed in countering terrorism.
In the past 15 years, numerous leading terrorist
figures, including the Al-Qaida leader Osama bin
Laden and Taliban leaders Mullah Omar and Mullah
Akhtar Mansoor, have lived and died in Pakistan. The
fact that notorious terrorist leaders were found and
killed in their safe havens there is clear proof that the
country has violated the sovereignty of other nations.
That constitutes a flagrant violation of the resolutions
1373 (2001) and 2255 (2015), on the sanctions regime
against the Taliban. We believe that there is an urgent
need for proper implementation of the existing counterterrorism resolutions of the Security Council.
Following the failure of their so-called spring
offensive, the Taliban have resorted to stepping up

16-185775/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

21/06/2016

highway banditry and the killing or kidnapping
civilians. In late May, they kidnapped 130 civilian
bus passengers in Kunduz; the fate of some of them
is still unknown. Earlier today, the Taliban again
took multiple travellers hostage in the province of
Helmand. Meanwhile, our neighbour’s provocative
actions along the de facto separation line, including
the illegal construction of military installations, abuse
of our nationals and restrictions on trade and transit,
have escalated. In the past three months, the violation
of our sovereignty and territorial integrity continued
with the firing of over 820 foreign artillery shells on
our eastern provinces of Nangarhar, Khost, Paktika,
Kunar and Nouristan, causing civilian casualties and
material losses.

republics, Chechnya and China are highly active in our
region.

Most recently — in contravention of bilaterally
agreed consultation mechanisms — our neighbour
attempted to build new infrastructure at the Torkham
Pass, thereby provoking an unnecessary military clash
that produced casualties on both sides. The situation,
which is a threat to international peace and security,
remains tense, with a devastating impact on trade and
transit. As a responsible Member of the United Nations,
and under Article 33 of the Charter of the United
Nations, Afghanistan has submitted 19 protest notes to
Pakistan and summoned that country’s head of mission
in Kabul three times in the past three months.

Despite the challenges, Afghanistan remains
committed to the peace process with reconcilable
Afghan elements, parallel to strengthening its defence
and security capabilities. However, it is important that
we remain vigilant against the instrumentalization
and misuse of the peace process by supporters of the
Taliban to buy time and refuel their war machine. One
can talk about peace only with those who value genuine
and results-oriented negotiations. But the world has
yet to see sincerity on the part of the Taliban and
their supporters.

Meanwhile, Afghanistan’s Government and Parliament
have called for a diplomatic solution to the illegal
construction at Torkham Pass. An Afghan delegation
was sent to Islamabad to explore a diplomatic
breakthrough. We hope the voice of reason will prevail,
but our message is very clear: make no mistake — I
repeat, make no mistake — the proud Government and
the people of Afghanistan have not, do not and will not
surrender to intimidation, violence and aggression. Our
history is a testimony to that.
Apart from the Taliban, constantly morphing
global and regional terrorist groups seek to turn
Afghanistan into a launching pad against Central Asia,
South Asia, West Asia and the Far East. It is imperative
that we remain vigilant and proactive against them.
Despite the recent heavy blows inflicted by the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces on the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaieda, those
groups continue to position themselves to re-emerge in
Afghanistan. Al-Qaieda has gone dark and deep. Other
regional terrorist networks with links to Central Asian
6/38

Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan, in coordination with
other terror groups, remains a long-term threat to the
security and stability of our region. More important,
most of those terrorist groups and networks enjoy the
facilitation and orchestration services of elements
within the Pakistani State structure who believe in
the use of violence to pursue political objectives. Any
country contemplating the use of good and bad terrorists
against each other and against others is playing with
fire and will catch fire itself. It is imperative that the
international community undertake an initiative to
establish objective criteria to identify and confront
State sponsorship of terrorism in our neighbourhood.

I must pay particular tribute to the brave men and
women of the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces. I am pleased to report that the security forces,
despite suffering high casualty rates, continues to move
from strength to strength, proving an invaluable asset
and partner in the global struggle against terrorism.
We are grateful for the continuous partnership of the
international community. We welcome last week’s
announcement by the United States on further ground
and air support to the security forces. We look forward
to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s Warsaw
Summit in two weeks’ time, which will review
international support for the Afghan security forces
and reiterate the pledges of our international partners.
Afghanistan has moved to complete or achieve
progress on a number of major national and regional
projects on energy and trade. Recently, we signed
an agreement with a Turkish company to explore
expanding the Kajaki dam in Helmand. Afghanistan
and India inaugurated the Saima irrigation and power
dam in Herat. Another historic occasion was the signing
of a transit trade agreement among Afghanistan, India,
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

and Iran on the Chabahar Port. We already started to
export agricultural products through that new trade
route. The leaders of Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Pakistan
and Kyrgyzstan launched the construction of the
CASA 1000 project. Afghanistan is determined to
continue its outreach to all regional partners for mutual
growth and prosperity, but at the same time remains
steadfast in refusing to allow obstructive policies in the
neighbourhood to dictate its direction.
We are currently working on the development
strategy framework, in line with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, to be presented at the
Brussels conference on Afghanistan in October. We look
forward to generous investments from the international
community in support of the implementation of that
strategy. We are committed to the full implementation
of the September 2014 agreement on the formation of
the National Unity Government. We are working with
all stakeholders to identify and remove obstacles and
expedite the electoral reform and convocation of the
Loya Jirga on amending the Constitution.
As we approach the Brussels conference, I am
pleased to report that over 90 per cent of Afghanistan’s
2015-2016 commitments in the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework are either
complete or nearing completion. Afghanistan has
established the High Council on Governance, Justice
and Anti-Corruption, which oversees the national
anti-corruption strategy, and has implemented
anti-corruption measures in the justice sector, which
are bound to improve governance. The Parliament
has given votes of confidence to the new Ministers of
Interior and Defence, the Attorney General and the
Head of the National Directorate of Security.
Despite rising civilian casualties due to attacks by
extremist factions, the determination of the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces to protect
civilian lives remains steadfast. The Government has
reiterated its commitment to promoting human rights,
continues to work on revising the penal code and
professionalizing the Afghan National Police, and has
submitted its first periodic report to the United Nations
Committee against Torture. Children’s protection units
are operational in different regions of the country to
prevent the recruitment of children into the armed
forces. Multiple women’s protection and family
guidance centres for survivors of domestic violence are
open and functional, which shows the Government’s
continued support to rehabilitating victims of violence.

S/PV.7722

The humanitarian situation remains fragile,
with an increase in conflict-related displacements in
extreme weather conditions. Earlier this year, I was
very pleased to sign the Paris Climate Agreement on
behalf of my Government, which I believe puts us on
the right track to make progress towards environmental
and social integrity. Afghanistan is ranked among the
most vulnerable countries facing the adverse impact of
climate change, which affects our economic situation
as well.
The ongoing flight of Afghans and the significant
numbers of internally displaced remain a cause
for concern, especially against the backdrop of
the decrease in voluntary repatriations. Terrorist
attacks on various aid organizations have hampered
humanitarian assistance in several cases, and rendered
refugee resettlement programmes more precarious.
However, our Government is fully committed to
finding sustainable solutions for the repatriation of
Afghan refugees, with the support of the international
community. I welcome the deliberations at the World
Humanitarian Summit, and assure the Council that
Afghanistan will work with our international partners
to address this serious humanitarian situation.
According to United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime’s socioeconomic analysis in its Afghanistan
Opium Survey 2015, the estimated gross value of
opiates in Afghanistan decreased from 13 per cent of
the country’s gross domestic product in 2014 to 7 per
cent in 2015. This demonstrates our commitment to
curbing the menace of narcotics, and we will continue
to work with the international community to garner
support for the Afghan national drug action plan to
counter the threat of illicit drugs.
Let me conclude by saying that 2015, the first posttransition year, was a year of survival for Afghanistan,
but 2016 has inaugurated the era of consolidation of
the gains that we have collectively made in the past
15 years. Together, we will pave the way for the longterm sustainability of progress in our country. I thank
the entire Council and almost all other United Nations
Member States that have been part of our journey so
far, either through sweat and toil or in spirit.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to begin by expressing our
indignation over and strong condemnation of the

16-185777/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

terrible attacks yesterday in Kabul and Badakhshan.
Most of the victims were defenceless civilians going
about their daily lives; many of them were children.
No goal, political, religious or otherwise, can justify
actions of this nature.
This morning, the Security Council issued a press
release vigorously condemning these acts, which
reiterates in no uncertain terms that any form of
terrorism is a criminal act that is absolutely inexcusable,
whatever the motivation invoked by its perpetrators.
The release further notes that those responsible for
these acts will sooner or later be held accountable.
There is no doubt that the international community and
the Security Council steadfastly support the process
towards peace, democracy and stability that the
Afghan people themselves have decided to embrace and
spearhead. I would ask Ambassador Saikal to convey to
the Government of Afghanistan our condolences and
heartfelt solidarity with the Afghan people.
I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom.
His presence among us will be the last in his current
capacity. We therefore take this opportunity to express
our gratitude for his years of steadfast commitment and
tireless dedication to Afghanistan and to the Council
as Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for four years, if we count his
two years as Deputy Special Representative. It is been
a true pleasure for my delegation to work closely with
him and his team as penholder of the Security Council
for Afghanistan. We have always had the highest regard
for his commitment to progress and reconciliation
in Afghanistan, and we wish him every success in
his future endeavours. Henceforth, his successor,
Ambassador Yamamoto, can count on the support and
collaboration of Spain.
It is abundantly clear after reading the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2016/532) and hearing Mr. Haysom’s
briefing that Afghanistan’s challenges persist and that it
is at a turning point in its recent history. It behooves us
to recognize the progress made, in particular since the
National Unity Government has taken up functions. It
has rolled out a robust reform agenda for the country’s
socioeconomic development.
We hail the Afghan National Peace and Development
Framework, which seeks to establish a road map for
reaching the self-reliance goals set forth in London in
2014, and will be presented in the upcoming ministerial
8/38

21/06/2016

conference to be held in October in Brussels. The
decisive push in the fight against corruption under the
direct leadership of President Ghani is also evident. We
welcome the measures contemplating judicial reform,
the regulation of procurement of public goods and
services, and the establishment of a high council on
governance, the rule of law and anti-corruption in an
effort to institutionalize anticorruption policies. We
commend the Government’s decision to give priority
attention to these matters.
In the context of human rights, the second annual
dialogue on this topic between the European Union and
Afghanistan, held just days ago in Kabul, brought to
light the measures that have been adopted in this area,
in compliance with Afghanistan’s commitments, such
as legal reform in the field of children’s rights, criminal
aspects of the law for the elimination of violence
against women, and new commitments undertaken
by Afghanistan with regard to various human rights
instruments. We must now be equally diligent in
ensuring the implementation of all of these important
measures throughout the nation.
The events of the past few months make it clear
that the challenges facing Afghanistan have not abated.
We are alarmed by the deterioration of security, the
increase of armed conflicts and the violence of insurgent
and terrorist groups in the recently launched spring
campaign, and the persistently high number of civilian
casualties from this conflict. Yesterday’s events were
yet another manifestation of this reality.
We are also concerned over the deterioration of
Afghan economic prospects, which may continue to
decline if national security collapses further. The
perceived lack of prospects among civilians is evidenced
in the massive outflow of Afghan civilians towards
other countries in search of opportunities which is a
worrying consequence of these factors. We are also
concerned about the lack of progress towards a process
of peace and reconciliation, despite the undeniable
efforts over the past few months of the members of
the Quadrilateral Coordination Group, whom I thank
once again.
The lack of progress in electoral reform, despite
the steps taken towards that goal, hampers compliance
with the electoral timetable and could have an adverse
impact on the stability and functions of the State,
which at this time is the principle goal of all the
institutions and political actors of Afghanistan. We are
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

also concerned about the ongoing rise in the number
of internally displaced persons and the conditions in
which they find themselves.
To summarize, it is essential to ensure that the
progress that has been achieved over the past 15 years
is not lost. Today perhaps more than ever in the past,
it is therefore particularly important to maintain the
unanimous support of the international community for
the current and future efforts of the Afghan Government
to promote political stability, economic growth, and the
well-being and rights of all Afghan men and women, as
well as their fight against terrorism and insurgency and
in favour of national reconciliation.
The NATO Summit that will take place in Warsaw
a few days from now and the ministerial conference
scheduled for October in Brussels, to which I referred
earlier, will be particularly important opportunities
to demonstrate our support for Afghanistan. In the
context of the international community’s support and
help for Afghanistan, a particularly important role
must be played by regional stakeholders. Afghanistan
therefore must continue to coordinate and cooperate
constructively with its neighbours.
Before concluding, I would like to refer to two
particular issues that are of key priority for Spain.
First, I welcome the recently adopted measures
pertaining to Afghanistan’s national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) . I am
pleased to inform the Council that Spain, together with
the United Kingdom, which is the penholder for that
resolution, has proposed the inclusion of Afghanistan
and UNAMA in the work of the informal experts group
on women, peace and security created by resolution
2242 (2015). We have done so because we are convinced
that a better understanding of all that Afghanistan and
UNAMA have done in that field will be very useful
to the increasingly important work of the Security
Council in that area.
Secondly, while I recognize the progress made
and political resolve demonstrated by the Afghan
authorities in a significant number of human rightsrelated areas, I add the voice of Spain to those who have
appealed to the Government of Afghanistan to establish
a moratorium on the application of the death penalty
and to advance towards the necessary legal reforms
necessary to commute such sentences.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): Let me first express
my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for convening

S/PV.7722

this debate. My gratitude also goes to the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his last but, as
usual, comprehensive briefing today. Japan appreciates
Mr. Haysom’s tireless efforts during the past two years
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and commends his achievements.
Today, I will start with a cultural aspect. Until
two days ago, a special exhibition, entitled “Hidden
Treasures from the National Museum in Kabul”,
was on display in Tokyo. There on display were 231
ancient art works from Afghanistan, enjoyed by more
than 200,000 museum visitors in Fukuoka and Tokyo.
In front of the National Museum in Kabul, there is a
small board with a message: “Our nation stays alive
when its culture stays alive”. I heard that many visitors
to the special exhibition in Tokyo were impressed
by that message, thinking about the long history of
Afghanistan and hoping for peace and stability in
that country. The preservation of the Afghan cultural
heritage has been one of the main areas of Japan’s
assistance to Afghanistan. Since 2003, Japan has been
undertaking a project entitled “Safeguarding of the
Cultural Landscape and Archaeological Remains of
the Bamiyan Valley”, through the UNESCO/Japanese
Funds-in-Trust Trust for the Preservation of World
Cultural Heritage.
Afghanistan is rich, not only in culture, but also in
agricultural and mineral resources. However, they are
not fully accessed or utilized due to such obstacles as
security concerns and underdeveloped infrastructure.
It is very regrettable that civilian casualties in the first
quarter of 2016 were the highest on record since 2009.
Our assistance programmes on the ground cannot be
implemented in their full scale because of Afghanistan’s
fragile security situation. Japan understands that
Afghanistan is under the threat of violent extremism.
At the same time, it is crucial for Afghanistan to realize
economic and social self-reliance and sustainable
growth so that it can overcome the root causes of
terrorism and violent extremism. All the commitments
made by the Government of Afghanistan must be
translated into action.
In March, at the debate on UNAMA, Mr. Haysom
said, “For 2016, survival will be an achievement
for the National Unity Government” (S/PV.7645,
p. 2). Indeed, 2016 is crucial for Afghanistan and the
international community. Japan intends to contribute
to achieving successful outcomes at the Brussels

16-185779/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

conference in October, which will be an important
milestone for the development of Afghanistan. The
Afghan Government and the donors have been working
towards consolidating the Afghanistan National Peace
and Development Framework to help ensure the success
of the Brussels conference. Among the priorities listed
in the Framework, we highly value agriculture, energy
and improving economic connectivity. With a view
to ensuring the transparency and accountability of
assistance, it is our hope that the opinions of the donors
will be taken into account in the Framework.
Afghanistan has thrived at the crossroads of
civilizations since ancient times. Now we place
Afghanistan at the heart of Asia, which invites regional
cooperation for a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
Japan is determined, together with the international
community, to continue supporting the Afghan
Government’s endeavour for peace and prosperity and
to contribute to promoting economic cooperation and
integration in the region.
In conclusion, I once again express my sincere
gratitude to Mr. Haysom for his efforts in extremely
difficult circumstances. In particular, Mr. Haysom
successfully established a communication channel
with the National Unity Government and has strongly
supported its reform endeavours in such areas as
humanitarian assistance, electoral reform, coordination
of development assistance and anti-corruption. I wish
Mr. Haysom all the best in his future career, and Japan
intends to continue supporting UNAMA’s activities
under the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral as well.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to extend our deepest gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, for his detailed and useful briefing and
his unrelenting efforts during his mandate as Head
of UNAMA.
The Middle East and Central Asia share the same
interest in and need for stability. Therefore, Egypt has
always supported the Government of Afghanistan in its
war against terrorism and in its tireless efforts to assert
its control and sovereignty on all its territories. We also
support the authorities of Afghanistan in their social
and political efforts to ensure security and promote
development and prosperity for all Afghanis.
10/38

21/06/2016

We stress that drug trafficking threatens the security
and stability of Afghanistan, as well as of Central Asia.
In this regard, we highlight the importance and need
for close coordination at the international and regional
levels with the Afghani authorities to fight drug
trafficking. This is part and parcel of the efforts to fight
terrorism because drugs are one of the main financing
sources for terrorist groups and armed militias. In this
regard, we commend the efforts of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and relevant regional
organizations, which have helped Afghanistan address
this problem which undermines efforts to promote
development and peace in the region.
In line with the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/532); General Assembly resolution 70/77,
entitled “The situation in Afghanistan”, adopted in
December 2015; and Security Council resolution
resolution 2274 (2016), which was adopted in March, it
is clear that the international community has sounded
the alarm against the ever-growing presence of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province.
Indeed, that terrorist organization has managed to
maintain its stronghold over the east of the country.
It is a cancerous tumour that must be treated, fought
and eliminated wherever it is, in line with the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
In the same regard, we stress our ongoing readiness
to train army and police officers through high-level
specialized sessions because Egypt’s sole interest is
to ensure security and stability in Afghanistan by
helping the Afghan National Army in its war against
terrorist organizations. We therefore hope to promote
the tripartite cooperation programme in this vital field
so that donors are able to provide the necessary funding
to cover the costs of these very important specialized
training sessions.
Egypt is promoting its constructive role as a
supporting country of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
process. At the international level, we note the need
to address the issue of Afghanistan effectively and
extensively in all relevant forums, especially at the
ministerial conference on Afghanistan to be held on
4 and 5 October in Brussels.
In conclusion, Egypt continues to closely follow the
political and security situation in Afghanistan because it
believes it share a common goal: to support the capacity
of Afghanistan, which has suffered for many decades,
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

to overcome these difficult challenges and achieve
peace, stability, security and sustainable development.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My delegation
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity you have provided us by convening
this meeting to once again examine the situation
in Afghanistan. At the outset, allow me to thank
Mr. Nicholas Haysom for the report (S/2016/532) he has
just introduced to us and to commend his extraordinary
work as Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

S/PV.7722

In this regard, we welcome the valuable support
provided by the international community and various
other partners active in that country. We strongly
urge all other partners who have not yet done so to do
the same, because technical assistance and expertise
continue to be necessary to ensure the capacity-building
of the Afghan army to allow it to assume responsibility
for the country’s security by preventing the advances of
the Taliban and curbing the spread of the Islamic State.

Recent developments in Afghanistan show the
persistence of the political, security and humanitarian
problems, as well as others, which this country
continues to experience and which represent a serious
source of concern. Indeed, the situation in the country
unfortunately continues to be marked by increased
armed clashes and drug trafficking, a weakened
economy and political divisions, not to mention the
worsening of the humanitarian situation, which all
make the stabilization and national reconciliation
process difficult.

We must also point out and welcome the substantial
progress that has been achieved thanks to regional
cooperation, in particular through the Istanbul process
on regional security and cooperation for peace and
stability in Afghanistan. Such progress must be
encouraged, in particular in the context of combatting
terrorism and especially in combatting the Islamic
State, which represents a genuine threat to the region.
In that spirit, my delegation would like to solemnly
call upon Afghanistan and Pakistan to continue to
work together to find an agreed solution to the difficult
problem of regional security in general and the problem
of the Taliban in particular.

It must therefore be said that, despite the
important meetings that have been held within the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan
Peace and Reconciliation Process and the significant
progress made towards an agreement with Hezb-iIslami Gulbuddin, efforts continue to fall short owing
to the demands of the Taliban for the withdrawal of
international forces, the recurring attacks during
the spring offensive and the reprisals following the
execution of the members of that group. The situation is
worsened internally by the political divisions, which I
just mentioned, and regionally by the recent tensions on
the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan, which
led to deadly armed clashes.

The humanitarian and human rights situation, like
the political and security situation, to which we have
just referred, remains a source of concern. There are
close to 1.2 million internally displaced persons within
Afghanistan, which also has one of the largest refugee
population in the world. According to recent estimates,
2.6 million Afghans are living outside their country.
Added to that is the high price that continues to be
paid by the civilian population, in particular women
and children. My delegation would therefore like to
reiterate its appeal to host countries to demonstrate
greater flexibility in the manner in which they deal
with Afghan asylum-seekers.

Despite this difficult security environment,
UNAMA — and I pay tribute to its efforts once
again — has fortunately done everything possible
to support the peace and reconciliation process of
the Afghan people. With regard to the international
technical and financial partners and other donors that
continue to invest in the stability of the country and the
security of its people, we encourage them to continue
their efforts to support Afghanistan’s reconstruction
and development, but also to continue to lend their
support to the Government’s efforts to restore peace
and security.

While welcoming some of the initiatives taken by
the Government with regard to freedom of expression,
we call on all Afghan parties to ensure that they protect
the media and journalists. My delegation, while paying
tribute to the courage shown by the Afghan Government,
which has resolutely undertaken to combat corruption,
calls upon the international community, and in
particular the United Nations and other partners with
expertise in this area, to provide the necessary support
to the Afghan authorities to help them to eradicate this
scourge, which continues to pose a serious threat to the
security, stability and economy of the country.

16-1857711/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

In closing, I should like to express once again
my delegation’s full support to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and recall the fact
that the combination of regional and international
efforts, in support of all of the efforts being made by
the Afghan parties, remains vital in order to enable the
country to overcome, on a lasting basis, the political,
security and economic challenges that it has been
facing for so many decades.
For that reason, my delegation hopes that at the
upcoming Brussels conference it will be possible to
make progress towards economic reconstruction and
stabilization in Afghanistan. We hope also that solutions
will be found very soon, particularly in terms of a
consensus with regard to the presence of the Resolute
Support Mission, and that lasting solutions will also be
arrived at with respect to the financing of Afghan forces
that would make it possible to resolve issues related to
the peace process and the combat against terrorism.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I wish at
the outset to thank Special Representative Haysom for
his briefing.
Afghanistan continues to demonstrate resilience
in confronting significant security, governance and
economic challenges. We recognize and welcome the
gains made in Afghanistan over the past 15 years, and
we all share an interest in preserving and building on
these gains. We see three key themes as necessary for
the continued development of Afghanistan: security,
reconciliation and reform.
First, with respect to security, the conflict continues
to exact a significant toll on the civilian population with
record high numbers this year, with almost a third of
the victims being children. In April, the United Nations
reported nearly 2,000 casualties in the first three
months of the year, a 2 per cent increase compared with
the number of civilian casualties in 2015. Just yesterday
we saw attacks by the Taliban and anti-Government
forces continuing to take place in civilian-populated
areas. We also remain deeply concerned by the terrorist
activities of the Haqqani network, Al-Qaida and the
Islamic State in Afghanistan, as well as the threat that
improvised explosive devices continue to pose to the
civilian population.
In that regard, we commend the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for
facilitating a high-level dialogue on civilian protection
this past May that brought together representatives of
12/38

21/06/2016

the Afghan Government, the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces, the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission and the NATO-led Resolute
Support Mission. All participants reaffirmed their
commitment to the prevention and mitigation of civilian
casualties, and the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission signed a memorandum of understanding
with the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of the
Interior and the National Directorate of Security, to
strengthen the accountability and transparency of
Afghan security institutions.
We also recognize that the Afghan forces are
fighting courageously to defend threatened populations,
especially in Helmand and in parts of Baghlan and
Kunduz. There is no question that Afghan forces have
become more capable and professional. They have
demonstrated the commitment to staying and fighting
and, when control over territory is lost, to working
tenaciously to regain it.
The United States remains committed to assisting
Afghanistan and the Resolute Support Mission. We will
maintain 9,800 troops in Afghanistan through most
of this year and 5,500 thereafter, located at a small
number of bases, including at Baghlan, Jalalabad in the
east, and Kandahar in the south. We will also continue
to provide financial support for the Afghan forces.
We encourage all other donors to the Afghan security
forces to do the same.
Afghanistan has requested donors to renew their
funding for the Afghan forces at or near current levels
through 2020. We urge donors to do so at, or ahead of,
next month’s NATO summit, in Warsaw.
Turning to reconciliation, in January Afghanistan
and Pakistan, with support from the United States
and China, launched the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group on the Afghan Peace and Reconciliation Process
to synchronize cooperation for the initiation of direct
talks with the Taliban. The Quadrilateral Coordination
Group has met five times since its formation in January
and has endorsed key principles, terms of reference and
a road map, which serve as a guiding framework. The
Group is committed to exploring all avenues to bring
the Taliban to the negotiating table. The strike against
Mullah Mansoor should serve as a clear signal to the
Taliban that we are prepared to take action against
those who plan to potentially harm United States
personnel and who continue to oppose peace. It is not,
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

however, indicative of a change in policy and does not
foreshadow a new military initiative.
The United States remains committed to encouraging
the peace process between the Afghan Government and
the Taliban, and we view such a process as the only
avenue for ending the war. There is no military solution
to the conflict. The Taliban must understand that they
can achieve their goals, including the withdrawal of
international military forces, only through a peace
process that leads to a negotiated settlement.
Now I should like to make a few points about
reform. The security of Afghanistan is inextricably
linked to the nation’s economic and political stability
and progress. It is important to recognize some of the
significant, though largely unheralded, progress that the
Afghan Government has made. Despite the economic
challenges facing Afghanistan, the Afghan Government
successfully completed the International Monetary
Fund’s (IMF) staff-monitored programme on 13 April,
meeting a series of IMF-designated benchmarks of
progress towards improving Government revenues,
strengthening the banking system and building a track
record for a future IMF financial arrangement. We
welcome the current negotiations with the IMF on a
modest new programme with new benchmarks.
We also note that President Ghani is taking initiatives
to root out corruption. He has worked to recover Kabul
Bank assets and is reopening criminal cases against
those who stole this money from the Afghan people. He
has removed corrupt judges and other public officials.
We all recognize, however, that countering corruption
is a long-term process. President Ghani, though, asked
that we hold him to his commitments at the London
anti-corruption summit last month. We applaud his
promises to establish a High Council on governance,
the rule of law and anti-corruption, and to establish an
anti-corruption justice centre, among other steps.

S/PV.7722

Accountability Framework and to make progress on
electoral reform, private-sector reform and women’s
issues. Of course, the United States remains committed
to working with UNAMA, which stands as a symbol
of the world’s commitment to the Afghan people.
UNAMA must continue in its important efforts to
help Afghanistan with governance, development and
promoting respect for human rights, as well as to
coordinate humanitarian assistance, donor support and
counter-narcotics efforts and to support reconciliation.
Finally, let me join others in thanking Special
Representative Haysom for his tireless and exemplary
efforts. The United States is truly grateful for his
service, and we know that UNAMA will continue its
work to build on the strong foundation he has laid. We
all wish him well as he takes on new challenges.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We wish to
thank Special Representative Haysom for his briefing.
He reminds us of the complex set of challenges
facing Afghanistan. We thank him also for his patient
commitment to achieving peace in Afghanistan and
wish him well in his next, no-less-difficult, assignment.
We look forward to continuing the Security Council’s
excellent relationship with his successor.
Almost 40 years after the Saur Revolution, 20 years
since the fall of Kabul to the Taliban and 15 years
since the United States-led intervention that followed
the 11 September attacks, sustainable peace for
Afghanistan continues to appear as elusive as ever. The
National Unity Government continues to face difficult
political, economic and security challenges.

The Afghan Government is making tangible
progress on self-reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework indicators. Already 15 of the 39 goals
under the Framework have been achieved, including
the successful completion of the IMF’s staff-monitored
programme and the filing of asset declarations by
senior officials.

The Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/532) identifies
several areas in which modest progress has been made
during the reporting period, including on financial
planning and political appointments. We welcome
this week’s confirmation of the appointments for
the positions of Minister of National Defence and
of Director General of the National Directorate of
Security, the last significant vacant positions to be filled
in the Afghan Cabinet. We also welcome the filling of
the last vacancy in the Afghan Supreme Court, and we
acknowledge and welcome the continued determination
and increasing professionalism of the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces.

As we approach the conference on Afghanistan
to be held in Brussels in October, we encourage the
Afghan Government to continue to deliver on its reform
commitments under the Self-Reliance through Mutual

However, that progress is more than offset by the
enormous human toll the conflict continues to exact.
The past three months have witnessed an increased
frequency of attacks on civilians, including the

16-1857713/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

21/06/2016

deadliest incidents in Kabul since the Taliban rule
ended 15 years ago, as well as killings of Government
and judicial officials. Yesterday’s separate attacks,
killing another 30 people, mainly civilians, underscore
the determination of the Taliban and other armed
groups to maintain that bloody trajectory. It is hard to
take seriously the Taliban’s claim to be an alternative
Government when they show such disregard for the lives
of ordinary Afghans and of those who put themselves
at risk in the international effort to help Afghanistan.

The resumption of a meaningful peace and
reconciliation process remains another critical
challenge. We recognize the difficulty of achieving
that in the short term. But there is no getting around
the fact that achieving a sustainable and peaceful
Afghanistan is ultimately dependent on achieving some
form of reconciliation between the Afghan State and
some elements of the armed opposition. As a Council,
we also need to consider what practical steps we can
take in supporting the peace and reconciliation process.

It is also more than disappointing to note that
no progress has been made during this period in the
peace and reconciliation process or in achieving the
regional cooperation necessary to effectively meet the
serious threats facing the region. Vital milestones for
the National Unity Government are yet to be reached.
Economic growth remains low, with few prospects
for any improvement in the short term, and outward
migration continues.

New Zealand continues to believe that the sanctions
regime established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011)
can play an important role in that regard and that
sanctions can, and should, be used more actively to
support progress on the ground. That includes targeted
measures to reduce the ability of the Taliban to seek
a military solution. One example is by taking further
steps to restrict access to improvised explosive devices
and their components. Another is creating incentives for
meaningful engagement in the peace and reconciliation
process. Regular and meaningful engagement between
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2001) and key stakeholders
is important to ensure that the sanctions regime
complements broader efforts. We remain committed to
do our part in that regard during our remaining time as
Chair of the Committee.

All of that might seem to represent a poor return
on the vast resources that have been poured into
Afghanistan’s security and reconstruction over the
past decade. However, it is very clear from past history
that, in the absence of sustained international support,
Afghanistan will risk slipping once again into chaos.
Whether we like it or not, the Government and the
people of Afghanistan need our continuing support.
The conferences to be held later this year in Warsaw
and Brussels will provide important opportunities
for the international community to assess in what is
needed and what can be provided. At the same time,
the international community will be expecting clear
results from the Afghan Government in return. The
National Unity Government and regional actors need
to show that they are brave enough to take the steps
needed to achieve sustainable progress in addressing
the challenges they face in a wide range of closed
critical areas. The National Unity Government needs to
provide the coherent and effective leadership its people
so desperately need. We endorse Special Representative
Haysom’s call for the Government to adopt a broad
and collaborative approach in the ongoing political
dialogue. Similarly, we call on regional leaders to
set aside their differences in pursuit of their shared
interests in countering terrorism and in addressing the
conditions that breed instability and extremism to the
detriment of the security of the entire region.
14/38

One immediate action the 1988 Sanctions
Committee can take is to ensure its listings remain upto-date, particularly to keep pace with changes in the
Taliban leadership. In that regard, we note that regard
both the new Taliban leader and the Tehrik-i-Taliban
Pakistan leader are not currently listed. That anomaly
must be addressed as soon as possible.
We all stand to benefit from achieving a stable and
peaceful Afghanistan, no more so than for its immediate
neighbours and Afghanistan itself. New Zealand will
continue to offer its support to Afghanistan and to
the work of the Special Representative and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in ensuring
that the political and security foundations are in place
for Afghanistan to advance. We look forward to taking
stock of progress in September.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to to
use this opportunity to add my voice to others on behalf
of my Government to thank Special Representative
Haysom for the way he has carried out what I think
is an extraordinarily tough job, and one that he has
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

done with both flair and commitment. On behalf of my
Government, adding what to others have said, I thank
him very much indeed.
As we heard in today’s briefing, Afghanistan still
faces an exceptionally tough road ahead. As it works
through myriad challenges, the latest civilian casualty
figures from the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) remind us of the ongoing
human cost. Others have talked about some of the
incidents that have happened recently. But looking
back over time, nearly 59,000 civilians have been killed
or severely injured since UNAMA records began. The
vast majority were at the hands of anti-Government
groups. Fifty-nine thousand is an extraordinary price
to pay. It is a price being paid in Badakhshan and in
Kabul, following attacks just yesterday. I offer my
Government’s condolences for all those who lost their
lives or who were injured in those shameful attacks,
including those working at the Canadian Embassy. I
hope the Canadian Ambassador will convey that to his
Government on our behalf.
It is clear that our job is far from done. And it is
clear that the support of the Security Council and the
international community remains vital to Afghanistan.
Our collective action can have a direct positive impact
on the lives of the Afghan people. We need to show
that we are standing by Afghanistan in the months and
years ahead. I see three areas where we can do so.
First, on the matter of security, the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces are admirably holding
their own this year. They are repelling the Taliban’s
spring offensive and forcing back Da’esh as it tries to
expand. But their task is formidable, and the longer-term
stability of Afghanistan is dependent on their success.
We therefore cannot just speak about our commitments
to supporting Afghan security, we have to demonstrate
it, too. The NATO Warsaw Summit in July will be
an opportunity for States to show that resolve. The
United Kingdom intends to provide $100 million each
year to the Afghan national forces from 2017 to 2020.
Meanwhile, 450 United Kingdom troops continue to
provide military support and training as part of NATO’s
Resolute Support Mission. That includes helping the
Afghan national army officer academy, where 1,300
officer graduates have been trained, with more female
officers than ever.
In that regard, allow me to add my voice to that
of Spain in saying that I am very pleased that we are

S/PV.7722

including Afghanistan together on our joint work
programme on women and peace and security. I call
on other members of the international community to
show their support, not just through their words inside
the Chamber but through their actions and financial
commitments outside of it.
My second point concerns development. Development
and security are mutually reinforcing. Together we
need not only to build an Afghanistan that is stable
and resilient, but also self-reliant and prosperous.
Continued development assistance will be critical to
the future Afghanistan. It is therefore equally critical
that we do not see a drop-off in assistance this year,
particularly given the fragility of the Afghan economy.
We look forward to the international community going
to Brussels this year ready to make long-term financial
commitment to Afghanistan. We also look forward to
the Government of Afghanistan setting out the progress
it has delivered so far and its priorities for the coming
years, including on economic reform, job creation and
tackling corruption.
My third and last point is that, if we want security
and development to take hold in Afghanistan, then there
needs to be political stability. That is why the United
Kingdom supports the National Unity Government as it
tackles Afghanistan’s challenges head-on. We strongly
believe that the best chance for reaching a negotiated
peace starts with the stability of the National Unity
Government, the effectiveness of the national forces
and the support of Afghanistan’s neighbours. It is
therefore especially important that the Governments
of Afghanistan and Pakistan work towards a stronger
relationship. That is not only to stop the escalation of
incidents like the one last week at the Torkham border
crossing, but also to tackle the larger common threat of
violent extremism. It is my firm view that the long-term
interests of both Afghanistan and Pakistan are aligned.
Their success is dependent, in part, on how much both
countries recognize that.
Let me conclude with this final thought: Afghanistan
still faces grave security, development and political
challenges. Through the summits in Brussels and
Warsaw and through the Council, we have a real chance
to show the National Unity Government and the people
of Afghanistan that they do not face those challenges
alone. We need to keep bolstering the military, keep
supporting the economy and keep building international
and regional support. In doing that, we can help ensure
that 2016 really does turn — to use the words of the

16-1857715/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

Ambassador of Afghanistan — from the year of
survival to the year of consolidation.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing
on the quarterly report (S/2016/532) of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Afghanistan. We convey
our deep appreciation and gratitude for the work of
Mr. Haysom and for his contribution in facing, with the
Afghanistan authorities and people, the great challenges
in achieving peace and a better life. We praise the work
of UNAMA in discharging its mandate under extremely
difficult conditions while Afghanistan struggles to
establish a society based on the fundamental values of
peace, human rights and social equity.
This debate offers us an opportunity to assess the
political, security and human rights situation, as well
as the latest regional and international developments,
concerning Afghanistan. The overall situation in the
country, as portrayed in the report of the SecretaryGeneral is most worrisome. In the past three months,
the Afghan Government continued to face significant
political, security and economic challenges. However,
despite a dire situation, as Mr. Haysom stressed,
important progress was achieved in the past 10 years.
The Afghans and the international community must
do everything in their power to ensure the gains are
irreversible. We deeply regret that the initial impulse
of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan
Peace and Reconciliation Process in its efforts to
facilitate a peaceful solution to the conflict through
dialogue between the Government and the Taliban did
not bear the desired results.
As in the previous period, the security situation
remained unstable, characterized by continuous and
intense armed clashes in various regions of the country
and terrorist attacks perpetrated by the Taliban, with a
disastrous impact on the civilian population. We took
note, with dismay, that over 1,900 civilian victims were
documented in the period covered by the report, with
60 per cent of the deaths attributed to non-governmental
elements. The indiscriminate killing of civilians
deserves our most vigorous condemnation, and we urge
all parties to the conflict to respect their obligations
and human rights and international humanitarian law
by putting an end to attacks against civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
16/38

21/06/2016

Continued and widespread armed clashes and
very low economic growth generate a precarious
humanitarian situation, characterized by increasing
numbers of internally displaced people and a high
number of Afghan migrants already in Europe. On the
other hand, humanitarian access remains a matter of
concern. Incidents involving humanitarian workers
are on the rise, while humanitarian funding for food,
nutrition, health care and refugee programmes are
insufficient to meet such huge humanitarian needs.
The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
have shown increasing resilience despite the pressures
they face, including rising casualty and attrition rates,
which create great challenges to the sustainability
of the forces, as underlined in the report of the
Secretary-General.
It is common wisdom that long-term stability
and prosperity in Afghanistan depend upon national
reconciliation, based on respect of human rights and
fundamental liberties, regional and international
cooperation, mutual respect and non-interference in
one another’s internal affairs.
Afghanistan is pursuing regional commitments
with an emphasis on the economy and security. During
the period under review, regional cooperation appeared
to be the most virtuous development in and around
Afghanistan. The agreement among Afghan President
Ghani, Iranian President Rouhani and Indian Prime
Minister Modi on transport, trilateral transit and
facilitation of trade among the three countries and the
engagement by the countries of the region with the
similar Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process as a platform
for regional cooperation, including the fight against
terrorism, are other welcome developments, as are as the
consultations held in Kabul by the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force with Government officials
on plans to develop a structure for a regional strategy on
combating terrorism. In that regard, we commend the
efforts on the part of the Afghan authorities to develop
relations with regional partners in neighbouring
countries in the fight against terrorism and in pursuing
a political settlement to the conflict they have been
engulfed in for so long.
We take good note of the determination on the part
of the Afghan authorities and institutions to adopt more
rigorous policies and practices and translate them into
actions aimed at building the population’s trust. The
agenda for the reform of the Afghan Government has
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

started to produce a meaningful impact on the lives
of the Afghans. The fight against corruption is a key
feature of the agenda. We welcome the establishment, by
a presidential decree, of a High Council on governance,
Justice and Anti-corruption to oversee the drafting and
implementation of a national anti-corruption strategy
and presidential statements outlining measures to step
up the anti-corruption drive.
In conclusion, we are mindful that the challenges
faced by Afghanistan are immense. We join the
Secretary-General in applauding Afghanistan’s
commitment, along with China, Pakistan and the United
States, in the context of the Quadrilateral Coordination
group on the Afghan peace and reconciliation process to
reach a negotiated agreement between the Government
and the Taliban for the achievement of sustainable
peace for the Afghan people.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, we would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, for his comprehensive briefing on the situation
in Afghanistan and for his courageous work as Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We listened closely to the Permanent
Representative of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan,
Mr. Mahmoud Saikal.
For many years now, developments in the security
situation in Afghanistan continue to be the subject
of our extreme concern. Unfortunately, the situation
is going from bad to worse. We fear that the armed
opposition and terrorist groups will this year pursue
their efforts to seize strategically important towns
and gain control over large swathes of the country’s
territory. The Taliban movement, having announced the
start of its spring offensive, is systematically carrying
out high-profile attacks in various parts of Afghanistan,
and most of them are against civilian populations. The
series of terrorist attacks that took place on 20 June
in various parts of the country is further evidence of
this fact. I would ask Ambassador Saikal to convey our
sincere condolences to the Government and the people
of Afghanistan.
We are particularly concerned about the increase in
the number of members of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and the attempts of that group to absorb
other armed opposition groups, mainly in the north of
Afghanistan. It is our hope that the future leadership of
UNAMA, in particular the new Special Representative

S/PV.7722

of the Secretary-General, Mr. Yamamoto, will pay
careful attention to this dangerous phenomenon.
We support the Government’s approach to
achieving national reconciliation. We are ready to
support progress in the negotiations process, including
being flexible on the possible softening of sanctions
set up by the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), on the Taliban, if it
is not contrary to Afghanistan’s national interests.
We welcome the appointment of the country’s
leading religious figure, Mr. Gilani, to the Head
of the High Peace Council. We hope that, with his
participation, the national reconciliation process will
be given renewed dynamism.
We take note of the Afghan Government’s intention
to develop a dialogue with the armed opposition. We
support any efforts made in that regard, but we are
convinced that national reconciliation will be lasting
only when it takes on a genuinely national character.
The main challenge in terms of reconciliation means
involving the Taliban movement in the peace talks,
but that has not yet been achieved. The Quadrilateral
Coordination Group on the Afghan Peace and
Reconciliation Process needs to organize direct talks
between the Government and the Taliban, although the
important decisions that have already been taken have
not, it would seem, led to any significant results. We
call on the armed opposition to rise to the level of State
responsibility for the fate of Afghanistan and its people,
end its military activities, stop its reprisals and acts
of terrorism and enter into a significant, substantive
dialogue with the country’s legitimate authorities.
Russia is ready to establish constructive cooperation
with the Afghan leadership in order to support stability
and an independent path forward for Afghanistan, so
that the country can be free from terrorism and the
drug threat.
We take note of the world’s growing understanding
of the important regional dimension of settling the
conflict in Afghanistan, as well as the increased
number of regional platforms that focus on Afghan
issues. We believe it is important that, in the contex
of such activities, regional stakeholders themselves
should have a decisive role to play.
We are convinced that efforts to support
Afghanistan should mainly be undertaken using the
structures that have proved their worth, for example,

16-1857717/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

first of all, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO), whose stakeholders, observers or partners
in dialogue include practically all of the countries
of the region, including Afghanistan. We welcome
Afghanistan’s official application to become a member
of the SCO. We actively support steps by the Afghan
Government, to which Ambassador Saikal referred, to
establish economic cooperation and integration with
regional neighbours.
We see considerable potential in enhancing
counter-terrorism and anti-narcotics cooperation
between Afghanistan and the SCO and the Collective
Security Treaty Organization. However, in this context
we must say that the new NATO Resolute Support
Mission has not yet achieved its declared goals. The
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, which is
courageously fighting the terrorist threat, is suffering
major losses as it counters the opposition, as well as
experiencing serious difficulties in effectively pushing
back the opposition’s onslaught. We take note of the
decision of the United States Administration to halt
its withdrawal of American troops from Afghanistan,
which reflects a recognition that the security problem
has not yet been resolved.
It must not be forgotten that Russia voted in favour
of resolution 2189 (2014), on launching the Resolute
Support operation, based on the belief that the North
Atlantic alliance would report to the Security Council
on the situation in Afghanistan in the context of that
operation. NATO and the United States of America
have a special responsibility for training the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces and ensuring
its effectiveness and security in Afghanistan. Another
area of work is to ensure that no threat to third-party
countries should come from Afghan territory. That
said, the situation in this area — and I will say this
directly — is alarming. An example of this is the
situation in northern districts of Afghanistan, where
there is a growing presence of foreign terrorist fighters
and an increase in the activities of ISIL.
The drug problem poses a serious threat to the
stability of Afghanistan itself, its neighbours in the
region and the world at large. In addition to the direct
harm it causes, drug production provides substantial
and determinative financial support for terrorism.
In that context, we believe it is necessary to step up
efforts by the international community to fight drug
trafficking from Afghan territory. We have no illusions
about the 2015 statistics showing a significant drop in
18/38

21/06/2016

opium production in Afghanistan. We are concerned at
forecasts of a significant increase in the poppy harvest
this year.
The key to improved stability of the situation in
Afghanistan is a militarily capable Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces, which should on its own
be able to ensure peace and stability in its own country.
In February, Russia provided free delivery of weapons
and munitions to meet the needs of Afghanistan’s
security forces. We will continue to help Kabul in
training members of the structures of the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces through the
relevant Russian services, particularly since our two
countries historically enjoy a high level of cooperation
and mutual assistance in these areas. We will continue
that work both bilaterally and through cooperation
with international partners, despite the changes in the
approach of the United States, NATO and many Western
countries to implementing, together with the Russian
Federation, joint projects to support Afghanistan.
The task of consolidating the efforts of the main
external players remains the primary precondition
for resolving the main problems in Afghanistan.
Competition over areas of influence should be eliminated
immediately, as should involvement in domestic affairs.
We need to combine our efforts to ensure that there is
national reconciliation in the country, that we eliminate
the problem of terrorism and that we help Afghanistan
back onto the path of sustainable development. We
particularly stress the fact that the situation can be
resolved only through good-neighbourliness, open
international and regional cooperation and cooperation
with the legitimate Government of Afghanistan, while
respecting that State’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this open meeting on
Afghanistan. I also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan, Mr. Haysom,
for his briefing, and Ambassador Saikal, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, for his statement.
China strongly condemns the multiple terrorist
attacks that took place in Afghanistan on 20 June.
We express our profound sympathy to the families of
the victims, as well as our sincere condolences to the
Government and the people of Afghanistan.
By and large, the Afghan Government of National
Unity has recently been operating effectively and
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

making substantial efforts to develop its economy,
promote reconciliation and safeguard stability.
Afghanistan continues to face grim challenges in the
political, economic and security fields. There is a need
for unity on the part of all Afghan communities, as well
as the sustained attention, support and assistance of
the international community. I wish to emphasize the
following four points.
First, improvement in the security situation is
the basis for Afghan stability. Recently, the security
situation in Afghanistan has taken a turn for the worse.
Domestic armed clashes have been escalating, with
increasing civilian casualties. The Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Al-Qaida and other terrorist forces
are seizing the opportunity to enhance their presence
in Afghanistan, thus gravely jeopardizing Afghan
safety and stability. The international community
should enhance Afghan’s self-defence and counterterrorism capabilities by increasing its assistance to the
country in the security sector so as to prevent setbacks
in the security situation. We hope that the United
Nations will strengthen its assessment of the security
situation in Afghanistan; promote cooperation between
Afghanistan and the countries of the region in the fight
against terrorism, drugs and transnational crimes; and
jointly create conditions conducive to improving the
security situation in Afghanistan.
Secondly, promoting national reconciliation is
a fundamental way of achieving a solution on the
question of Afghanistan. China welcomes the recent
peace agreement between the Afghan Government and
Hezb-i-Islami Afghanistan. We hope that it will serve
as an example for the Afghan national reconciliation
process. The international community should continue
to exercise a positive influence on the parties concerned
and fully support an inclusive reconciliation process led
and owned by Afghans. The Afghan parties concerned
must put the interests of the nation and the people above
all else and resume peace talks as soon as possible.
Thirdly, strengthening governance is an important
guarantee for Afghan development. In the final
analysis, Afghan affairs must be managed by the
Afghan people themselves. In the light of Afghanistan’s
development strategy and its concrete needs, the
international community should provide more targeted
assistance to the Afghan Government in terms of
resources for governing the country and consolidate
the results of its nation-building efforts. With national
stability and prosperous development in mind, all

S/PV.7722

Afghan communities should strengthen their unity and
commit to resolving their differences through dialogue
and consultations.
Fourthly, the promotion of economic and social
development is a necessary condition for Afghan
prosperity and stability. The international community
must increase its assistance to Afghanistan; support
the Afghan Government’s efforts to halt its economic
downturn, promote comprehensive economic and
social development in Afghanistan, encourage and
support the Afghan Govenrment in its efforts to fully
leverage its advantages in terms of resources and
location, strengthen cooperation with Afghanistan
in the areas of infrastructure, trade, investment and
human-resources training and promote Afghanistan’s
cooperation with neighbouring countries in their
mutual interest so that Afghanistan can be integrated
into robust regional development.
Resolution 2274 (2016) calls on all parties to actively
participate in the One Belt, One Road initiative and
other initiatives in the area of economic cooperation. We
hope that all parties will comply with the resolution and
actively participate in building regional connectivity,
communication and economic cooperation. China and
Afghanistan are friendly neighbours. China hopes
that Afghanistan will achieve peace, security, stability
and development as soon as possible. Recently,
Mr. Abdullah, Afghanistan’s Chief Executive Officer,
visited China. China and Afghanistan jointly signed
multiple important documents regarding cooperation
in economy, technology, connectivity, communication
and other areas.
China firmly supports Afghanistan’s counterterrorism efforts and will continue to provide Afghanistan
with assistance to strengthen its security capabilities.
China firmly supports the Afghan peace and
reconciliation process and stands ready to continue to
play an active role in the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group mechanism in order to help promote
Afghan reconciliation.
China firmly supports Afghanistan’s integration
into regional cooperation efforts. We will align the One
Belt, One Road initiative with Afghanistan’s national
transition and development strategy and continue to
contribute to Afghans’ early attainment of sustainable
peace and development.

16-1857719/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): First, I wish to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom for his extensive briefing, and Ambassador
Seikal for his statement. We value Special Representative
Haysom’s insights on the enormous security, political
and economic challenges faced by Afghanistan and
his persistent and untiring efforts to work with Afghan
partners for peace.
We are supportive of the Afghan Government’s
unwavering commitment and ongoing efforts to
achieve national unity and lasting stability, as rightly
underscored by Ambassador Seikal. However, although
we commend the best efforts of the Government and
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, it is
troubling that the Taliban appear to be gaining ground
and sowing fear among the vulnerable and long-suffering
population. Yesterday’s horrific string of attacks, for
which the Taliban has claimed responsibility, provides
an example of their continued barbarism. As such, we
are pleased that the Council swiftly agreed to condemn
the attacks and express solidarity with the people and
the Government of Afghanistan as well as with the
peoples and the Governments of Nepal and India. We
remain convinced that the Taliban and other violent
extremist and terrorist groups operating in Afghanistan
must continue to be dealt with in a comprehensive
manner. In that context, ongoing efforts to win hearts
and minds of the Afghan population must be stepped up
in order to deny the Taliban their support base.
Like many others that want to see a peaceful,
stable and prosperous Afghanistan, Malaysia places
much hope in the ability of the recently established
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan
Peace and Reconciliation Process to successfully
convene direct peace talks between the Government
and the Taliban. Unfortunately, given the continuing
Taliban intransigence, such hopes remain unachievable.
The recent killing of the principal Taliban leader Mullah
Akhtar Mansour, according to some analysts, would
appear to have complicated the Group’s efforts in that
regard. Against such a development, no reiteration is
required that meaningful progress towards sustainable
peace and stability can be achieved only through
a peaceful political settlement among the parties.
Let us hope that the members of the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group will continue to explore and pursue
all avenues in facilitating early direct talks between the
Government and the Taliban. In that respect, Malaysia
is pleased to note the Afghan Government’s steadfast
20/38

21/06/2016

commitment to implementing the Self-reliance through
Mutual Accountability Framework. The Afghan
Government’s robust engagement and cooperation with
regional partners and the international community,
including through the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process,
is encouraging.
The NATO Warsaw Summit 2016 next month and
the upcoming Brussels conference in October, in our
view, present opportunities for partners to complement
and assist the Afghan Government’s reconstruction and
development efforts. At the regional level, cooperation
in addressing security issues and countering the
threat of terrorism and extremism has thus far been
encouraging. Pursuing further collective efforts
involving the Afghan Government, regional partners
and the United Nations in developing a framework for
a regional counter-terrorism strategy within the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process is imperative. My delegation
further notes that the Secretary-General’s report on
Afghanistan (S/2016/532) highlights, among other
issues, the increasing number of civilian casualties,
mainly attributable to anti-Government forces or
elements. It is therefore not surprising that children
continue to suffer disproportionately from the ongoing
conflict, accounting for almost one-third of all
civilian casualties.
On a positive note, Malaysia is encouraged by the
strong progress in ending recruitment of children by the
Afghan National Police. Malaysia strongly encourages
full implementation of the Action Plan and Road Map
towards Compliance, particularly by the Afghan local
police. However, the plight of the children is not over,
as non-State armed groups and violent extremist groups
continue to recruit and retain children among their
ranks through manipulation or coercion, facilitated by
poverty. In that connection, we call on all parties to the
conflict to undertake the necessary measures to uphold
the obligations to ensure the safety, security and wellbeing of all children in the country.
We must emphasize that the international
community’s support is especially vital to the success
of this long-term endeavour. To that end, we call for
continuing and strengthened cooperation between
the Government and the United Nations, particularly
with UNAMA and the Special Representative to the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, as
well as among bilateral and other multilateral partners
and stakeholders.
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

In conclusion, Malaysia reiterates its firm support
for the reconciliation and the reintegration efforts
undertaken by the Afghan Government to provide
a secure future for all Afghans and to end violent
extremism and terrorist groups’ activities.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to join
other delegations in expressing our appreciation to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Mr. Haysom, for his briefing and
dedicated service as Head of the United Nations Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We wish him every success
in his future assignment.
While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the observer of the European Union
later today, I would like to add our voice to the
sincerest condolences to the people and Government of
Afghanistan, as well as those of Nepal and India, with
regard to yesterday’s heinous terrorist attacks in Kabul
and Badakhshan.

S/PV.7722

We regret that the efforts of the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group have not resulted in real prospects
for moving forward a national reconciliation process
and organizing direct peace talks between the Taliban
factions and Afghan Government representatives. To an
even greater extent, the ongoing insurgency campaign
of various terrorist and violent extremist groups
continues to adversely affect Afghanistan’s political,
economic and security stability.
The annual Taliban spring offensive, followed by
a range of deadly terrorist attacks, have shocked the
world with the number of fatalities. In that regard,
we praise the courage of the Afghan nation in
withstanding that terrorist threat and preventing the
insurgency from widening its geographical reach. We
call on the United Nations and the whole international
community to continue to support Afghanistan in those
endeavours, including by strengthening its counterterrorism capacities.

Yet, we are concerned that the preparations for
the long-awaited parliamentary and district council
elections, scheduled for October, are being hampered
by disagreements over the electoral process and by the
ambiguity over the appointment of the leadership of
electoral management bodies. If the current political
impasse and security threats posed by terrorist groups
are used as an excuse for postponing the polls, the
prolonged delay will cause further fragmentation
among political elites in Afghanistan and overshadow
the legitimacy of the legislature.

We also welcome the efforts of Afghanistan’s
international partners to combat the Taliban, in particular
the elimination on 21 May this year of its leader,
Mullah Akhtar Mansour. However, the swift election of
Mansour’s successor, Haibatullah Akhundzada, and his
deputies, who have strong connections with Al-Qaida
through the Haqqani network, have demonstrated the
resilience of the Taliban threat. Some experts heralded
a decline in hostilities while the new Taliban leadership
seeks pledges of allegiance with field commanders, yet
there is a danger of an intensification of the insurgency
as those commanders try to expand their influence
and support base in order to bargain with Akhundzada
for privileges. It is also alarming that the new Taliban
leader has never appeared on the relevant United
Nations sanctions list. Here, we agree with those who
call for this omission to be corrected without any
delay. Ukraine would also like to reiterate its call on
members of the international community with a degree
of influence on the Taliban to persuade its leadership to
finally renounce aggression against the Afghan nation
and earnestly participate in peace negotiations.

To ensure the country’s economic growth, in
our view the Government should focus attention on
addressing the fiscal gap, poverty and unemployment,
as stipulated in the Self-reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework. Cooperation with relevant
international financial and trade organizations should
also be carried out in order to further the implementation
of the Government’s economic reform agenda.

The protection of civilians in Afghanistan has
become an increasingly complex challenge, particularly
in the light of the ongoing Taliban offensive. The evergrowing numbers of casualties, especially among
women and children, and the displacement rates of those
forced to abandon their homes and seek refuge, warrant
our close attention. Another part of that problem is the
protection of humanitarian, medical and health-care

We would like to note some important progress
made by the Government of Afghanistan in stabilizing
the political situation in the country since our last
meeting on this subject (see S/PV.7645). The assignment
of candidates to fill key Government positions in the
security sector, obtaining their approval by the National
Assembly, the promotion of legislative reforms on
elections, and the fight against corruption and terrorism
are all welcome developments.

16-1857721/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

facilities in situations of armed conflict. Last month,
the Security Council sent a strong message concerning
this pressing issue by adopting resolution 2286 (2016).
However, as pointed out in the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security
(S/2016/532), health and humanitarian institutions of
the United Nations, international and non-governmental
organizations, including those carrying out demining
activities, continue to be subjected to arbitrary
searches, threats, looting and abductions by all parties
to the conflict. That constitutes a blatant violation of
international humanitarian law.
We are deeply concerned by these facts and call
on all sides to follow both the legal and fundamental
moral obligations to protect civilians in armed conflict
and to ensure their unimpeded access to humanitarian
aid. We also call on the Government of Afghanistan to
systematically investigate, with the support of UNAMA,
all such violations and bring those responsible to justice.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to begin
by condemning the recent terrorist attacks that occurred
on 20 June in Kabul and Badakhshan, which caused
loss of life and injuries. We extend our solidarity to
the people and the Government of Afghanistan and we
convey our condolences to the families of the victims of
such a terrible terrorist attack.
We would like to thank Mr. Nicholas Hayson,
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his commendable efforts
to promote peace and stability in Afghanistan in his
capacity as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. As this is his last briefing to the Security
Council in his capacity as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of UNAMA, we
would like to wish him every success in his future
endeavours. We would also like to express our support
to Ambassador Tadamichi Yamamoto, who will take
over the leadership of UNAMA. We also express
our gratitude to the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, our friend Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal,
for his statement.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is following
with concern the sensitive political and security
situation in Afghanistan, which continues to pose major
challenges to that country. The dialogue process with
the Taliban insurgency has been seriously impacted by
22/38

21/06/2016

the armed group’s refusal to participate in the peace
talks and by foreign interference. It is essential to create
a favourable political environment for carrying out the
agenda for change proposed by President Ashraf Ghani,
with the participation of all actors in Afghan society and
as an Afghan-led process free of foreign interference.
In that context, the strengthening of dialogue
and mutual trust among all parties is essential to
consolidate peace. It is therefore necessary to redouble
efforts along those lines with the support of the
international community. Of special interest are the
peace agreements reached by the Afghan authorities
and the Hezb-i-Islami Gulbuddin. The agreements are a
positive sign that other opposition groups might engage
in similar initiatives with the Afghan authorities,
thereby paving the way for national reconciliation.
Venezuela reiterates its call on the Taliban
insurgency to decisively join the peace talks. We support
what was said by the Secretary-General, who noted that
direct negotiations between the Taliban and the Afghan
Government are key to that process. In that regard, we
appreciate the positive role that has been played by
the Quadrilateral Coordination Group, which includes
Afghanistan, China, Pakistan and the United States,
in support of the national peace and reconciliation
dialogue between the Afghan Government and Taliban.
The security situation has been negatively impacted
by the Taliban’s continued military operations. In
that regard, we note with concern the increase in the
number of armed clashes in 2016, with the east and
south-east regions being the most affected. According
to the report (S/2016/532) of the Secretary-General, the
year 2016 is showing higher rates of violence than those
of June 2014.
Afghanistan has also been destabilized by the
presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS), whose cells, according to the report (S/2016/92)
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2253 (2015), are located in southern and
western Afghanistan. Over 1,000 foreign terrorist
fighters are operating in the country. That is why
ISIS and other terrorist groups pose a serious
threat to peace and stability in Afghanistan and the
region and must be fought within the framework of
international cooperation.
At the political level, we recognize the recent
advances in the strengthening of Afghanistan’s
institutions following the appointment of officials
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

to high-level positions in the Office of the Attorney
General and the Ministry of Defence. Similarly, we
welcome the initiative and commitment of President
Ghani on holding parliamentary and district elections
in October, with UNAMA’s assistance. In that regard,
Venezuela highlights the constructive work carried out
by UNAMA in coordination with the Government. The
role of the Mission has been crucial to the promotion
of peace, national reconciliation, regional cooperation
and economic and social development. We extend
our thanks to the Mission and commend the efforts it
undertakes for the reconstruction of the country.
In the area of the political empowerment of women
within the framework of resolution 1325 (2000), we
emphasize the interaction between UNAMA and
the Ministry of Women of Afghanistan to strengthen
women’s protection services and eradicate violence
against women. The opening of 23 centres to address
this issue demonstrates the Afghan Government’s
commitment in this area. We encourage it to continue
working in that direction.
Our country hopes that dialogue and cooperation
between Afghanistan and Pakistan will be strengthened
in order to contribute to stability in the region. The
political clashes between the two nations must be
overcome for the benefit of their peoples. The shared
challenges in the political, economic and security fields
call for greater understanding by the authorities of the
two countries in order to overcome mistrust and the
problems affecting them. We welcome the strengthening
of regional cooperation among Afghanistan, India and
Iran, which has been seen in the signing of the trilateral
transport and transit agreement, which will facilitate
trade among the three countries and the countries
of Central Asia. The ongoing high-level visits to the
country from its neighbours are a clear indication of
this trend towards dialogue and solving problems of
common interest within the region itself.
The Brussels international conference for the
development of Afghanistan, to be held in October,
is vital for the promotion of stability, security and
economic and social development of the nation.
We therefore urge the international community to
continue supporting the people and the Government
of Afghanistan by providing resources and capacitybuilding to promote its comprehensive development. It
is worth noting that improving the country’s security
situation will have a positive impact on political,
economic and social dynamics.

S/PV.7722

Drug trafficking continues to pose serious threats
to peace and stability in Afghanistan, while also being
a public health problem with serious consequences for
the Afghan people. As indicated in the report, 7 per
cent of Afghanistan’s gross domestic product comes
from drug trafficking. While there has been a decrease
in the overall value of opium cultivation, the Taliban
insurgency continues to use illegal drug trafficking
to finance their terrorist activities. In that regard, we
recognize the efforts undertaken by the Government in
this area, which has received assistance from the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We reiterate that
an effective fight against drugs requires international
cooperation, including among neighbouring countries,
to prevent, combat and eliminate this scourge.
The armed conflict in Afghanistan continues
to impact civilians, who are the main victims of the
armed clashes between the parties. According to
the report, 600 people were killed and 1,373 were
injured during the reporting period, which reflects a
2 per cent increase. The report submitted by UNAMA
acknowledges that women and children are the most
affected by the spiralling violence. In 2015, there was
a 37 per cent increase in fatalities among women and
a 34 per cent increase among children. Similarly, we
express our concern about the detention of children on
charges of associating with armed groups.
Finally, we encourage the Government of Afghanistan
to continue its efforts to promote a comprehensive and
inclusive political process leading to the establishment
of a strong and lasting peace, to make progress in
gaining control of its entire territory and resources, to
strengthen the State and its institutions to the benefit of
its people, who have been affected by so many years of
war and violence.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, let me thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for the
work he has carried out during the nearly five years of
his mandate with the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as well as the commitment
with which he has carried out the difficult task that was
entrusted to him.
Uruguay underscores the press statement adopted
today by the Security Council condemning in the
strongest terms the terrorist attacks in that took place
yesterday in Afghanistan. We reiterate our solidarity
with the families of the victims.

16-1857723/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

Uruguay remains concerned at the situation in
Afghanistan. The country continues to face increasing
difficulties in a context characterized by a deteriorating
security situation, a renewed offensive by the Taliban,
an upswing in internal political tensions and sluggish
rates of economic growth. All of this comes despite the
efforts made by the National Unity Government, the
countries of the region and the international community.
Against that backdrop, we would like to reiterate
once again our support for the work being carried
out by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), and we call on the Mission and
the National Unity Government to work more closely
together, guided by the spirit of national leadership and
ownership, bearing in mind the fact that there remain
major challenges to the reconstruction and stabilization
of the country.
On a similar note, we support the work being
done by the Quadrilateral Coordination Group and the
commitment of its member States to the peace process.
It is our hope that this mechanism will continue to
maintain its relevance through the inclusion, as soon as
possible, of all actors involved in the peace talks. It is
vital that efforts continue to be made to promote direct
talks between the Government and the Taliban at the
earliest possible time.
Likewise, Uruguay would like to express its support
for the swift ratification of the peace agreement signed
a month ago between the Government of Afghanistan
and the Hezb-i-Islami group, which would represent a
significant step towards decreasing the level of violence
and instability in the country.
By the same token, we deem crucial the
strengthening of Afghanistan’s institutional apparatus.
Similarly, it is necessary for the National Unity
Government to continue to strengthen its commitment
to introducing electoral reforms, which would make it
possible to ensure that the elections scheduled for this
year take place in a democratic and transparent manner
and that the necessary guarantees are in place.
Uruguay urges the Afghan authorities to continue
to adopt anti-corruption measures at the public
administration level and to fill vacant Cabinet seats.
Such steps would allow us to provide greater stability
to a political scene that is characterized by a ramping
up of the insurgency and the proliferation of the
political opposition.
24/38

21/06/2016

Uruguay is particularly concerned at the
consequences of the existing instability for the civilian
population, which has also had very damaging effects
by preventing thousands of children from accessing
health-care services and from going to school. We
are concerned also at what was stated in the UNAMA
communiqué of 2 June about the wave of abductions,
hostage-taking incidents and summary executions of
civilians that have taken place over the past few weeks.
I cannot but stress that the humanitarian situation
has deteriorated as a direct result of the increase in the
number of displaced persons, whose very survival is at
risk as a consequence of the insecurity resulting from
the conflict, against the backdrop of an operational
environment that has made it increasingly difficult for
the humanitarian actors that are working on the ground.
In that context, and bearing in mind that, according
to the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/532),
civilians have been the victims of both opposition
elements and attacks carried out by Government forces,
Uruguay believes that there is an imperative need for all
parties to abide by their obligations under international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
On a similar note, we appeal for full compliance
with the provisions of resolution 2286 (2016), on the
protection of hospitals and humanitarian staff engaged
in medical duties in situations of armed conflict,
taking into account their inviolable status as well as the
importance of the provision of health-care services for
the civilian population.
Overcoming, over the long term, the prevailing
situation of instability and insecurity in Afghanistan
will depend to a large extent on the success achieved
in taking firm strides towards a lasting peace. To do
so, is essential that sustained support continue to be
provided to the efforts undertaken by Afghanistan to
alleviate the humanitarian situation, consolidate the
political transition and promote economic activity and
the holistic development of Afghanistan.
In conclusion, Uruguay condemns all use of
violence against the civilian population and is alarmed
at the activities carried out by the Taliban and groups
associated with the Islamic State, which have taken the
lives of innocent and defenceless civilians. Against
that backdrop, we deem it crucial to step up the fight
against terrorism in the region, particularly through
the adoption of more robust measures targeting their
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

sources of funding, which are often closely linked to
the high levels of illicit drug trafficking in the country.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of France.
Allow me to begin by warmly thanking Nicholas
Haysom and Ambassador Saikal for being with us
today and for their respective briefings. I should like
in advance to align myself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union and to make
three comments.
I should first like to welcome the fact that
Afghanistan continues to move forward in its
transition, as reflected by the continued reforms
undertaken by the Government since September 2014.
The recent appointments to senior Government posts
and governors’ posts are also to be welcomed. France
reiterates its full support to the Afghan Government and
encourages it to continue its efforts. I should like also
to reiterate my country’s commitment to cooperating
with Afghanistan in the areas set out in the important
Franco-Afghan Friendship and Cooperation Treaty,
which has bound our two countries since 2012.
Secondly, as the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/532) points out, the circumstances remain
difficult and the challenges manifold. Beyond the need
to sustain political and economic reforms, the priority
continues to be ending the fighting and re-establishing
lasting security. The recent attacks, particularly that of
yesterday and the one carried out on 19 April last in
Kabul, which left 64 people dead and 327 wounded, show
that the situation remains fragile. On behalf of France,
I wish to express once again our deep condolences in
connection with these tragic events and to pay tribute
to the courage and resilience of the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces, which, in addition to the
Taliban, must also deal with the challenge caused by
terrorist groups affiliated with Da’esh.
The refusal by the Taliban to respond to the offer
of direct talks with the Afghan Government made by
the Quadrilateral Coordination Group on Afghanistan
is of course a disappointment for the international
community. It can only continue to pointlessly prolong
the violence and the suffering of the Afghan people.
Frances hopes that the dialogue can resume as soon as
possible so as to put an end to the conflict and move
towards national reconciliation. France also calls
upon all countries of the region to actively support the
stabilization of Afghanistan and to contribute positively

S/PV.7722

to the establishment of lasting peace in the country.
In that context, prospects for an economic opening
towards Central Asia and Iran are positive.
The illicit economy, corruption and the production
and trafficking of drugs must be actively combated by
Afghanistan and its regional partners, because these are
also major obstacles to the re-establishment of security
in and the development of the country.
Thirdly, and finally, this fragile context makes the
international community’s support for Afghanistan
even more important in order to help the country
make progress towards greater stability, prosperity
and democracy. The support of the United Nations
in particular remains crucial, particularly in the
provision to the population of basic services and
international assistance.
France is particularly committed to UNAMA’s
good-offices role. Resolution 2274 (2016), adopted
in March, allowed the international community to
reassert its determination to maintain its support for
Afghanistan. It is essential that the United Nations
continue to have the resources necessary to achieve the
objectives set out in the resolution. The NATO Summit,
to be held in Warsaw on 8 and 9 July, and the Brussels
conference on Afghanistan, to be held on 5 October,
must reaffirm the international community’s support to
Afghanistan and the process that led to the National
Unity Government.
In conclusion, allow me again to pay tribute to
the work carried out by Nicholas Haysom as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
UNAMA and to wish him much success in his future
duties. France is pleased to continue to cooperate very
closely with his successor, Mr. Yamamoto.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the State Secretary for Foreign
Affairs of Sweden.
Ms. Söder (Sweden): Let me begin by joining
the members of the Council in extending my sincere
condolences to the peoples of Afghanistan, India and
Nepal for the tragic loss of lives caused by the Taliban
attack yesterday in Kabul.
Let me thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/532) and not least Special Representative
Haysom for his briefing and all his endeavours. I

16-1857725/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

would also like to take this opportunity to thank him
for his outstanding service in Afghanistan and to wish
him very good luck in his new position. We also join
others in welcoming incoming Special Representative
Tadamichi Yamamoto, who will have our full support
in his important mission.
Sweden aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union
and would like to make some additional remarks,
mainly on the responsibility and role of the
international community.
Together with the Afghan National Unity
Government, which has our full support, the
international community should continue to invest in
sustainable peace in Afghanistan. Success will require
addressing the root causes to achieve peace, security
and development, with strong partnerships and national
ownership. We know that very well, since our assistance
to Afghanistan dates back more than three decades, all
over the country, with a focus on education and health,
women and girls.
Now we, the international community, stand before
two important milestones this year: the meeting of the
NATO Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan, to be
held in Warsaw in July, and the donor conference to
be held in Brussels in October. At these conferences,
the future of the international community’s support
to Afghanistan will be determined. Predictable and
sustainable funding is a prerequisite for success.
We have already declared our substantial long-term
commitment, with the ambition of contributing
approximately $1.2 billion during the transformation
decade, 2015-2024. We encourage all countries
that have been engaged in the region, and the wider
international community, to stay committed and to join
us in this long-term approach. Sustained assistance
to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
is also needed. Sweden participates proudly in the
Resolute Support Mission.
The continued implementation of essential reforms,
as stipulated in the Self-reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework, is necessary. Respect for
the Afghan Constitution is key, and we encourage
the Afghan Government to continue reaching out to a
broad political base. Additional measures to counter
corruption and the illicit economy are particularly
important. All of these are critical to building a viable
26/38

21/06/2016

democratic society and increasing confidence in the
Afghan State.
As we have heard, today security remains a basic
and serious concern. We are particularly disturbed by
the high number of civilian casualties and internally
displaced persons recorded in 2015, and by the fact
that the situation persists. The humanitarian situation
in the country continues to present serious challenges
and, as always, women and children are the most
affected. All actors need to make sure that civilians are
afforded protection in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
We all long for a peaceful solution to the conflict.
Therefore, we welcome the efforts made so far
throughout the year, most notably the work conducted
by Afghanistan, Pakistan, China and the United
States in the Quadrilateral Coordination Group, and
the clear ambition of President Ghani and the Afghan
Government to invite the Taliban to the negotiating
table. We encourage the Government to continue on
this constructive path. We of course stand ready to
support the process if called upon.
The sustained engagement of the countries of
the region is also essential. A conducive regional
environment is very much needed. We are particularly
pleased by the formation of a new High Peace Council
and by the fact that several women are included in
the new structures, including as a Deputy Chair. We
strongly believe that women’s inclusion in a potential
peace process will greatly enhance the likelihood of a
successful outcome.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) continues to play a crucial
role in supporting the Afghan Government. Moreover,
the Mission and its leadership have been decisive
to efforts for peace, stability and development in the
country, as well as an important facilitator of dialogue
and discussion within the international community.
We support the important role of UNAMA with regard
to humanitarian access, the promotion of human
rights and in providing good offices in support of
the peace process. UNAMA will remain essential to
the international engagement in Afghanistan for the
foreseeable future.
Let us recognize that much progress has been made
in Afghanistan in the past decade, yet the challenges
require our continued attention and we must take a
long-term approach. As I said earlier, we have provided
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

assistance for a very long time — indeed, many decades.
The Afghan Government and people can certainly
count on Sweden’s ongoing support in their quest for a
peaceful and more prosperous future. The international
community cannot afford to forget about Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Italy.
Mr. Amendola (Italy): Allow me first, on the
occasion of his last briefing in his current capacity,
to join others in their unanimous expressions of
appreciation and gratitude to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom for his
outstanding work and passionate commitment as Head
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) during a delicate period in the history of
Afghanistan. Of course, we give our support the new
Special Representative Yamamoto. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2016/532).
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union and wishes to add
the following remarks in its national capacity.
As the Afghan Ambassador has already underlined,
Afghanistan’s security and stability are still under
threat from the ongoing violent attacks of the Taliban
and other hostile insurgent groups. We condemn in
the firmest possible terms those barbaric acts, such
as yesterday’s attacks in Kabul and in Badakhshan.
An unprecedented number of civilian casualties in
the conflict have been documented by UNAMA, with
nearly 2.000 civilian victims in the first quarter of 2016
alone. It is particularly worrying that children represent
almost one-third of all victims.

S/PV.7722

with NATO members and other partners. The security
forces are carrying out their task to protect their country
and its people with great courage and sacrifice.
A long-lasting peace in Afghanistan will hardly
be sustainable without a political solution. To that
end, effective collaboration among all regional players
is pivotal. Terrorism is a global and destabilizing
threat. We therefore support all diplomatic efforts,
such as those undertaken by the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group, aimed at creating the conditions
for an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process,
by engaging neighbouring countries and establishing
constructive dialogue.
That process cannot stop, because a failure in the
peace process could endanger the achievements gained
over the years in the sphere of human, civil and social
rights, particularly for women and girls — as has been
stated already — reflected in the Afghan Constitution.
That is one of the pillars of Afghanistan’s democratic
growth and partnership with the international
community. We also encourage and support initiatives
for interconnectivity, trade and infrastructure projects
aimed at fostering economic integration and cooperation
in the region, which would significantly contribute to
the development and prosperity of the region as a whole.
Afghanistan is the first beneficiary of Italy’s
development aid, and reducing the country’s structural
connectivity gaps represents one of the main goals of
our cooperation. This is the first priority of our effort
in a Mission that is the second-largest in terms of
foreign contingents.

Internally displaced people and flows of Afghan
migrants have considerably increased, also as a result
of the precarious economic scenario. Against that
challenging backdrop, I wish to reiterate the full Italian
support for the efforts of the Afghan National Unity
Government towards peace and stability and to defend
the gains achieved in Afghanistan in the past 15 years
in terms of democracy, basic freedoms, human rights
and women and girls’ education.

The Afghan Government has started a reform
process that we support. It is fundamental to
Afghanistan’s democratic consolidation and selfreliance. Progress in sectors such as the rule of law,
the fight against corruption, economic governance,
electoral reform and respect for human rights, women’s
rights and women’s empowerment is essential. We
therefore commend the Government’s determination
and commitment to reform and the encouraging
results obtained, such as increased fiscal revenues, key
appointments and new measures to fight corruption. We
look forward to further tangible achievements based on
mutual accountability principles.

The purpose of Italy’s participation, as a framework
nation for the Western region, in the Resolute Support
Mission is to provide training and assistance to the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces together

As we approach the Brussels conference on
Afghanistan in October, further progress in the
Afghan Government’s reform and governance agenda,
combined with the sustained support of the international

16-1857727/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

community, will be key to ensuring sustainable growth
and prosperity for Afghanistan and its people. As
Nicholas Haysom said, peace is not a luxury, but a
necessity. I think, as we all think, that we must advance
on that path.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Nicholas Haysom for his briefing and for his
outstanding leadership at the helm of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
During his tenure as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and prior to that as Deputy Special
Representative, he has played a key role in bringing
the international community together to support
Afghanistan, especially at pivotal moments such as the
latest presidential elections.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
Germany is committed to continuing its support for
Afghanistan, together with its international partners
and in close cooperation with the Afghan Government.
Under the chairmanship of our Special Representative
for Afghanistan and Pakistan, the International Contact
Group reaffirmed this support at its most recent
meeting, held in Istanbul on 5 June. Afghanistan in
turn needs to make substantial progress on the agreed
reforms before the Brussels conference in October.
The implementation of electoral and economic
reforms, as well as the fight against corruption, are at
the heart of the Mutual Accountability Framework. The
Afghan people and international community deserve to
see tangible results in these areas: reforms to bolster
the private sector, the creation of job opportunities
and a clear and realistic timetable for electoral reform
and parliamentary elections, which also need to be
communicated to the Afghan people.
All actors in the Afghan political system bear a
responsibility to implement the reforms, as the National
Unity Government enters its third year in office this
fall. In that context, we commend yesterday’s decisions
by the Afghan Parliament to confirm the appointments
of Acting Director Muhammed Masoom Stanekzai and
Minister of Defence Abdullah Khan Habibi. Those
decisions send out an important signal of national
unity. Visible progress on the political and economic
reform agenda is the only ground on which to justify
28/38

21/06/2016

to donor constituencies the exceptional level of support
to Afghanistan.
The need for economic and political reform brings
me directly to my second point — migration. Afghan
migrants were the second-largest group of asylum
seekers in Germany in 2015. Overall, the German
authorities registered around 154,000 Afghans last
year. This is a cause of grave concern to us also in
light of our long-standing effort to help stabilize
Afghanistan. Since the start of this year, another
38,000 Afghan nationals have arrived in Germany. In
this situation, it is crucial to make quick progress in
reducing migratory flows. It is in our joint interest that
young Afghans can see a future in their own country.
We note Afghanistan’s commitment to honouring its
international obligation to readmit nationals who are
not in need of international protection.
An inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process remains the only viable path to a sustainable
solution of the conflict. There is no exclusively military
solution. Although talks with the Taliban remain elusive,
there is much that Afghanistan and its partners can do
to lay the groundwork. It is absolutely crucial that doors
remain open. In that regard, we support all efforts of
the Quadrilateral Coordination Group and others.
In our view, progress will be possible only if all
key stakeholders in peace in Afghanistan, especially
the countries of the region, unite around basic common
positions and the joint endeavour. Negotiations with
Hezb-i-Islami Gulbuddin are a welcome development,
and a successful outcome would send a strong
positive message.
We are highly concerned by the high toll that the
conflict continues to take on Afghan civilians after
the record number of civilian casualties registered last
year. Children suffer particularly from the continued
brutality of the conflict. As the Secretary-General
notes in his recent report on children and armed conflict
(S/2016/360), the number of children killed or maimed
in Afghanistan rose by 14 per cent last year — an
abhorrent and highly worrisome development. While
the vast majority of those casualties are caused by
non-State actors, the Government can do more to
protect children as well. We are encouraged by the
Government’s proactive engagement with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict; at the same time, there is an urgent
need to implement the agreed commitments.
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

Another area in which we hope to see more
progress before Brussels is women, peace and security.
The adoption last year of the national action plan on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and the
recent symposium on Afghan women’s empowerment
in Kabul, sent the positive message that women have
made great strides in Afghanistan over the past few
years as parliamentarians, doctors or businesswomen.
But again, implementation of the national action plan
is key; for instance, Germany hopes to see, as agreed,
the swift roll-out of prosecution units specialized on
violence against women and girls in 26 provinces
this year.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
UNAMA and Nicholas Haysom personally for their
excellent work in the area of human rights, especially
in the monitoring of violations against children in the
Afghan conflict.
Germany joins all of Afghanistan’s friends and
partners in sending the clear message that we will not
abandon Afghanistan at this critical time. Germany
remains committed to supporting Afghanistan, in close
cooperation with the Afghan Government and our
international partners.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing today’s debate on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Nicholas Haysom for his briefing, which I understand
is perhaps his last in his present capacity. We wish him
luck in his future endeavours.
We express our appreciation for the important
statement made by Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal of
Afghanistan. We offer our sincere condolences over
the loss of lives and property in the bomb attack on
20 June in Kabul, in which some 20 people — not only
brave Afghans, but also Nepalese and Indians — lost
their lives.
While there has been no dearth of effort on the part
of the Government and people of Afghanistan, as well as
the international community, we note that the security
situation in Afghanistan has deteriorated. Since the
beginning of the year, the Taliban have continued
attacks at an unprecedented rate, and there is ongoing
violence by other armed groups. As per the Secretary-

S/PV.7722

General’s report (S/2016/532), armed clashes increased
this year as compared with the same period in 2015.
This situation has put renewed focus on the need for
enhanced engagement and action by the international
community. The Security Council needs to look into
the deteriorating security situation and the means to
contain it, as it could pose serious threats to the gains
made by the people of Afghanistan in the past 15 years.
Groups and individuals that perpetrate violence
against the people and the Government of Afghanistan
cannot have safe havens and should not be allowed
to exercise control and wield influence over any
part of Afghanistan’s territory. In our view, that is
critical for lasting peace in the country. The effective
implementation of the Security Council sanctions
regime, including that established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals groups
undertakings and entities, should also be carried out
consistently and with perseverance for it to serve as a
strong deterrent to the listed entities and individuals.
Also, it is sheer folly that the leader of a proscribed
entity is not yet designated as a terrorist individual. As
pointed out by the Representative of New Zealand, we
need to address that matter forthwith.
Afghanistan has our full support in strengthening its
defence capabilities to preserve its unity and territorial
integrity, as that is the most important antidote to the
worsening security situation in the country. On 4 June,
the Prime Minister of India, Mr. Narendra Modi,
and the President of Afghanistan, Mr. Ashraf Ghani,
inaugurated the Afghanistan-India Friendship Dam. As
Prime Minister Modi mentioned then, “India’s capacity
may be limited, but our commitment to Afghanistan is
without limits.”
On 23 May, India, Afghanistan and Iran also signed
the Chahbahar trade and transit agreement, which we
hope will provide a new path to prosperity and reliable
access to Afghanistan.
We are strongly committed to supporting
Afghanistan in various plurilateral and multilateral
forums. India looks forward to hosting the Heart
of Asia Ministerial Conference in December. We
welcome the cooperation of participating countries
as well as supporting countries and organizations for
the Ministerial Conference and related events in the

16-1857729/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

political, security, economic, connectivity and cultural
spheres, to be organized in the run-up to the Conference.
We believe that the path to reconciliation in
Afghanistan should be through an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned process that respects the red lines drawn
by the people of Afghanistan and the international
community, especially the ones regarding giving up
violence and abiding by the Constitution of Afghanistan.
The ideas and philosophy of understanding and
reconciliation have deep and ancient roots there. I am
reminded of a famous son of the Balkh region — the
Sufi poet Rumi — who as far back as in the thirteenth
century said, “I always thought that I was me — but no,
I was you, and never knew it”.
We applaud the role of UNAMA in providing
assistance in the various sectors of Afghanistan’s
transformation decade.
I conclude by recalling the words of Prime
Minister Modi when he said that for many others their
commitment may have a sunset clause, but India’s
relationship with Afghanistan was timeless. We would
like to reiterate our strong commitment and faith in
the will of the brave people and the Government of
Afghanistan to have a peaceful, prosperous, united,
inclusive and democratic nation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation thanks the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2016/532) and Special
Representative Nicholas Haysom for his briefing. We
wish him Godspeed in his future endeavours.

21/06/2016

security and economic situation in Afghanistan. On the
contrary, attacks by insurgent groups have intensified,
economic opportunity is absent, the reconciliation
process is frozen, hopes for peace are waning, and the
confluence of those factors has magnified the suffering
of the people of Afghanistan and the threat to regional
peace and security. The Warsaw Summit and the
Brussels conference will be further opportunities for
the international community to provide the support that
Afghanistan obviously needs to overcome those multiple
challenges to peace and development. Yet, ultimately,
it is the responsibility of the Afghan Government to
deliver on the commitments to its own people.
In his report, the Secretary-General expresses and
reinforces the firm international consensus that only by
a negotiated political agreement will Afghans achieve
sustainable peace. That is precisely what my country
has long proposed as the only course to end the decades
of war and suffering in Afghanistan. Based on that
belief in a negotiated peace, and in response to repeated
requests from President Ashraf Ghani, Pakistan agreed
to facilitate the first-ever direct peace talks between the
Afghan Government and the Afghan Taliban in Murree
in June 2015. That was a promising start to a process
aimed at ending Afghanistan’s long night of conflict.
Unfortunately, days before the second round, in which
the two sides were to also consider a de-escalation of
violence, the talks were scuttled by developments that
are well known.

Also, at the very outset, I reject the unjustified,
untrue and gratuitous comments made by the
representative of Afghanistan in casting uncalled-for
aspersions on my country and its State institutions.
The international community is well aware of, and
acknowledges, Pakistan’s contribution to and sacrifices
in countering violent extremism and terrorism.

Another period of concerted efforts led to the
establishment of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group
in December 2015 in Islamabad, by which Afghanistan,
the United States, China and Pakistan undertook to join
together to provide decisive impetus to Afghanistan’s
peace efforts. The international community welcomed
that development. The Group held five meetings
in which a road map for a peace process was drawn
up. In its meeting of 18 May, the Group agreed that
a negotiated settlement was the most viable option.
Efforts by Pakistan and others were under way for the
early resumption of the peace talks. Despite posturing
by both Afghan parties, a revived dialogue seemed to
be within reach.

This is indeed a sombre moment for the people of
Afghanistan, for the region and for the international
community, which has invested so much blood and
treasure to restore peace and stability in Afghanistan.
The Secretary-General’s report observes that there
has been no significant improvement in the political,

That process was destroyed by the United States
drone attack of 21 May, which killed the Taliban leader,
Mullah Akhtar Mansoor. Is it an accident that, in less
than a year, the possibility for a negotiated peace in
Afghanistan has been scuttled? The United States
drone strike on our territory was a blatant violation

At the start, let me condemn the attacks in Kabul
and Badakshan.

30/38

16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

of Pakistan’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
and a blatant breach of the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and of international law. That
unacceptable action also dealt a blow to the Afghan
peace process and added to the intensity and complexity
of the Afghan conflict. It has raised serious questions.
Does the international community desire a negotiated
or a military solution in Afghanistan? Is it ready to
invest in war rather than peace in Afghanistan? The
use of force for the past 15 years has failed to stabilize
Afghanistan. Continued resort to military means will
further destabilize the situation in our neighbour and
in our region. Pakistan would advise against such
a strategy.
Other than Afghanistan, over the past 35 years
Pakistan has suffered more than any other country as
a result of foreign intervention, conflict and terrorism
within Afghanistan. Several thousand Pakistani
civilians and security personnel have died at the hands
of terrorists.
Let me make it clear what Pakistan’s policies and
priorities are. First and foremost, we will eliminate all
terrorist threats within Pakistan. Pakistan’s Operation
Zarb-e-Azb is the largest and most effective anti-terrorist
campaign anywhere in the world, involving over
180,000 members of our security forces. In two years,
that Operation has made substantial gains in cleansing
our country of terrorism. Our Operation will continue
until our objectives have been accomplished; those
objectives will not be fully met until the sanctuaries and
safe havens of terrorists who have fled to Afghanistan
have been eliminated. We urge the Government in
Kabul and the international coalition there to take
action against the militant Tehrik-i-Taliban elements
that have sought refuge in Afghanistan.
Secondly, it is self-evident that effective border
control and management are vital to preventing the
move of militants across the 270-kilometre PakistanAfghan border. Pakistan proposed a number of border
standard operating procedures to Afghanistan two years
ago; they still await finalization, as does Pakistan’s
proposal to establish a joint border commission.
Effective border management is a sovereign right of my
country. Pakistan will take measures on its side of the
border accordingly. It is disingenuous to characterize
steps aimed at regulating the border and curbing the
flow of immigrants as illegal. There is nothing — I
repeat, nothing — illegal about any construction on our
side of the border.

S/PV.7722

Thirdly, we have the related problem posed by
the 3 million Afghani refugees who remain on my
country’s soil after 35 years. Our hospitality and
challenges in hosting the most protracted presence of
refugees anywhere in the world needs to be, at the very
least, appreciated and supported by the international
community. But we also expect that tangible steps
will be taken for the early return of refugees to their
homeland with honour and dignity.
Finally, Pakistan remains ready to support a
genuine Afghan peace process, but we will not tolerate
violations of Pakistan’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity from any source. Those who seek a renewed
recourse to military solution need to rethink the
consequences of their position. Further, we would urge
the Government of Afghanistan not to externalize its
internal problems and blame others for its own failures
and omissions.
The Quadrilateral Coordination Group remains a
viable mechanism to promote a genuine peace process,
but that process will have to be pursued with patience
and perseverance. Success will be assured only when the
Afghan parties themselves come to the conclusion that
there is no military solution to the Afghan war and that
peace can be achieved only through a non-conditional
dialogue that will require difficult compromises on
both sides.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let
me first extend my condolences to the people and
Government of Afghanistan for the loss of lives caused
by the Taliban terrorist attacks in Kabul yesterday.
I would like to express my appreciation to France for
organizing this debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I
would also like to thank the Ambassador of Afghanistan
for his statement, as well as Mr. Nicholas Haysom for
his briefing and introduction of the Secretary-General’s
latest report (S/2016/532). We wish him all the best in
his new assignment, and welcome Mr. Yamamoto as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
My Government is concerned over the volatile
situation in Afghanistan, which continues to face
major security, economic and political challenges.

16-1857731/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

The Secretary-General’s report refers to “continued
and intense armed clashes, which were at their highest
number recorded since 2001” (S/2016/532, para. 3) as the
lead factor contributing to the deteriorating situation in
the country. Also distressing is the uncertainty over the
prospects for direct talks between the Government and
the Taliban. We condemn all violent attacks committed
by the Taliban and all other terrorist groups, as well
as any cooperation with them, which we believe would
encourage them in their odious behaviour and would
thus be counterproductive to establishing peace in
Afghanistan. Iran reiterates its support for any Afghanled peace process.
At the same time, the emergence of Da’esh and its
offshoot, the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan Province, along with a spectrum of
other terrorist and extremist groups, such as the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan in the north and the Eastern
Turkistan Islamic Movement, are all alarming signs of
more trouble in the future if we fail to properly address
them now.
Today, the Afghan National Unity Government is
at the forefront of fighting terrorism. The sustained
support of the international community is sorely
needed to shore up the Afghan Government in its fight
against terrorism and extremism and to address the
security, economic and political challenges that it faces.
Strengthening regional cooperation with Afghanistan
is a priority and a major path towards consolidating
peace and security in the region. We see great potential
in our economic cooperation with Afghanistan and are
ready to increase bilateral cooperation, particularly
on security matters and counter-narcotic efforts,
developing projects and economic cooperation in the
fields of infrastructure and agriculture and finding
durable solutions for Afghan refugees.
During the past decade, Iran has helped
Afghanistan to complete nearly 300 projects, ranging
from infrastructure to human resources training and
capacity-building, particularly by offering of hundreds
of scholarships each year. On 23 May, the Presidents of
Afghanistan and Iran and the Prime Minister of India
signed the Trilateral Transport and Transit Agreement
in Tehran to facilitate trade among the three countries
and, potentially, Central Asia. The Agreement covers
the development of the Iranian port of Chabahar, which
would provide Afghanistan with access to the high
sea, which would be very valuable to Afghanistan
as a land-locked country and the entire region. Iran
32/38

21/06/2016

and Afghanistan are also committed to increasing
their connectivity, with emphasis on the Khaf-Herat
railway, the 78-mile railroad project in Farah and the
second bridge over the Helmand River. A planned
trilateral Afghanistan-Iran-India transit corridor is also
under way.
Narcotics are a real threat to the region and beyond
and should be addressed by the international community
in a serious and comprehensive manner. Any increase
in narcotics use is a reflection of prevailing insecurity
and poverty. The strong support and commitment of
international donors, Afghan authorities and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime are essential
to deter the menace of narcotics as a social health
challenge and, more importantly, as a major source of
income for extremist and terrorist groups.
With regard to refugees, Iran continues to participate
in the work of the Tripartite Commission in order to
plan for the voluntary, safe, dignified and gradual
repatriation of Afghan refugees. It is very unfortunate
to learn from the Secretary-General’s report that 2016
represents the lowest recorded returnee rate since
the establishment of the voluntary return programme
in 2002, with many of the returnees choosing not to
return to their areas of origin, including many who
settled in urban centres. We welcome any effort to help
overcome the main reintegration challenges faced by
returnees and to formulate a comprehensive voluntary
repatriation and reintegration strategy. Success in
voluntary repatriation depends first and foremost on
addressing the reasonable needs of repatriated refugees
in Afghanistan, which underscores the necessity of
mobilizing more international support for this purpose.
Over the past few decades, we have supported and
continue to support millions of Afghan refugees, who
have not been confined to camps and have had free
access to Iran’s job market, despite the difficulties
that the country has faced. This year, 386,000 Afghan
students are enrolled in our schools and universities,
which represents an increase of 36,000, thanks to the
Government’s decision to enrol all children, regardless
of their legal status. In the field of health care and
medical services, Afghan refugees continue to have
access to public health services in the country.
Iran continues its full support for the promotion of
security, stability and comprehensive and sustainable
development in Afghanistan, since we consider the
security of Afghanistan to be the security of our borders
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

and the region. We support UNAMA and United
Nations agencies in their efforts to provide development
and reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through a
genuine commitment on the part of the United Nations
to a sustained partnership with Afghanistan, as set forth
in final report of the Tripartite Review Commission on
the United Nations in Afghanistan. We need to utilize
the UNAMA mandate and its good offices to strengthen
national institutions and capacities in priority areas
requested by the Government.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in
French): In honour of your presidency, Sir, allow me to
thank you in French for the opportunity to speak at this
debate on behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
(spoke in English)
I align myself with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his detailed and thorough report (S/2016/532), Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom for
his briefing, and the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for his statement. I express particular
appreciation for the efforts, dedication, and
commitment of Special Representative Haysom in
support of the people of Afghanistan under sometimes
very challenging conditions. We wish him all the
best in Africa and will welcome incoming Special
Representative Tadamichi Yamamoto in due course.
Let me address three issues: security, peace and the
way ahead.
On security, the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Afghanistan states unequivocally that
the overall security situation has deteriorated since
the beginning of the year. Only yesterday, as others
have noted, at least 20 people were killed and many
more wounded in attacks in Kabul and Badakhshan.
Our thoughts are with the victims and their families,
and we offer our condolences to Nepal, Canada
and Afghanistan.
The increase in casualties among the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces is worrisome.
I would therefore like to commend the courage of the
Government and the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces in their efforts to provide security

S/PV.7722

to the Afghan people. The continued support of the
international community, including that of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, remains necessary in view of the
threat. In this context, we recall the 20 May decision
of the Foreign Ministers of participating countries to
extend the Resolute Support Mission beyond 2016.
With regard to the peace process, recent civilian
casualties have increased. This demonstrates the urgent
need for a peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan.
Durable peace can be achieved only through Afghanled reconciliation supported by an inclusive regional
process. We therefore commend the continued
commitment shown by the region to the Heart of Asia
process. We welcome the fact that the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group reiterated its commitment to the
peace process on 18 May. The Netherlands stands ready
to support reconciliation efforts if so desired.
On the way ahead, the international community
has been engaged in Afghanistan, in collaboration with
the Afghan Government, for over a decade. Together,
we have seen some very positive results in terms of
development. Service delivery of health care and
education has improved drastically since 2001. Women
and girls actively take part in social life, and Afghanistan
has witnessed a sharp increase in girls enrolling in
schools. The Government of National Unity has shown
its commitment to advancing its anti-corruption agenda.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands especially welcomes
the creation of a high council on governance, justice
and anti-corruption, and particularly the establishment
of a specialized anti-corruption court. The formation
of these new bodies will strengthen Afghanistan’s
anti-corruption investigations.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands has been a longtime partner of Afghanistan, and has contributed
significantly in the fields of peace, justice and
development. We remain committed to supporting
Afghanistan throughout the transformation decade. In
the run-up to the NATO Summit in Warsaw and the
Brussels conference, the Netherlands is planning its
post-2016 engagements, combining the three Ds of
defence, development and diplomacy.
The Secretary-General’s report notes that both the
Afghan Government and the international community
should sustain their attention and commitment,
and work towards a better future for the people of
Afghanistan. There needs to be a clear commitment on
the part of the Afghan Government to implementing

16-1857733/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

the necessary reforms. The international community
must offer the required support, taking into account
the challenges facing Afghanistan. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands will continue to cooperate with its Afghan
and international partners, as agreed in the Selfreliance through Mutual Accountability Framework.
We welcome the first draft of athe new Afghan National
Peace and Development Framework, which we consider
to be encouraging.
In conclusion, we, the international community,
have a collective responsibility for stability and
development in Afghanistan. The Netherlands will
remain committed to Afghanistan throughout the
transformation decade, in the context of increased
Afghan ownership and leadership. In this spirit, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue to support
Afghanistan and its people as their partner for peace,
justice and development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): I should like to join
others in thanking the Secretary-General for his
report on Afghanistan (S/2016/532), the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement,
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Nicholas Haysom for his briefing. Australia is deeply
grateful to Special Representative Haysom for his
astute leadership, dedication and outstanding four years
of service to the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and Afghanistan. We wish him
every success in his new role as Special Envoy for the
Sudan and South Sudan.
We also take this opportunity to welcome and
congratulate Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto on his
appointment. Mr. Yamamoto has served with distinction
as Deputy Special Representative, and we look forward
to working with him.
Over the past three months, the security situation
in Afghanistan has deteriorated, with armed clashes
increasing in 2016. Terrorist attacks orchestrated by the
Taliban have continued to inflict enormous harm. These
include attacks against the media, the Government
and judicial officials, killing and injuring hundreds of
innocent civilians. We condemn in the strongest terms
the brutal and reckless tactics of the Taliban in targeting
civilians. We also express our condolences for the
terrorist attacks yesterday in Kabul and Badakhshan.
34/38

21/06/2016

The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
have proven resolute in response to sustained pressure,
and we honour their sacrifices. We also extend
our gratitude to United Nations personnel and the
international coalition for their tireless work to support
the Afghan people. Australia reaffirms its commitment
to Afghanistan and to assisting in defending its people
against the insurgency.
In the coming months, the international community
will meet in Warsaw and then Brussels to recommit
to Afghanistan and chart the way forward to the year
2020 and beyond. In Warsaw, Australia will join
international partners in committing to support the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, and in
Brussels we will do the same to support Afghanistan’s
reconstruction and development. We encourage the
Government of Afghanistan to use this opportunity,
created by the international community’s collective
support, to redouble efforts to implement its reform
agenda. There remains much to do, particularly in
countering corruption.
We welcome the Government of Afghanistan’s
support for gender equality, including steps towards
addressing violence against women and implementing
the national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000).
Full implementation of the action plan and the law
on the elimination of violence against women must
be priorities.
The protection of children is also paramount. We
welcome the recent progress made in preventing child
recruitment by the Afghan National Army and the
Afghan National Police. We urge the Government to
increase the oversight of child recruitment by the Afghan
Local Police and to take further steps to implement the
recommendations contained in resolution 1612 (2005).
We further urge the Government of Afghanistan to
work pragmatically towards parliamentary and district
council elections being held as soon as is practicable.
Finally, let me express Australia’s appreciation for
the role that UNAMA plays in guiding and coordinating
international efforts in Afghanistan. We look forward
to continued cooperation with UNAMA and with the
Government of Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Vrailas.
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

Mr. Vrailas (spoke in French): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and
Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2016/532). I would also like to
thank Special Representative Haysom for his briefing.
(spoke in English)
Let me start by reiterating our full support for the
important continuing role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
all of the United Nations agencies in supporting the
Afghan people and in coordinating the international
community’s assistance.
The progress achieved in Afghanistan is encouraging
in many areas, but much remains to be done as progress
has been uneven and remains reversible. The ongoing
fragility warrants a realistic approach for the longer
term and calls for the sustained and predictable support
of the international community, based on the principles
of mutual accountability.
As the Secretary-General highlights in his report,
we have to meet important challenges, in particular in
terms of the economic slowdown, with persistent high
poverty rates; the struggle for political reforms, notably
as regards the electoral system and a credible electoral
calendar; and a security situation that remains a source
of real concern.
Success will require concerted efforts, which
depend on tangible progress in Afghan State-building
through the continued implementation of the reform
agenda of the National Unity Government; international
support and sustained funding at or near current levels
until 2020; increasing aid effectiveness in response
to the new Afghan national peace and development
framework and our lasting security partnership;
and regional support for a political process towards
stabilization, peace and reinforced cross-border
economic cooperation.
A wait-and-see attitude is hardly an option and
risks costing much more tomorrow than it might save

S/PV.7722

today. The signal of our lasting, mutual engagement
has real impact not only on Afghanistan but also on the
wider region: on stability, on possible peace talks, on
economic development and on migration.
Let me underline the need for the Afghan people,
especially the youth, to be able to see a viable future in
Afghanistan. In this regard, the capacity of Afghanistan’s
institutions to address the population’s basic needs and
to reduce poverty will be a determining factor. This will
require the Afghan Government to promote sustainable
economic, social and environmental development,
including sustained job creation for women and men
alike, while further improving governance, tackling
drug production and trafficking, as well as further
strengthening fiscal sustainability.
The first draft of the new Afghan national peace and
development framework is encouraging. It is important
that the framework focus also on the important issues
of good governance, the rule of law, anti-corruption
and human rights. Progress must be made with the
new national priority programmes and the update
of the Self-reliance through Mutual Accountability
framework. All three are linked and will be important
deliverables in the run-up to the Brussels conference,
to be co-hosted by the Government of Afghanistan and
the European Union in October this year.
However, even more important is to cross
the threshold from policy concepts to actual
implementation, despite the difficult legacy that the
National Unity Government is facing. Corruption in
particular is a critical challenge in this regard, and the
implementation of effective anti-corruption measures
is of paramount importance.
Only a stable political and economic environment
will help consolidate Afghanistan’s nascent democratic
institutions and promote the establishment of a reliable
rule-of-law framework with safeguards to respect,
protect and promote human rights, in particular women’s
and children’s rights. Significant progress in this
respect has been made in recent years in Afghanistan,
but much remains to be done, in particular to ensure
the full enjoyment of women’s and girls’ rights and
women’s empowerment at all levels of society, which
is a priority.
In this context, I would like to highlight that
substantial cooperative efforts will be necessary to
address large population movements and the issue of
irregular migration. They represent a severe constraint

16-1857735/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

for the development of Afghanistan’s society and
economy, as well as a pressing challenge to the region,
transit States and the EU, where Afghans remain the
second-largest group of arrivals in 2015.
Irregular migration is a real political challenge,
and that is why the EU has made the offer of a new
political framework to address this pressing problem:
the Joint Way Forward. Effective cooperation on the
return and readmission by the Afghan Government of
its nationals, in full respect of their fundamental rights
and in accordance with international commitments and
obligations, is its central element. We hope to agree
on and effectively implement the Joint Way Forward
as soon as possible. The EU stands ready to support
its implementation through substantial reintegration
assistance so as to help create a conducive environment
that can offer Afghan citizens opportunities within
the country.
I would also like to briefly highlight the formidable
challenge that minefields still pose for security and the
socioeconomic development of the population. We call
for a sustained demining rhythm and commend the work
of mine-action partners and the Afghan authorities.
In this crucial phase, when we are heading towards
the upcoming NATO summit in Warsaw and the
Brussels conference on Afghanistan in October, let
me stress that we have a collective responsibility for
stability and State-building in Afghanistan and the
wider region. Security and sustainable development
represent interconnected challenges in such a
State-building process, which needs to be underpinned
by genuine political support within the region. A secure,
stable, and prosperous Afghanistan is vital to the peace
and stability of the region as a whole. It is probably
the best reason to join forces in the region, to set aside
differences and to use one’s respective influence with
the parties to the conflict.
We need to promote a genuine and resultsoriented negotiation process aimed at creating a lasting
settlement that will provide the foundation for peace,
security and prosperity both in Afghanistan and the
wider region, and we know how important UNAMA’s
work is in this context. At the same time, it is imperative
that any agreement not set back the rights of Afghan
women and girls.
The EU encourages the multilateral efforts under
way to support the Afghan Government in promoting
a meaningful, Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
36/38

21/06/2016

process as the only viable path towards the sustainable
resolution of the conflict. It welcomes and supports the
efforts undertaken by the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group to create a conducive environment for such a
process. Ending the armed conflict in Afghanistan is
urgent and in the interest of all who seek development
and stability, prosperity and peace.
Let me conclude by joining others in paying tribute
to Special Representative Nicholas Haysom for his
outstanding work, his personal commitment and his
integrity, as well as his untiring energy in contributing
to a better future for all Afghans, the sort of future that
they both want and deserve. We wish him all the best
for his new challenging assignment in Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Vrailas for his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I wish to express
my appreciation for this opportunity to address the
Security Council.
Canada thanks the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its ongoing
crucial work in Afghanistan and welcomes the latest
report (S/2016/532) of the Secretary-General to the
Security Council. Canada is also grateful to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Nicholas
Haysom for his briefing today and his years of service
to advance peace, development and human rights in
Afghanistan. We wish him the best as he takes up his
new role.
Canada strongly condemns yesterday’s terrorist
attacks in Afghanistan by the Taliban, including the
attack on the bus carrying security guards who protect
the Embassy of Canada to Afghanistan in Kabul. I offer
my sincere condolences to the families and friends of
the Nepalese and Indian security guards killed, and
I wish a speedy recovery to those who were injured.
Many of the victims have been part of our Embassy
family for years. They will be remembered for their
service in the protection of the men and women at the
Embassy of Canada to Afghanistan.
(spoke in French)
Improved security remains essential to Afghan
stability today and to the achievement of its long-term
economic and development goals. Afghan security
forces have withstood considerable challenges as the
16-18577

21/06/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7722

armed insurgency has grown across much of the country.
The international community must continue to support
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces in the
face of this challenge. The NATO Summit in Warsaw
in July will provide Canada, along with other NATO
allies and partners, an opportunity to pledge continuing
support to the Afghan Government and to stand
against the violence and terrorism that is undermining
Afghanistan’s development and prosperity.

Canada remains concerned about minority, ethnic
and religious rights in Afghanistan, as well as about the
safety of journalists and the ability of the Afghan media
to freely report the news. Recurrent attacks against
minorities by insurgents and the repeated targeting of
journalists by the Taliban are of particular concern.
Canada calls on the Government of Afghanistan and
the armed insurgents to uphold the human rights of all,
including the freedom of expression.

(spoke in English)

(spoke in English)

Canada supports an Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process and calls on the Taliban to
come to the table and negotiate in good faith. Canada
recognizes the importance of ensuring that the peace
process include meaningful participation by Afghan
women and the Afghan Government’s efforts to ensure
such through appointments to the High Peace Council.
So much has been invested by the Afghan Government
and Afghan women’s groups to uphold women’s and
girls’ rights that it would be a travesty to jeopardize
them through a peace that would predominantly benefit
only half the population.

Canada stands with the Afghan people as they strive
for a more secure and prosperous future. We support
the Afghan Government and its people in the face of
challenging circumstances and welcome Afghanistan’s
efforts to counter an escalating insurgency, broker
peace and pursue economic and social development.
We call on Afghanistan’s leaders to intensify their
efforts to uphold and protect all human rights, in
particular the rights of women and girls, and to sustain
progress towards stability and security, accountability
and self-reliance.

We are encouraged by the positive steps that
Afghanistan has made in recent years to promote
and protect the rights of women, including stronger
legal protection from violence, greater educational
opportunities and more inclusion in public and political
life. Canada welcomes the Afghan Government’s
initiative to develop a national women’s economic
empowerment strategy and a national priority
programme. Sustainable development cannot happen
without women’s full economic and civic participation.
However, those gains remain fragile and Canada
calls on Afghanistan to press forward with the full
implementation of the law on the elimination of violence
against women, as well as Afghanistan’s national action
plan on women and peace and security.
(spoke in French)
The promotion and protection of human rights,
especially those of women and girls, continue to be
a priority for Canada’s engagement in Afghanistan.
Gender equality is the cornerstone of all Canadian
development programming in education, health, human
rights and capacity-building for Afghan humanitarian
assistance actors. At the same time, Canada’s
development assistance investments in Afghanistan’s
future serve to advance the rights, security and
empowerment of all Afghans.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): We thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2016/532), Special Representative
Mr. Nicholas Haysom for his briefing and Ambassador
Mahmoud Saikal for his statement.
The report of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan
fairly reflects our observations as well. The
achievements of the past years in Afghanistan, including
in the fields of security, democracy, governance,
economic development and human rights, deserve to
be acknowledged. Nevertheless, those achievements
are not irreversible. Afghanistan continues to face
challenges in all areas.
We would also like to highlight that, as observed
during the official visit of Turkish Foreign Minister
Mr. Çavuşoğlu to Kabul on 16 June, progress in
every field is more visible. In order to maintain those
achievements and to be able to build upon them, the
international community’s continuing support to
Afghanistan during the transformation decade is of the
utmost importance.
Turkey was pleased to host the International
Contact Group for Afghanistan in Istanbul on 5 June.
The attendance by 54 delegations at the meeting
confirmed that the international community’s support

16-1857737/38

S/PV.7722

The situation in Afghanistan

for Afghanistan will continue. On the other hand,
the National Unity Government continues its reform
programme with a view to achieving self-reliance
in the economic and security areas. At the Contact
Group meeting, the participants shared the observation
that the Afghan security forces are more resilient
and performing better on the battlefield. However,
the peace and reconciliation process remains a major
challenge and should be put back on track. In that
regard, the Quadrilateral Coordination Group’s work
needs to advance on the basis of the road map agreed
by the parties.
We take this opportunity also to encourage both
Afghanistan and Pakistan to continue their efforts to
build confidence between them. The recent tension at
the Afghanistan-Pakistan border, which resulted in
the loss of life, is clear testimony to the need for good
neighbourly relations.

38/38

21/06/2016

We believe that NATO’s decision to continue with
the current phase of the Resolute Support Mission is
appropriate. We hope that the NATO Warsaw Summit
and the Brussels conference on Afghanistan will show
that the international partners of Afghanistan will
maintain the level of their pledges.
I would like to stress that Turkey will continue to
support Afghanistan’s security and development efforts
on bilateral levels and in multilateral platforms. We
will stand by our Afghan brothers as long as our help
is needed.
Before I conclude, let me join others in condemning
the terrorist attacks in Afghanistan and in expressing
our deepest condolences.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

16-18577
