SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFI·CIAL RECO'RDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 61
;62nd and 163rd meetings

162eme et 163eme seances

2 July 1947

(50 p.)

22 juillet 1947

Lake Success
New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Hundred and sixty-second meeting

Cent-soixante-deuxieme seance
Page

Pages

232. Provisional agenda
1407
1407
233. Adoption of the agenda
234. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1407

232. Ordre du jour provisoire. . . . . . . . . .. 1407
233. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
1407
234. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque
1407

Hundred and sixty-third meeting

Cent-soixante-troisieme seance

235. Provi~onal agenda
1428
236. Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . .. 1428
237. Continuation of the discussion on the'
Greek question. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1428

235. Ordre du jour provisoire. . . . . . . . . . .. 1428
236. Adoption de l'ordre du jour. . . . . . .. 1428
237. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque
1428

Documents

Documents

The following documents, relevant to the hundred
and sixty-second and hundred and sixty-third
meetings, appear as follows:

Les documents suivants, se rapportant aux centsoixan te-deuxieme et cent-soixante-troisieme
seances, figurent dans les publications suivantes:

Official records of the Security Council:
Second Yea" Supplement No. 15, Annex 38
Amendments to the United States draft resolution on the Greek question submitted by the
representative of the United Kingdom at the
hundred and sixty-second meeting of the Security Council (document S/429).

Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securiti:
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 15, Annexe 38
Amendements au projet de resolution des EtatsUnis sur la question grecque, presentes par le
representant du Royaume-Uni a la centsoixante-deuxieme seance du Conseil de securite (docucment S/429).

Second Year, Supplement No. 15, Annex 39
Amendments to the United States draft resolution on the Greek question submitted by the
representative of France at the hundred and
sixty-second meeting of the Security Council
(document S/430).

Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 15, Annexe 39
Amer ,dements au projet de resolution des EtatsU is sur la question grecque, presentes par le
representant de la France a la cent-soixantedeuxie,me seance du Conseil de securite (document S/430).

Second Year, Special Supplement No. 2
Report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council (document S/360).

DeuxiJme Annee, Supplement special No 2
Rapport presente au Conseil de securite par la
Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a ia frontiere grecque (document
S/360) .

~

1428

I
I

HUNDRED AND SIXTY-THIRD MEETING

CENT-SOIXJ..\NTE-TROISIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Tuesday, 22 July 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le ma.rdi 22 juillet 1947, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. O. LANGE (Poland).

President: M. O. LANGE (Pologne).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, France, Pologne, Syrie,
Royaume-Uni, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques.

235. Provisional agenda (document
5/424)

235. Ordre du iour provisoire (document
5/424)

,

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. The Greek question: report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council (document S/360).1

2. La question grecque: rapport presente au
Conseil de securite par la Commission
d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la
frontiere grecque (document S/360) 1.

236. Adoption of the agenda

236. Adoption de I'ordre dfJ iour

The agenda was adopted.

L'ordre du jour est adoptee

237. Continuation of the discussion
on the Greek question

237. Suite de la discussion sur la
question grecque

At the invitation of the President, Colonel
Kerenxhi, representative of Albania, Mr. Mevorah, representative of Bulgaria, Mr. Dendramis, representative of Greece, and Mr. Vilfan,
representative of Yugoslavia, took their seats at
the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, le colonel
Kerenxhi, representant de l'Albanie, M. Mevorah, representant de la Bulgarie, M. Dendramis,
representant de la Grece et M. Vilfan, representant de la Yougoslavie, prennent .place a la
table du Conseil.

The PRESIDENT: We shall continue with our
discussion of the preamble to the United States
resolution.2

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Nous allons reprendre la discussion du preambule
de la resolution des Etats-Unis2.

Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil): I feel that I must make
a few remarks about the point raised' by the
representative of Syria concerning the interpretation of the power of the Security Council to
make investigations under Article 34. If we adhere to a strictly literal interpretation of Article
34, the point raised by the representative of
Syria !night carry weight. But a literal interpretation is not always the right one. We have to
look for the meaning of the words and the concept behind them in order to find the reality,
which is after all the only thing that counts.

M. MUNIZ (Bresil) (traduit de l'an,r,lais): Je
me vois dans 1'0bligation de faire quelques
remarques sur le point souleve par le representant de la Syrie a propos de l'interpretation
des pouvoirs d'enquete conferes au Conseil de
securite par l'Article 34 de la Charte. Si nous
adoptions une interpretation strictement litterale
de l'Article 34, l'argument du representant de
la Syrie ne laisserait pas d'avoir du poids. Mais
ce n'est pas toujours une interpretation litterale
qu'il faut faire Pour decouvrir la realite, qui
est, apres tout, la seule chose qui compte, il nous
faut degager le sens des mots et le principe qu'ils
expriment.
Le droit d'enqueter est expressement devolu
au Conseil de securite. Aux termes de l'Article
34, le Conseil de securite peut enqueter afin de
determiner si la prolongation d'un differend ou
d'une situation semble devoir menacer la paix
et la securite. Ce1a veut-il dire que le pouvoir
d'enquete, si important comme moyen de regIement pacifique, doive etre interprete d'une fa~on
limitee, uniquement dans ce cas particulier? Je
ne le pense pas.

The power to make an investigation is e.xpressly lodged in the Security Council. The Security Council, under Article 34, may investigate
in order to determine whether the continuance
of a dispute or a situation is likely to endanger
peace and security. Does that signify that the
power of investigation, important as it is as a
means for a peaceful settlement, should be interpreted in' a li!nited way, only in that particular
instance? I do not think so.
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Special Supplement No. 2.
I Ibid., Second Year, No. 51, 147th meeting, page 1124.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
DeuKieme Annee, Supplement special No 2.
~ Ibid., Deuxieme Annee, No 51, 147eme seance, page
1124.

1429
After the Security Council has determined, on
the basis of an investigation, that the situation is
likely to endanger peace, the Council's power
of investigation does not stop there. That situation might improve; it might remain stationary;
it might grow worse. The Security Council, under those conditions, might find it necessary to,
use its power of investigation to verify those circumstances in order to decide whether the situation had become a menace or a threat to peace.
Shall we say that the Security Council is powerless to do so because of a literal interpretation of
Article 34? Does not that conclusion invalidate
entirely the function of security placed upon the
Council by the framers of the Charter?

Lorsque le Conseil de securite a determine, a.
la suite d'une enquete, que la situation semble
devoir menacer le maintien de la paix, ses
pouvoirs d'enquete ne s'arretent pas la... Cette
situation peut s'ameliorer; elle peut demeurer
stationnaire; elle peut aussi empirer. Dans ces
conditions, le Conseil de securite pourrait juger
necessaire de recourir a. ses pouvoirs d'enquete
pour examiner la situation et determiner si
celle-ci est devenue une menace contre la paix.
Faut-il nous en tenir a. une interpretation litterale
de l'ArtiCle 34 et declarer que le Conseil de
securite n'a pas le pouvoir d'agir ainsi? Une telle
conclusion ne reduirait-elle pas a. neant les fonctions dont les auteurs de la Charte ont investi le
Conseil en ce qui conceme le maintien de la
securite?

Here we have a situation in which the members of the Council have reached the conclusion
that the situation on the northern borders of
Greece still needs the presence of a commission
with broad powers of investigation and conciliation. Is the Security Council nevertheless barred
from appointing the commission because of a
strict interpretation of Article 34? This is evidently a case in which we cannot take the literal
meaning of the words, but must 'look into the
pattern of reality which the framers of the Charter intended to construct. Let us leave aside the
bare words and face that reality which presents
itself to us with the evidence of facts.

Le cas dont nous nous.occupons est le suivant:
les membres du Conseil ont conclu que la
situation a. la frontiere nord de la Grece exige
encore la presence d'une commission dotee de
pouvoirs etendus d'enquete et de conciliation.
Vne interpretation etroite de l'Article 34 peutelle neanmoins empecher le Conseil de securite
de nommer une telle commission? Dans le cas
present, nous ne pouvons evidemment pas nous
en tenir a. la signification litterale des mots ;
nous devons, au contraire, essayer de discerner
quelle est la veritable structure que les auteurs
de la Charte ont voulu edifier. Laissons de cote
les mots et regardons la realite, telle qu'elle se
presente avec le temoignage des faits.

Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): I did not mean, by
the suggestion which I made, to limit or restrict
the powers and jurisdiction of the Security Council in any way. The Charter is clear in fixing
the competence of the Security Council. The
Security Council is always free to take any
action whieh is allowed by the Charter. I
simply wanted to say that, in this proposal whieh we are now discussing, there is
a section which speaks of the constitution of a
cOIr.nllssion which would act in that area on behalf of the Security Council and investigate these
incidents. Chapter VI of the Charter is clear;
its Articles are in no way vague or ambiguous.
According to Chapter VI of the Charter, under
whieh we are now working, the Security Council
has the power to make rec01;nmendations and
investigations. I simply want to add Article 34
of the Charter of the United Nations to the resolution concerning the Commission of Investigation. This would not interfere in any way with
the competence of the Security Council as defined in Article 24 and Article 36 of the Charter
-that is, the right of the Security Council to
make recommendations with respect to methods
of adjustment in order to maintain peace and
security. I believe this should be done in order
to avoid any interpretation other than the one
we intend. However, it is not necessary for us
to follow the letter of the Charter; it is necessary
for us to follow the spirit of the Charter. I can
see no objection to specifying one interpretation
and eliminating others by a text which would

U. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de I'anglais) :
Je n'entendais pas, en faisant cette suggestion,
limiter ou restreindre en aucune fac;on les pouvoirs ni la competence du Conseil de securite.
La Charte definit clairement les attributions du
Conseil. Celui-ci est toujours libre de prendre
toute mesure prevue par la Charte. Une partie
de la proposition que nous sommes en train de
discuter traite de la creation d'une commis£ion,
qui agirait dans cette region au nom du Conseil
de securite et qui enqueterait sur ces incidents.
Or, le Chapitre VI de la Charte est clair; les
articles n'en sont nullement vagues ni ambigus.
Aux termes de ce Chapitre VI, qui regit pour
l'instant nos travaux, le Conseil de securite a le
pouvoir de faire des recommandations et de
proceder a. des enquetes. Je desire seulement que
la resolution relative a. la Commission d'enquete
fasse aussi mention de l'Article 34 de la Charte
des Nations U nies. Cela ne modifierait en rien
la competence du Conseil de securite telle que
la definissent les Articles 24 et 36 de la Charte,
c'est-a.-dire ne porterait aucunement prejudice
au droit dont jouit le Conseil de securite de
recommander des methodes d'ajustement destinees a. assurer le maintien de la paix et de la
securite. Je crois que nous devrions agir ainsi
pour eviter toute interpretation autre que celle
que nous entendons Gonner. Il n'est pas necessaire, toutefois, cie nous en tenir a. la lettre de
la Charte; c'est l'esprit de la Charte qui doit
nous guider. Pourquoi ne pas preciser notre
interpretation et eliminer les autres en presentant

.....

1430
not leave the way open for opposition or objection, but which would be plausible and to which
it would be easy to adhere.

If we draw up a resolution in that form, we
should not be doing anything harmful to the resolution or to the future actions of the Security
Council and the Commission of Investigation.
For this reason, I think it would be best if the
preamble were to read as suggested by the representative of France.! It would read as follows:
"The Security Council, having primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, by virtue of Article 24 of the
Charter, and having considered the report submitted by the Commission of Investigation established by the Council's resolution of 19 December
1946"-deleting the rest of the preamble and
replacing it by the following-"finds it necessary
that further action be taken by the Security
Council under Articles 34 and 36 of the
Charter."
Article 34 justifies the establishment of a new
commission of investigation as well as of the old
Commission, and authorizes that body to do
whatever is necessary. Paragraph 1 of Article 36
states: "The Security Council may, at any stage
of a dispute of the nature referred to in Article
33 or of a situation of like nature, recommend
appropriate procedures or methods of adjustment."
The draft resolution which we are considering
is composed of these two elements: the constitu-

tion of a commission of inquiry and recommendations for methods of adjustment. Articles
34 and 36 in Chapter VI cove~ these two functions. I think it would be better to put it in the
way I suggested, so that there will be no room
for any objection as regards the constitutionality
of our work.
Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French): The original wording of the preamble to the proposal by the United States delegation was completely satisfactory to the Belgian
delegation, and if it were put to the vote, we
should vote in favour of it.
Failing a vote on this text, the Belgian delegation will vote for that proposed by the Syrian
delegation. It considers that the remarks made
on the subject by the Syrian representative were
very wise.

un texte qui ne pourrait soulever aucune opposition, ni appeler aucune objection, mais qui
serait raisonnable et auquel il serait facile de se
rallier?
L'adoption d'une resolution de ce genre ne
serait en rien prejudiciable a la resolution ni aux
futures decisions du Conseil de securite et de la
Commission d'enquete. C'est pourquoi je pense
que la meilleure solution serait de donner au
preambule la redaction proposee par le representant de la France!. Le preambule se lirait
comme suit: "Le Conseil de securite, a qui
incombe, en vertu de l'Article 24 de la Charte,
la responsabilite principale du maUitien de la
paix et de la securite internationales, apres avoir
etudie le rapport presente par la Commission
d'enquete creee par la resolution du Conseil en
date du 19 decembre 1946 ... " Le reste du
preambule serait supprime et remplace par le
texte suivant: " ... considere qu'il est necessaire
que le Conseil de securite prenne de nouvelles
mesures en application des Articles 34 et 36 de
la Charte".
L'Article 34 justifie la creation d'une nouvelle
commission d'enquete ou la poursuite de I'enquete par I'ancienne Commission, et autorise cet
organe a prendre toutes les mesures necessaires.
Le paragraphe 1 de l'Article 36 stipule: "Le
Conseil de securite peut, a tout moment de
I'evolution d'un differend de la nature mentionnee a l'Article 33 ou d'une situation analogue,
recommander les procedur~s ou methodes
d'ajustement appropriees."
Le projet de resolution que nous sommes en
train d'examiner comporte ces deux elements:
la creation d'une commission d'enquete et
des recommandations proposant des methodes
d'ajustement. Les Articles 34 et 36 du Chapitre
VI couvrent ces deux fonctions. Je pense qu'il
serait preferable d'adopter le texte que j'ai propose, de fa~on a ne donner lieu a aucune
objection quant a la legitimite de notre decision.
M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique): Le texte
primitif du preambule de .la proposition de la
delegation des Etats-Unis donnait pleine satisfaction a la delegation beige, et c'est en faveur
de ce texte qu'elle voterait s'il etait mis aux voix.
A defaut de ce texte, la delegation belge votera
pour celui qui a ·ete propose par la delegation
syrienne. Elle considere que les observations faites
a ce sujet par le representant de la Syrie sont
inspirees par une grande sagesse.

Mr. PAROD! (France) (translated from
French): Since the text which I submitted this
morning has found a certain number of supporters, it is a little beyond my control.
So Jar as I am concerned, however, and subject to the opinion of other delegations, I too am
inclined to support the proposal made by the
Syrian representative, it being clearly understood
that I in no way retreat from the interpretation
which I gave this mornil.lg. But I am attracted

En ce qui me concerne, toutefois, et sous
reserve de l'avis des autres delegations, je suis
dispose, moi aussi, a me rallier a la proposition
soumise par le representant de la Syrie, etant
bien entendu que je ne renonce nullement a
l'interpretation que j'ai indiquee ce matin. Mais

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 15, Annex 39.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securiteJ
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 15, Annexe 39.

M. PAROD! (France): Le texte que j'avais
presente ce matin m'echappe un peu, puisqu'il a
recueilli un certain nombre d'adhesions.

1431
by the way the Syrian representative put the
matter, namely, that in any event it was important to avoid the difficulty by a formula of
the kind he proposes.
But I repeat that the interpretation which I
gave this morning still seems to me the correct
one.

je suis seduit pa:r la presentation que le representant de la Syrie a faite de son observation,
selon laquelle il y a interet, de toute maniere, a
eviter la difficulte par une formule du genre de
celle qu'il propose.
Mais je repete que l'interpretation que j'ai
donneece matin continue a me paraltre exacte.

The PRESIDENT: I should like to ask the representative of the United States where he has
considered the proposed amendment and whether
he is willing to accept it.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Je voudrais demander au representant des EtatsUnis s'il a examine l'amendement propose et
s'il est pret a l'accepter.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America) :
The United States delegation accepts the amendment or proposal of the representative of Syria,
which we think is sound, and derogates in no
way from our intention in the original preamble
or from that presented by the. representative of
France. We do not, however, agree with the
interpretation given by the representative of
Syria, which would indicate that he thinks this
amendment is necessary. We'think it is harmless, but not necessary. We would accept it.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): La delegation des Etats-Unis
accepte l'amendement ou la proposition du
representant de la Syrie; cette proposition nous
paralt logique et ne s'ecarte en rien, quant au
fond, de notre preambule primitif, ni de celui
qu'a propose le representant de la France. Nous
ne partageons pas, toutefois, les vues du representant de la Syrie, qui semble croire a la
necessite de cet amendement. Nous le jugeons
acceptable, mais non necessaire. Nous sommes
prets a l'adopter.

The PRESIDENT: The text of the preamble in
its present form reads as follows:

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' ang1ais):
Dans sa forme actuelle, le preambule se lit
comme suit:
"Le Conseil de securite, a qui incombe, en
vertu de l'Article 24 de la Charte, la respon.sabilite principale du .maintien de la paix et de
la securite internationales, apres avoir etudi6 le
rapport presente par la Commission d'enquete
creee par la resolution du Conseil en date du
19 decembre 1946 - et void la modification
proposee - considere qu'il est necessaire que
le Conseil de securite prenne de nouvelles mesures en ap'plication des Articles 34 et 36 de la
Charte."

"The Security Council, having primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security by vh"'1:ue of Article 24 of the
Charter, and having considered the report submitted by the Commission of Investigation established by the Council's resolution of 19 December 1946,"-and now the new wording-"fiilds
it necessary that further action be taken by the
Security Council under Articles 34 and 36 of
the Charter."

'M. VILFAN (Yougoslavie): Je n'avais pas
Mr. VILFAN (Yugoslavia) (translated from
French): I had not foreseen that the discussion prevu que la discussion prendrait aujourd'hui
today would take on a legal character. I think un caractere juridique. J e pense qU'il sera posit will be possible to return to these questions sible, par la suite, de revenir sur ces questions.
later, and I should like to reserve the right to Je voudrais surtout me reserver le droit d'interintervene in the discussion then.
venir a ce moment dans la discussion.
Je me bornerai, aujourd'hui, a faire trois
I shall confine myself today to three brief
comments, all bearing on the interpretation of breves remarques, portant toutes trois sur l'interArticle 34 of the Charter.
pretation de l'Article 3~ de la Charte.
First of all, I should like to make a remark on
Je ferai d'abord une remarque su:: une
a matter of principle. It appears to me that at question de prindpe: au stade ou se trouvent
the present stage when the Unit~d Nations has les Nations Unies, apres deux annees seulement
been in existence only two years, it would be d'existence, il me semble que le plus sage est de
wise to keep to the strictest possible interpreta- se tenir a l'interpretation la plus stricte possible
tion of the Charter. If we start interpreting the de la Charte. Car, si nous commen~ons a interspirit of certain Articles, we risk raising disputes preter l'esprit de certains Articles, nous risquons
instead of creating unity among the United de susciter des divergences au lieu de creer
Nations.
l'unite parmi les Nations Unies.
It has been emphasized today that we should
On a souligne aujourd'hui qu'il ne fallait pas
not limit ourselves to the literal interpretation of se limiter a l'interpretation litterale des Articles
the Charter's Articles; I am in complete agree- de la Charte; je suis tout a fait d'accord. Mais,
ment. But if we are going to examine the exact si on recherche l'esprit et la teneur exacts de
spirit and purport of certain Articles of the certains Articles de la Charte, il vaut mieux, me
Charter, it would seem to me better to retrace . semble-t-il, recourir a I'historique de ces Articles,
1811 J]~ ..."..~ ..,

1432
the history of these Articles and see how they
were worked out and voted on at the San Francisco Conference.
Article 34 of the Charter has a history.
Amongst others, an amendment was submitted
by Bolivia on 5 May 1945.1 With your permission I shall read this amendment:
"The Security Council should be empowered
to investigate any dispute or situation which may
lead to international' friction or give rise to a
dispute, and to propose the means which it considers necessary and to determine the measures
which will be chosen in order to prevent the corttinued existence of the dispute or situation .from
endangering international peace, security and
justice."
If you analyse the contents of this amendment,
you will see that it corresponds. exactly to what
the United States resolution now proposes; the
latter provides for everything suggested by the
Bolivian delegation, n~ely permanent inquiry,
and the possibility of taking decisions and of
determining what are here called "the measures".

et voir comment its ont ete elabores et votes a l~
Conference de San-Francisco.
L'Article 34 de la Charte a une histoire.
Entre autres, un amendement fut presente par
la Bolivie le 5 mai 19451 • Si vous me le permettez, je donnerai lecture de cet amendement:
"Le Conseil de securite devrait avoir le pouvoir d'enqueter sur tout differend ou toute
situation susceptible d'entrainer un desaccord
entre nations ou d'engendrer un conflit, en
proposant les moyens qu'il estime necessaires. et
en determinant les mesures propres a eviter que
la prolongation de ces difJ-erend ou situation ne
constitue une menace pour le maintien de la
paix, de la securite et de la justice internationales."
Si vous analysez le contenu de cet amendement, vous verrez qu'il correspond exactement a.
ce qui est propose maintenant par la resolution
des Etats-Unis; cette derniere prevoit tout ce qui
a ete suggere par la delegation bolivienne, a
savoir: une enquetepermanente, la possibilite
de prendre des decisions et de determiner ce que
l'on appep'e ici "les mesures".
Quel fut le sort de l'amendement de la
Bolivie? A la Conference de San-Francisco, cet
amendement fut repousse; en d'autres termes, on
n'a pas voulu donner aux mesures prevues pour
le Conseil de securite dans le Chapitre VI de la
Charte la n~ture si caracteristique de celles que
prevoit la resolution des Etats-Unis aujourd'hui
en discussion. Si je suis d'accord pour considerer
qu'un Article de la Charte ne doit pas etre
interprete a la lettre, je crois du moins qU'il ne
faut pas aboutir, par interpretation, a trouver
dans cet Article ce qui a ete expressement
repousse par la Conference de San-Francisco.
Enfin, dans le but de bien interpreter le
Chapitre VI de la Charte, j'ai cherche a m'informer de l'opinion du Gouvernement des EtatsUnis; cette opinion fut formuIee, a l'epoque,
par le chef de la delegation des Etats-Unis a la
Conference de San-Francisco: nous la trouvons
dans le rapport adresse par le chef de cette
delegation au President des Etats-Unis2 •

What was the fate of the Bolivian amendment? At the San Francisco Conference, this
amendment was rejected; in other words, it was
not iound desirable to give such a categorical
nature to measures assigned to the Security
Council in Chapter VI of the Charter as is provided by the United States resolution under discussion today. While I agree that an Article of
the Charter should not be interpreted literally,
I do not think we should go so far as to interpret
this Article as meaning something which was
expressly rejected by the San Francisco Conference.
'Finally, with the object of interpreting Chapter VI of the Charter properly, I have tried to
ascertain the opinion of the United States Government. That opinion was expressed, at the
time, by the Chairman of the United States delegation to the San Francisco Conference; it is to
Le found in the report submitted to the President
of the United States by the Chairman of that
delegation. 2
Quel etait donc le caractere des mesures:
What then was the character of the measures
provided by Chapter VI of the Charter accord- ·prevues au Chapitre VI de la Charte suivant
ing to the interpretation, I repeat, of the Chair- l'interpretation, je le repete, du chef de la deleman of the United States delegation? On page gation des Etats-Unis? A la page 79 de ce
79 of this report, dated 26 June 1945 and ad- rapport, date du 26 juin 1945 et adresse au
dressed to the President of the United States, the President des Etats-Unis, vous trouverez le passage suivant:
following passage occurs:
"It is to be noted that the Members of the
"11 y a lieu de noter que les Membres de
Organization agree to carry out the decisions of l'Organisation conviennent d'executer les decithe Security Council 'in accordance with the sions du Conseil de securite "conformement a
present Charter'. Thus the precise extent of the la presente Charte". Ainsi, l'etendue exacte de'
1 See United Nations Conference on International Organization; document 2, G/14(r); volume 3, page 584.
2 See Report to th~ President on the results of the San
Francisco Conference by the Chairman of the United
States Delegation, the Secretary of State (Department of
State Conference Series No. 71, No. 2349).

1 Voir les Documents de la Conference des Nations
Unies sur l'organisation internationale, tome IV, page
827 [document 2,G/14(r)].
2 Voir Report to the President on the results of the San
Francisco Conference by the Chairman of the United'
States Delegation, the Secretary of State, publie sous l'indice: Department of State Conference Series No. 71, No_
2349.

,

j

1433
bbligations of Members under Article 25 can be . l'obligation des Membres en vertu de I'Article 25
determined only by reference to other provisions ne peut etre determinee que par allusion aux
of the Charter, particularly Chapters VI, VII, autres dispositions de la Charte, en particulier
VIII and XII (Article 24, paragraph 2). Deci- aux Chapitres VI, VII, VIII et XII (Article
sions of the Security Council take on a binding 24,paragraphe 2). Les decisions du Conseil de
quality only as they relate to the prevention or securite ne peuvent lier les parties que dans la
suppression of breaches of the peace. With re- mesure ou elles ont pour objet de prevenir et
spect to the pacific settlement of disputes, the de reprimer des ruptures de la paix. En ce
Council has only the power of recommendation." qui concerne le reglement pacifique des differends, le Conseil de securite n'a que le pouvoir
de recommandation."
Il me semble qu'il eilt dit ici, expressement et
It seems to me that this is an express and
clear ~~atement that the measures assigned to the clairement, que les mesures prevues pour le
Security Council-which, by virtue of Chapter Conseil de securite - qui les discute en vertu
VI, debates them-are solely in the nature of du Chapitre VI - ont seulement la nature de
recommandations et ne sont pas des decisions.
recommendations and are nqt decisions.
I should now like to ask the Uiutd States
Je m'adresse maintenant a la delegation des
delegation what legal reasons have led it to Etats-Unis pour lui demander quelles raisons
modify an opinion so clearly and expressly form- juridiques 1'0nt amenee a modifier une opinion
ulated in an instrument which is not only an si clairement et si expressement formulee dans
official but a formal one as well-the report of· un document qui est non seulement officiel, mais
the Chairman of the United States delegation to aussi soltnnel: le rapport du chef de la delegathe President of that country..
tion. den Etats-Unis au President de ce pays.
The PRESIDENT: As there do not· appear to be
any members who wilSh to speak on the preamble, I shall consider the discussion on the
preamble finished.
'

Le. PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Il semble que personne ne desire plus prendre
la parole au sujet du preambule; je considere
done que la discussion du preambule est terminee.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): Mr. President, are you declaring the discussion on the preamble closed before we see the text?

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais) : Monsieur le President, allez-vous
prononcer la cl6ture de cette discussion sur le
preambule avant que nous ayons pu en voir le
texte?

The PRESIDENT: The text is now being distributed, and I shall allow the members to read
it over in order to make their recommendations
and remarks.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
On est en train de distribuer ce texte. Je laisserai
aux membres du Conseille temps d'en prendre
connaissance afin qu'ils puissent presenter leurs
recommandations et leurs observations.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): This morning
I gave reasons why my delegation was supporting the Frer-ch text. Some of the members may
not agree with the argument that it was necessary to have such a finding or determination before we could take action under Chapter VI. Be
that as it may, every representative here at this
Council table, either directly or by implication,
has said that we are concerned with a dispute the
continuation of which is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security.
That is a fact. Why not say it? I cannot understand why we should eliminate those words by
accepting this new text. I therefore want to
make it clear that I will not vote for any text
which eliminates that statement.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): J'ai i'1dique ce matin les raisons pour
lesquelles ma delegation soutenait le texte franc;ais. Il se peut que certains membres du Conseil
n'acceptent pas l'argument suivant lequel il est
necessaire d'adopter une conclusion de ce genre
avant de pouvoir prendre les mesures prevues au
Chapitre VI. Quoi qU'il en soit, tous les representants qui siegent a la table du Conseil ont
explicitement declare ou ont laisse entendre que
nous nous trouvons devant un differend dont la
prolongation semble devoir menacer le maintien
de la paix et de la securite internationales. C'est
un fait. Pourquoi ne pas le reconnaltre? Je ne
saurais comprendre pourquoi nous devrions supprimer ces mots en a(;ceptant le nouveau texte.
Je desire donc declarer nettement que je ne
vDterai en faveur d'aucun texte qui eliminer&it
cette declaration.
A notre avis, le texte devrait etre redige
comme suit: "Le Conseil de securite se trouve
saisi d'un differend dont la prolongation est
susceptible de menacei le maintien de la paix
et de la securite internationales, et, en consequence ... ", et c'est id, je crois, qu'il conviendrait d'inserer la proposition de la delegation

We think the text should read as follows:
"The Security Council finds itself concerned with
a dispute the continuance of which is likely to
.endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security, and consequently ..."-and there
is where the proposal of the Syrian delegation
would be appropriate-". . . finds it necessary

-----------.-

1434
that further action be taken under Articles 34
and 36 of the Charter." That is how my delegation feels it should logically run~

de la Syrie: " ... considere qu'il est necessaire
de prendre de nouvelles mesures en application
des Articles 34 et 36 de la Charte". Teldevrait
logiquement etre, de I'avis de ma delegation, la
redaction du texte.

Mr. PAROD! (France) (translated from
French): I must apologize for prolonging this
rather too legal and somewhat subtle discussion,
bu I am nevertheless obliged to speak. Just now
I gave a rather too hasty agreement to the wording proposed by the Syrian representative. As I
pointed out, I did this because I was under the
impression that this wording would remove the
difficulty.

M. PAROD! (France): Je m'excuse de prolonlonger une discussion un peu trop juridique et
qui devient quelque peu subtile, mais je suis
pourtant oblige de reprendre la parole. Tout a
I'heure, j'ai donne un peu trop vite mon adhesion
a la formule proposee par le representant .de la
Syrie. Comme je l'ai indique, -. je I'ai fait parce
que j'avais l'impression que cette formule faisait
disparaltre le probleme.

On re-reading this text, however, it seems to
me that the same difficulty which the Syrian
representative found with my initial text applies
to the one he proposes. This text bases the action
which the Security Council is called upon to take
both on Article 34 and on Article 36 of the
Charter. It seems to me that, as was pointed out
this morning, Article 36 is. contingent on Article
37. In Article 37, paragraph 2, it is stated: "If
the Security Council deems that the continuation
of the dispute is in fact likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security,
it shall decide whether to take action under
Article 36 or to recommend such terms of settlement as it may consider appropriate."
Therefore, in so far as reference is made to
Article 36, it is to be concluded that the Council
first considered that Article 37 was applicable.
But, as I have just recalled, the latter brings
ArtiCle 36 into play, because the Security Council is presumed to consider that the continuance
of the dispute endangers the maintenance of international peace and security. ,
The result is that the contradiction referred to
by the Syrian representative, if it exists, appears
in full force when the two Articles are placed
side by side in the same text.
I must apologize for this somewhat complicated explanation, but it is essentially very
serious.
If this is so, if the difficulty is not removed, I
think the text which I originally proposed is the
best, and I beg leave to revert to it.

Or, en relisant ce texte, il me semble que la
difficulte que le representant de la Syrie avait
trouvee dans mon texte initial se presente dans
celui qu'il nous propose. Ce texte consiste a
fonder l'action que le Conseil de securite est
appele a prendre a la fois sur l'Article 34 et sur
I'Article 36 de la Charte. L'Article 36 me para~t
bien dependre de I'Article 37, comme on l'a
rappele ce matin. En effet, l'Article 37 dit, a son
paragraphe 2: "Si le Conseil de securite estime
que la prolongation du differend semble, en fait,
menacer le maintien de la paix et de la securite
internationales, il decide s'il doit agir en application de l'Article 36 ou recommander tels termes
de reglement qu'il juge appropries."
Donc, dans la mesure ou l'on se refere a
l'Article 36, on entend que le Conseil a d'abord
estime que I'Article 37 etait applicable. Or celuici, je viens de le rappeler, met en jeu I'Article
36, parce que le Conseil de securite est cense
estimer que la prolongation du differend menace
le maintien de la paix et de la securite.
Il en resulte que la contradiction relevee par
le representant de la Syrie, si elle existe, apparalt
completement lorsqu'on juxtapose les deux
Articles dans une meme formule.
Je m'excuse de cette explication qui paralt un
peu compliquee; mais, quant au fond, elle est
tres serieuse.
S'il en est ainsi, si la difficulte n'est pas supprimee, je crois que le texte que j'avais propose
tout d'abord est le meilleur et je demande la
liberte d'y revenir.

The PRESIDENT: May I ask the representative
of the United States to tell us whether he wa,nts
to accept the proposal of the representative of
Australia or the alternative suggested now by the
representative of France?

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Le representant des Etats-Unis voudrait-il nous
faire connaitre s'il est pret a accepter la proposition du representant de l'Australie ou celle que
vient de. suggerer le representant de la France?

Mr. JOHNSON (0'nited States of America):.
The United States delegation prefers the amendment of the French delegation. If the result of
the French representative's withdrawing his support from the Syrian amendment is that the
French amendment is back on the table, I should
prefer the latter.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): La delegation des Etats-Unis
prefere I'arnendement presente par la delegation
fran~aise. Si le fait que le representant de la
France cesse d'appuyer I'amendement syrien
signifie que l'amendement fran~ais revient
devant nous, c'est a ce dernier que vont .mes
preferences.

Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): I think the suggestion of the representative of Australia is in
conformity with the provisions of Article 37. The

M. EL-KHOUR! (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je crois que la suggestion du representant de
l'Australie est conforme aux dispositions d:...,..

application of Article 36 would imply that the
dispute now in question is lik~ly to endan?er
international peace and securIty. In statmg
that we are to take action under Articles 34 and
36 the implication is quite clear, although the
point is not actually mentioned. It is tacitly understood that as long as we are applying Article
36, Article 37 has been taken into consideration.

I'Article 37. L'application de I'Article36 impliquerait que le differend en question est
susceptible de menacer la paix et la securite
internationales. Si nous declarons que notre
decision se fonde sur les Articles 34 et 36,
l'implication est parfaitement claire, sans toutefois que le fait soit expressement formule. 11 est
tacitement entendu que si nous appliquons
l'Article 36, c'est compte tenu de I'Article 37.

Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil): The text as amended
by the representative of Syria attempts to evade
the question of whether the situation is likely to
endanger security. That is why I prefer the
French formula, and shall vote for it. _

M. MUNIZ (Bresil) (traduit de 1'anglais):
Le texte, tel qu'il est amende par le representant
de la Syrie, tend a eluder la question de'savoir
si la situation est susceptible de mettre en danger
la securite. C'est pourquoi je prefere le texte du
representant de la France, et je voterai pour ce
textc.

The PRESIDENT: I should like to clear up the
status of the text we have before us. I shall put
a question to the United States representative.
We had an original proposal submitted by the
United States and an amendment suggested by
the representative of France, wl:].ich the United
States representative acr:epted. The United
States representative was also prepared to accept
different formulations, as suggested by the representatives of Syria and Australia; however, he
expressed preference for the original French
amendment.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Je voudrais preciseI' I'historique du texte que
nous examinons et poser une question au representant des Etats-Unis. A l'origine, nous nous
sommes trouves saisis d'une proposition emanant
de la delegation des Etats-Unis et d'un amendement qu'a depose le representant de la France
et que le representant des Etats-Unis a accepte.
Ce dernier etait egalement dispose a accepter
d'autres £ormules, proposees par les representants
de la Syrie et de l'Australie; il a cependant
exprime une preference pour le texte fran~ais
primirif.
J'aimerais que le representant des Etats-Unis
nous fasse connaitre queUe est maintenant sa
proposition, afin que le Conseil sache quel
est le texte qu'il accepte et queUes sont les
propos~tions que nous pourrions avoir a mettre
aux VOiX.

I should like to have the representative of the
United States inform us what his proposal is
now, in order for the Council to know which
text he accepts and which proposals we may
have to put to a vote.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
The text as amended by the representative of
France represents the text now accepted by the
United States. However, if a majority of the
Council should express itself in favour of either
the Syrian or the Australian suggestion, the
United States would not oppose it.

. M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): C'est le texte amende par le
representant de la France qu'accepte maintenant
la delegation des Etats-Unis. Cependant, si la
majorite du Conseil se pronon~ait en faveur,
soit de la proposition syrienne, soit de la proposition australienne, les Etats-Uni;) ne formuleraient aucune objection.

The PRESIDENT: Therefore, the text proposed
by the representative of France, which is before
the Council, is the United States text, and the
Syrian and Australian texts are amendments.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
C'est done le texte propose par le representant
de la France, texte que nous avons sous les yeux,
qu'appuient les Etats-Unis. Les textes presentes
respectivement par la Syrie et l'Australie sont
des amendements.

Mr. LAWFORD (United Kingdom): When
this discussion began, my delegation was in
favour of the French amendment to the United
States draft resolution, in the form of an addition to the preamble. We are still in favour of
the French text, in spite of the interventions
which have taken place since this morning.

M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni), (traduit de
l' anglais): Lorsque cette discussion a commence,
ma delegation etait en faveur de l'amendement
fran~ais au projet de resolution des Etats-Unis
sous la forme d'une addition au preambule.
Nous sommes toujours en faveur du texte fran~ais, malgre les interventions que nous avons
entendues depuis ce matin.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia) : You will recall that this morning I spoke very strongly in
fav:our of the French text. I then asked to see
the Syrian proposal. When that came before us,
both the French representative and the United
States representative said that the Syrian text

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Vous vaus souvenez que ce matin je
me suis pronance tres categoriquement en faveur
du texte fran~ais. J'ai demande ensuite a voir
la proposition syrienne. Apres examen de ceUe-d,
le representant de la France et le representant

~_.

..

~

1436

My delegation will vote fot the original
French amendment.

des Etats-Unis ont tous deux declare que letexte
syrien etait acceptable; il m'a semble que la
majorite des membres etait aussi de cet avis. Ma
delegation, toutefoiS, n'en jugeait pas ainsi et j'ai
eleve des objections.
J'ai simplement suggere, sans deposer aucun
amendement, que, si le Conseil acceptait le texte
syrien, il devrait y inclure egalement l'idee que
l'on trouve dans l'amendement fran~ais, a savoir
que nous avons constate, en fait, que la prolon.
gation de la situation menace reellement la paix
et la securite internationales. Je n'ai fait aucune
proposition formelle ni presente Cl'amendement
dans ce sens.
Ma delegation votera en faveur de l'amende.
ment fran~ais primitif.

The PRESIDENT: Thus we have only one
amendment. I shall ask the representative of
Syria whether he would like to have a vote on
his amendment.

Le PRESID"ENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Nous sommes donc saisis d'un seul amendement.
Le representant de la Syrie desire-t-il que son
amendement soit mis aux voix?

Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): Articles 36 of the
Charter implies that the Security Council may,
at any stage of a dispute, take steps or make
recommendations for appropriate methods leading to an adjustment. Article 37, in its second
paragraph, states as follows: "If the Security
Council deems that the continuance of the dispute is in fact likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, it shall
decide whether to take action under Article 36
or to recommend such terms of settlement as it
may consider appropriate."

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais):
D'apres l'Article 36 de la Charte, le Conseil de
securite peut... a tout moment de l'evolution d'un
difIerend, prendre des mesures ou faire des
recommandations pour que soient adoptees des
methodes appropriees permettant d'aboutir a un
ajustement. Le second paragraphe de I'Article
37, d'autre part, declare: "Si le Conseil de
securite estime que la prolongation du differend
semble, en fait, menacer le maintien de la paix
et de la securite internationales, il decide s'il
doit agir en application de l'Article 36 ou
recommander tels termes de reglement qu'il juge
appropries."
Il ressort clairement de ce texte qu'il n'est pas
necessaire, pour pouvoir appliquer l'Article 36,
que le Conseil de securite ait pris une decision
definitive etablissant que le differend actuel est
susceptible de menacer la paix et la securite
internationales. Le Conseil de securite peut citer
l'Article 36 et prendre des mesures en application
de cet Article dans une situation de cet ordre
ou dans toute autre situation, lorsqu'il le juge
necessaire ou utile. l'Article 36 declare que, a
tout moment de l'evolution d'un difIerend,
lorsque le Conseil de securite decide qu'il y a
danger, il peut recommander des methodes
d'ajustement. Si nous adoptons l'amendement
que je propose, nul ne pourra affirmer a l'avenir
que le Conseil de securite a pris, ou n'a pas pris,
de decision definitive. La qveetion n'est pas encore tranchee. Ma proposition ne declare pas que
nous allons agir en application de I'Article 37.
Cependant, si nous prenons des mesures en vertu
de l' Article 36, on peut en deduire que nous
tenons egalement compte de l'Article 37.
J'estime donc toujours qu'il serait preferable
d'adopter l'amendement que j'ai propose. Je
n'insiste pas pour qu'il soit mis aux voix, puisque
la plupart" des membres du ConseiJ ne semblent
pas etre en faveur de la forme que j'ai donnee
a cet amendement.

was acceptable; it seemed to me· it was acceptable, also, to the majority of the members. However, it was not acceptable to my delegation, and
I objected to it.
All I suggested was-and I have not made
.any amendment-that, if the Syrian text were
accepted by the Council, it should also include
the idea found in the French amendment, which
stated that we have found, as a fact, that the
continuation of the situation does endanger inter~
national peace and security. I made no formal
proposal or amendment to that effect.

This would clearly show that it is not necessarily after the Security Council has taken a final'
decision that the existing dispute is likely to endanger international peace and security that
Article 36 can be applied. Article 36 may be
referred to and may be acted upon by the Security Council in such a situation and in any
other situation when the Security Council deems
it necessary or useful. It states that at any stage
of a dispute where the Security Council decides
that there is danger, it may recommend methods
of adjustment. If we take the amendment which
I propose, no one will be able to say in the
future that the Security Council had taken a
final decision or that it had not taken a. final
decision. The matter is not yet decided. My
proposal does not say that we shall be working
under AJlticle 37. However, if we work under
Article 36, it may be implied that Article 37 is
also being taken into consideration.

Therefore, I still believe it would be better to
adopt the amendment which I have proposed.
I do not urge that it should be put to a vote,
as I notice that most of the members are not in
favour of it in the form in which I put it.
Mr. PAROD! (France) (translated from
French): I should have been very glad to meet

M. PAROD! (France) : J'aurais ete tres desireux '
de rejoindre le representant de la Syrie si le text.

~1l';;';':·~tTJiU~~
..~,riff';~i>:~~~~~-,.,.~,,;,.;o;'~~~;j!f.V~"~~i'S"""_~""'&T"~-lO:~";<";T'Kjio>~';;JIi,~';<';-;'~:"~~~~~~-::',<;;o~~-=-=:-.~,=:;:
.. 1~~o=,.,.,~.~"c"~.-,,,,·~_ ..:':'-':lo2ff.R'>JM'~'·

1437

. the wishes of the representative of Syria if the'
text he has proposed really removed the difficulty
to which he pointed this morning. r should like
to revert, however, to the argument which he has
just put forward. Suppose we leave Article 37,
paragraph 2, completeiy aside-perhaps I was
wrong in referring to it in my argument. Let
us take Article 36. It says: "The Security Council may, at any stage of a dispute of the nature
referred to in Article 33 ..." But the dispute
in Article 33 is a "dispute, the continuance of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security ..."
I do not believe there is any way of avoiding
the difficulties which the representative of Syria
mentioned this morning. Indeed, if the literal
interpretation of the text is insisted upon, the
difficulty is increased. For my part, I maintain
the broader interpretation which I gave this
morning, and I therefore adhere to the text
which I proposed originally.

qu'il nous a propose supprimait vraiment la
difficulte qu'il a indiql!ee ce matin. Mais je
voudrais revenir au raisonnement qu'il vient de
faire. J'admets qu'on laisse complt:tement de
cote - et peut-etre ai-je eu tort de m'y rHerer
dans le raisonnement que j'ai fait -l'Article 37,
paragraphe 2. Mais prenons l'Article 36. n dit:
"Le Conseil de securite peut, a tout moment de
l'evolution d'un differend de la nature mentionnee a l'Article 33 ... " Or, ce differend
mentionne a l'Article 33 est un "differend dont
la prolongation est susceptible de menacer le
maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales ... "
Je crois que d'aucune maniere on n'evite les
difficultes que le representant de la S}'Tie a
signalees ce matin. A vrai dire, si 1'0n s'en tient
a une interpretation litterale des textes, on se
tire mal de cette difficulte. Je m'en tiens donc,
quant a moi, a l'interpretation plus large que
j'ai donnee ce matin, et, dans ces conditions, je
. reste attache au texte que j'avais d'abord propose.
.

Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil): What I was going to
say has just been said by the representative of
France. The interpretation made by the representative of Syria concerning any stage of a dispute refers to Article 33. Article 33 refers to a
dispute likely to endanger international peace, on
which the Security Council has to make a decision under Article 34.

M. MUNIZ (Bresil) (traduit de l'anglais):
Le representant de la France vient d'exprimer
exactement ce que j'allais dire. L'interpretation
que donne le representant de la Syrie, en ce qui
concerne tout moment de l'evolution d'un differend, mentionne l'Article 33. Or l'Article 33
parle d'un differend susceptible de menacer la
paix internationale, et qui doit faire l'objet cl'une
decision du Conseil de securite aux termes de
l'Artic1e 34.

The PRESIDENT: The representative of Syria
does not insist upon a vote on his proposal. As
no other member desires a yote on the amendment proposed by the representative of Syria, I
shall consider the preamble to the United States
resolution, with the amendment proposed by the
representative of France and accepted by the
United States representative, as adopted.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Le representant de la Syrie n'insiste pas pour
que sa proposition soit mise aux voix. Puisque
aucun autre membre du Conseil ne demande
qu'il soit procede a un vote sur l'amendement
propose par le representant de la Syrie, je considere que le preambule de la, resolution des
Etats-Unis, avec l'amendement propose par le
representant de la France et accepte par le
representant des Etats-Unis, est adopte.
Pendant I'heure du dejeuner, j'ai envisage
avec d'autres membres du Conseil differentes
suggestions concernant la suite de nos travaux.
Je pense que la meilleure solution serait la suivante: nous discuterons chaquc amendement et
nous le mettrons aux voix immediatement
apres la discussion, a moins, bien entendu, que
l'amendement ne soit accepte par le representant
des Etats-Unis, qui a depose la resolution primitive, auquel cas aucun vote ne sera necessaire.
De cette maniere, nous etablirons un projet de
r&solution definitivement amende, que nous devrons egalement mettre aux voix. Le representant
de la Colombie a demande que ce projet definitif
soit souInis au vote paragraphe par paragraphe.
C'est la procedure que' nous adopterons.

During the lunch hour I discussed with other
members various suggestions in regard to our
subsequent procedure. I think the best solution
would be this: we shall discuss each amendment
and vote on it immediately after the discussion,
unless of course the amendment is accepted by
the representative of the United States, who
proposed the original resolution, in which case
no vote will be necessary. In that way, we shall
arrive at a draft of the resolution which has
been finally amended, and upon which we shall
also have to vote. The representative of Colombia has requested that the vote upon this final
draft shall take place paragraph by paragraph.
That is the procedure we shall follow.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
I should like to ask whether my understanding
of the procedure suggested by the President is
correct. According to the President, we shall
now put aside consideration of the preamble and

~." .

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Je voudrais etre sur d'avoir
bien compris la procedure suggeree par le President. Le President a propose que nous laissions
de cote le preambule et que nous passions a

proceed to a consideration of the first paragraph,
with any amendments which may perhaps be
suggested to it; we shall then proceed to consider the subsequent paragraphs and amendments, in order to arrive at a text upon which
we shall take a final vote.

I'examen du premier paragraphe, amsl que de
tous les amendements qui pourront s'y rapporter;
puis a I'examen des paragraphes et amendements
suivants, afin d'etablir un texte qui sera finalement mis aux voix.

The PRESIDENT: Each amendme~t will be
voted upon as an amendment after it has been
discussed; for instance, I would have taken a
vote on th~ amendment suggested by the representative of Syria if he had insisted upon it. In
that way, we shall arrive at an amended text of
the resolution proposed by the representative of
the United States, and that amended text will
be submitted to a vote paragraph by paragraph.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Nous mettrons aux voix chaque amendement,
considere comme tel, apres l'avoir discute; par
exemple, si le representant de la Syrie avait
insiste, j'aurais mis aux voix l'amendement qu'il
a propose. C'est de cette maniere que nous
etablirons un texte amende de la resolution
proposee par le representant des Etats-Unis, texte
amende qui sera mis aux voix paragraph!': par
paragraphe.
J'ajouterri, a titre d'information pour les
membres du Conseil, que telle est la procedure
que nous avons suivie en decembre, alors que
nous avions une resolution sur le meme sujet et
qu'un grand nombre d'amendements y avaient
ete proposes. Nous avons tout d'abord discute
chaque amendement, nous I'avons mis aux voix
et nous avons obtenu un texte amende que nous
avons finalement mis aux voix.

For the information of the Council, I should
like to add that that was the procedure we
adopted in December when we had a resolution
on the same subject, to which a large number of
amendments had been proposed. We first discussed each amendment, voted on it, obtained
an amended text and finally voted on that.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
When we have considered all the amendments
and have voted·upon them, and returned to the
preamble in order to take a final vote paragraph
by paragraph, I take it that new amendments
will no longer be in order.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Si je comprends bien, lorsque
nousaurons examine t"-"1S les amendements et
mis aux voix chacun d'eux, lorsque nous serons
revenus au preambule avant de passer au vote
definitif paragraphe par paragraphe, aucun
amendement nouveau ne pourra plus etre propose.

. The PRESIDENT: That is so. There will then
be no opportunity for further amendments.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
C'est exact; il n'y aura plus possibilite de presenter d'autres amendements.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I think this
procedure is neither very appropriate nor very
convenient. I fail to see why we should spend
two days voting, when all this could be. done
much more quickly. I can understand that a discussion may goon for several days, but I can see
no sense in a procedure where a resolution has
to be voted on for two or three days. I comider
that all the amendments from first to last and
all the para¥aphs of the resolution from first
to last should be discussed, and that we should
then go back and vo~e on the amendments and
paragraphs respectively from first to~ast. That
would be a more normal and convenient method.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du f1tSse): n
me semble que cette fa~on de proceder ne
convient pas tout a fait, et qu'elle n'est pas tres
commode. J e ne sais pas pourquoi nous devrions
passer deux journees entieres a voteralors que
nous pourrions faire tout cela beaucoup plus
rapidement. J'admets I'utilite d'une discussion
qui dure meme plusieurs jours, mais je ne vois
pas le sens d'un mode de procedure qui nous
obligerait a consacrer deux ou trois jours au
vote d'une resolution. Il me semble qu'il conviendrait d'examiner tous les amendements, du
premier jusqu'au dernier, et tous les paragraphes
de la resolution, du premier au dernier, avant de
mettre aux voix ces amendements et ces paragraphes, du premier au dernier. Un tel mode de
procedure serait plus normal et plus commode.
N'est-il pas important en effet, pour un
membre du Conseil, de connaitre I'avis des
autres representants a l'egard des derniers points
de la resolution? n.me semble que cela a de
I'importance pour determiner son attitude a
l' egald des premiers paragraphes de la resolution.
Pour ma part, en tout cas, j'y aUache de
I'importa:i:!ce. Pour determiner mon attitude a
I'egard des premiers paragraphes de la resolution,
je ne puis manquer de tenii compte des diffe- ........

Does not a Council member attach importance
to th.e attitude of other representatives toward the
last paragraphs of the resolution? I feel that it
is of some importance from the point of view of
dei.errnining their attitude to the first paragraphs
of the resolution. In my case, at any rate, it is
not a matter of indifference. In determining my
attitude to the first paragraphs of the resolution,
I cannot but take account of the views expressed
luring the discussion of the amendments and· the

p2

last paragraphs of the resolution. In Cf.i.ermin- I rent· " (Ip" 10'\.:: emises au COUfS de l'examen des
ing my attitude to the first paragraphs of the . ame> I~
's et des derniers paragraphes de
resolution and consequently to the amendment.'l la h ,~m:ion. Pour determiner mon attitude a
suggested theret0) I shall take account of the regard de8 premiers paragraphes de la resolution
views expressed on the last paragraphs of the et d~s amendements proposes pour ces pararesolution and also the amendments proposed for graphes, je tiendrai compte des opinions exprimees sur les derniers paragraphes de la resolution
those paragraphs.
et les amendements qui s'y rapportent.
N'est-ce pas plus pratique? Pourquoi ne pas
Is that not more convenient? Why not adopt
the following procedure: first finish the discus- proceder ainsi: achever tout d'abord r examen
sion of all the amendments and all the para- de tous les amendements et de tous les para~
graphs to which these amendments have been graphes pour lesquels ces amendements ont ete
suggested and of the paragraphs for which there proposes, ainsi que des paragraphes pour lesquels
are no amendments, and then revert to the il n'y a pas d'amendement, et passer ensuite au
vote?
voting?
Mr. PARODI, (France) (translated from
M. PARODI (France): Je comprends ce que
French): I u;nderstand what our colleagu~, vient de dire notre collegue, M. Gromyko. Mais,
Mr. Gromyko, has just said. But if we accepted si I'on prenait completement en consideration le
his reasoning completely, the result, I think, raisonnement qu'il vient de faire, on en
would be that we should vote en all texts begin- arriverait, je crois, a voter tous les textes en
ning at the end and proceeding backwards, commen~ant par la fin et en remontant, ce qui
which would not be very practical; and it is n'est pas tres pratique; et cep.'est pas ce que
nous faisons generalement.
not what we usually do.
I think that it would be very difficult not to .
J e crois qu'il est tres difficile que nous ne
take a decision at the end of the discussion on prenions pas une decision a la fin d'une discusany given paragraph. If we did not do so, the sion sur un paragraphe donne. Sinon, le resultat
result of the discussion would be lost sight of de la discussion serait perdu de vue et il faudrait
and we should have to go over it again a second recommencer completement une seconde fois.
time.
In any event, therefore, it seems to me that we
n me semble done que, de toute maniere, nous
shall have to take a double vote, as you have sommes conduits a un double vote, comme vous
proposed.
I'avez propose.
The PRESIDENT: I should like to avoid a long
discussion on this point of procedure. Therefore,
I shall simply say a few words as President, and
make a ruling on the subject.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
J e voudrais eviter une longue discussion sur cette
question de procedure. Je me bornerai done a
dire quelques mots en ma qualite de President,
avant de formuler une decision.
I fully understand the position expressed by
Je comprends parfaitement le point ,de vue
the representative of the Union of Soviet So- du representant de I'Union des Republiques
cialist Republics. Other representatives raised socialistes sovietiques. D'autres representants ont
the question before the meeting in private con- souleve la question avant la seance, au caurs de
versations. Theoretically, of course, it is true that conversations particulieres. Theoriquement, il est
the attitude of a member toward one of the evidemment exact que l'attitude d'un membre
amendments may depend upon what is said in a l'egard des !J.mendements peut dependre de ce
the discussion of another. But, on the other qui est dit au cours de la discussion d'un autre
hand, a great practical difficulty would be in- amendement. D'autre part, il y aurait la une
volved since, as we see from our present experi- grosse difficulte d'ordre pratique, etant donneence, there are rather long discussions on differ- comme nous pouvons en juger d'apres notre
ent paragraphs. Unless we take a vote on a experience actuelle - que les divers paragraphes
paragraph and its amendment after the discus- font l'objet de longues discussions. A moins de
sion is completed on that particular amendment, mettr.e aux voix un paragraphe et son amende~
we may find, at the conclusion of our discussions, ment une fois terminee la discussion. de cet
that we do not remember the texts of the amend- amendement particulier, il se peut que nous
ments proposed. I think it may prove to be constations, a la fin des discussions, que nous ne
rather confusing, therefore, to :vote upon all the nous souvenons plus du texte des amendements
amendments'at the conclusion of our 9iscussions. proposes. n pourrait doni:: etre assez embalTassant de voter sur tous les amendements a la fin
de nos debats.
For this reason, I shall ask for a vote on each
Je demanderai done que chaque amendeamendment as the discussion on that amend- ment soit mis aux voix apres avoir ete discute.
ment is completed. Of course, it goes without Il va evidemment sa...'1S dire que le texte amen~e
saying that the amendeq text of the resolution de la resolution sera ulterieurement soumis a un
will be subject to a vote later, after all the vote lorsque tous les amendements auront ete
amendments have been accepted. Of course it acceptes. Il va aussi sans dire que, daIIS le cas
also goes without saying that, in the particular' particulier ou l'auteur de la resolution accepte
~

1440

case where an amendment is accepted by the
originator of the resolution, as has occurred with
the preamble, no special vote on that amendment is necessary because the originator of the
resolution has accepted the amendment as part
of the text of his resolution.
We pass now to the second French amendment, which is an amendment to the first'paragraph of the draft resolution. The amendment
proposes that this paragraph should read as follows: "The Security Council adopts in their
substance the proposals submitted by the majority of the members of the Commission of Investigation."
I shQuld like to ask the representative of the
United States for his reaction to the proposed
amendment.

Nous passons maintenant au deuxieme amendement presente par la delegation de la France,
qui est un amendement au premier paragraphe
du projet de resolution; l'amendement suggere
de rediger comme suit ce paragraphe: "Le
Conseil de securite adopte dans leur substance
les propositions presentees par la majorite des
membres de la Commission d'enquete."
Je voudrais demander au representant des
Etats-Unis ce qu'H pense de l'amendement propose.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
The United States delegation accepts that
amendment. In our opinion, the substantive
value is not ch~ged at all.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): La delegation des Etats-Uni!
accepte cet amendement, qui, a notre avis, ne
change en rien le fond de la resolution.

Mr. HSIA (China): The Chinese delegation
is not opposed to this particular paragraph. We
have no amendment to make, but we wish to
make a few comments for the consideration of
the United States representative.

M. HSIA (Chine) (traduit de l'anglais): La
delegation de la Chine ne s'oppose pas a
l'adoption de ce paragraphe. Nous n'avons pas
d'amendement a presenter, mais nous desirons
soumettre quelques commentaires sur lesquels
nous appelons l'attention du representant des
Etats-Unis.
Ce paragraphe particulier n'est pas d'une
grande utilite. H resume la resolution. Incidemment, une partie de cc paragraphe rend
hommage a la Commission d'enquete pour avoir
apporte sa contribution a la resolution. Cependant, ce paragraphe souleve, a mon sens,
certaines difficultes. En premier lieu, une difficulte de forme, du fait qu'il se presente
autrement que les autres paragraphes. Ces derniers consistent en recommandations ou propositions tirees du rapport, tandis que celui-ci est
d'une nature quelque peu diffel'ente; il constitue
une declaration plus generale.
La deuxieme difficulte est d'ordre purement
logique. Quelqu'un a declare ce matin, je crois,
que nous prejugerions la question, a supposer
que nous procedions paragraphe par paragraphe,
en adoptant ce paragraphe-ci sans adopter les
suivants, car, en l'adoptant, nous nous engageons.

This particular paragraph does not help very
much. It summarizes the contents of the resolution. Incidentally, a portion of the paragraph
gives credit to the Commission of Investigation
for its contribution to the resolution. However,
$e paragraph creates certain difficulties, as I
see it. In the first place, it ("teates a difficulty of
form, inasmuch as it stands in a different light
from the rest of the paragrapHs. The other paragraphs consist of recommendations or proposals
of the report, while this one is of a somewhat
different nature; it is a more general statement.

The second difficulty is one of logic. I think
somebody said this morning that we are t>rejudging the matter, assuming that we proceed
paragraph by paragraph, if we adopt this paragraph without adopting the subsequent paragraphs; we are committing ourselves by voting
for it.
My third comment is that, for those who were
opposed to the original proposal in the report,
this paragraph creates a dilemma, because a vote
for the proposals is a vote for the entire resolution. Some of the members of the Commission
agreed to accept some of the proposals. Those
members who agreed to vote for some of the
recommendations are not able to vote for the
entire resolution. As I see it, it might be a
dilemma for such members who are in a different position from the rest of the Commission.
For these reasons, I respectfully suggest it
might be better to proceed to paragraph 2-that
is, take up the .substance of the whole resolution

un amendement, comme cela s'est produit pour
le preambule, il n'est pas necessaire de proceder
a un vote special, puisque l'auteur de la resolution a accepte l'amendement comme faisant
partie intt~grante du texte de sa resolution.

En troisieme lieu, je voudrais faire observ~r
que, pour ceux qui etaier.t contre la proposition
originale du rapport, ce paragraphe cree un
dilemme. En efIet, voter en faveur des propositions, c'est voter en faveur de la resolution tout
enticre. Certains membres de la Commission or.t
decide d'accepter certaines propositions. Ceux
des membres qui ont decide de voter pour
certaines recommandations ne peuvent pas voter
pour l'ensemble de la resolution. A mon avis,
cela peut constituer un dilemme pour les
membres de la Commission dont l'attitude est
differente de celle des autres.
Pour ces diverses raisons, .ie suggere respectueusement qu'il serait pe\lt-etre preferable de
passer au paragraphe 2, c'est-a.-dire d'etudie;

"~

>

1441
rather than the general statement summarizing
the entire matter. That is just a suggestion on
my part.

le fond de toute la resolution, plutot que la
declaration generale qui resume toute la question.
Ce n'est de ma part qu'une simple suggestion.

The PRESIDENT: The representative of China
has requested us to discuss the other paragraphs
before we discuss the second paragraph, which
would really mean that we should discuss the
paragraphs in the United Kingdom amendment
first.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Le representant de la Chine nous a demande de
discuter les autres paragraphes avant d'aborder
le deuxieme, ce qui signifierait, en fait, que nous
devrions discuter d'abord les paragraphes de
l'amendement presente par la delegation du
Royaume-Uni.
Je ne vois aucun inconvenient, si aucun
membre ne s',,! oppose, a ce que nous appliquions
cette procedure.

I have no objection to this procedure, unless
any of the other members object.
Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French): I probably misunderstood what the
representative of China said; I thought he
wished to delete this paragraph entirely. I would
remind yeu that there was another proposal this
morning by the representative of C:olombia, to
the effect that this paragraph, instead of being
a separate article, should be added to the preamble which would read as foll.ows: "The Security Council, adopting in their substance the
proposals submitted by the majority of the members of the Commission of Investigation ..."
Then would come the articles.
Personally, I have no preference between these
different suggestions. I shall support the one
which the United States representative thinks
best, since the alterations concern a text which
he originally introduced.

M. PARODI (France): J'avais probablement
mal compris ce que le representant de la Chine
avait dit; je croyais qU'il envisageait la suppression complete de ce paragraphe. Je rappellerai,
pour ma part, qu'il y a eu~ ce matin, une autre
proposition emanant du representant de la
Colombie, et seIon laqueHe ce paragraphe, au
lieu de constituer un article special, serait ajoute au preambule, qui se lirait alors ainsi: "Le
Conseil de securite, adoptant dans leur substance
les propositions presentees par la majorite des
membres de la Commission d'enquete ... "
On passerait ensuite aux articles.
Personnellement, je n'ai pas de preference
quanta ces difl'erentes suggestions et je me
rallierai a ceRe qui paraitra la meilleure au
representant des Etats-Unis, puisqu'il s'agit de
modifications au texte qU'il avait primitivement
introduit.

The PRESIDENT: The suggestion is to put the
second French amendment into the preamble.
I should like to have the opinion of the representative of the United States.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Conformement a cette suggestion, le deuxieme
amendement fran~ais figurerait dans le preambule. J'aimer&is connaitre le point de vue du
representant des Etats-Unis a eet egard.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
It is not entirely clear to me what the representative of China has proposed. But I may venture
a little comment on his observations regarding
paragraph 1 as it now stands, or as it was in our
original resolution.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Je n:; saisis pas tres bien ce
que le representant de la Chine a propose.Toutefois, je me permettrai de faire un bref
commentaire sur les observations qu'il a formulees au sujet du pa.ragraphe 1 tel qU'il se
presente actuellement, ou tel qu'il se presentait
dans notre resolution initiale.
Je crois qu~ le point souleve par le represeI'4tant de la Chine a ete partiellement regIe pa.r
l'amendement du representant de la France. Si
nous adoptons la substance des propositions
presentees par la Commission - et c'est ce que
notre delegation pense que nous devrions fair~ cela n'implique pas que fun que1conque des
membres ne puisse pas avoir une opinion
differente en ce qui concerne le detail de ces
propositions. Nous en adoptons la substance,
nous en approuvons la portee generale. Je crois
que c'etait la l'idee d!' representant de la France
lorsqu'il a propose cet adlelldement.
La delegation des Etats-Unis estime qu'un
paragraphe de ce genre, ou un paragraphe qui
contiendrait la meme idee, n'est veritablement
pas deplace dans ·cette resolution. Notre travail
actuel se fonde sur un rapport qui a exigeun
grand effort de la part de la Commission cre6e

I think the point of the representative of
China has been partly met by the amendment
suggested by the representative of France. 1£
we adopt the substance of the proposals made by
the Commission-which the United States delegation thinks we ought to do-that does not
mean that any individual member might not
have different views regarding details of those
proposals. We adopt them in their substance, in
'their overall intent. I believe that was the idea
in the mind of the representative of France when
he proposed this amendment.
• The United States delegation thinks that a
paragraph like this one, or one which would
embody the same idea, is not really out of place
in this resolution. We are basing our present
Work on a painstaking report by the Commission
. .et, U~hy the Security Council. The C~mmiss~on

1442
has made certain proposals to us which the
United States Government thinks this Council
ought to accept. That is our view, and we do
not object to having jt stated in the resolution.
We were willing, however, to accept the modification suggested by the representative of
France. I hope the Council will be able to
approve our proposal with this modification.
With respect to the suggestion made by the
representative of Colombia, and referred to a
moment ago by the representative of France, the
United States would have no objection to the
incorporation of this first paragraph in the preamble, because the idea that we would like to
see expressed in our resolution is that we have
adopted the proposals made by our Commission,
at least in their substance; we would then spell
out the specific details which we adopt. We
should' be quite satisfied with the incorporation
of that idea in the preamble, if the majority of
the Council so wishes.
Mr. L6PEz (Colombia): As I have already
stated, the Colombian delegation does not propose to submit any amendments. We have made
several suggestions. I should like to make clear
our suggestion concerning thiS particular point.
There is, to our minds, a difference between
adopting the substance of the proposals made by
the majority of the members of the Commission,
and following the proposals made by the majority of the members of the Commission, which
was our suggestion. I just want to make that
clear and to say that I am very glad that both
the United States delegation and the French
delegation find that satisfactory.
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I am not
speaking on the question of whether or not we
should defer consideration of this paragraph, as
suggested by the representative of China. I am
speaking on the point that the substance of the
paragraph should be made a part of the preamble. The representative of the United States
says that he is happy to accept that; my delegation would regret it. But if he has definitely
accepted it, we should have no objection.
However, a preamble indicates the objective;
it indicates an existing set of facts or circumstances, or indicates the subject-matter of the
';!solution, treaty, or whatever it may be. This is
not a preamble at all. This is very positive
action. This is the first decision we are taking,
namely, that we adopt the proposals made by the
majority. In our opinion this is not a preamble
at all. It is a very definitive part of the text, and
we prefer to see it in the text as paragraph 1.

Mr. HSIA (China): I do not want to prolong the discussion any further. I wish to say

par le Conseil de securite. La Commission a
formule certaines propositions que, de l'avis du
Gouvernement des Etats-Unis, le Conseil devrait
accepter. Tel est notre point de vue; nODS ne
nous opposons pas a ce qu'il en soit fait etat
dans la resolution.
Nous consentons cependant a accepter la
modification proposee par le representant de la
France. J'espere que le Conseil ser.a en mesure
d'approuver notre proposition ainsi modifiee.
En ce qui concerne la suggestion du· representant de la Colombie, evoquee, il y a quelques
instants, par le representant de la France, les
Etats-Unis ne s'opposeraient pas a ce que ce
premier paragraphe soit incorpore au preambule,
car l'idee que nous aimerions voir exprimee dans
notre resolution est que nous avons adopte les
propositions faites par notre Commission, au
moins en substance; nous enumererons par la
suite les details' particuli~rs que nous adoptons.
Si la majorite des membres du Conseil est
d'accord, nous accepterons volontiers que cette
idee soit incorporee dans le preambule.
M. L6PEz (Colombie) (traduit de l'ang1ais) :.
Ainsi que je l'ai declare anterieurement, la
delegation de la Colombie n'a aucunement
l'intention de soumettre des amendements. Nous
avons emis plusieurs suggestions, et j'aimerais
preciser celle que nous avons faite sur ce point
particulier.
Selon nous, il existe une difference entre
adopter dans leur substance les propositions
formuIees par la majorite des membres de la
Commission, et suivre les propositions de cette
majorite, ainsi que nous l'avions propose. Je
voulais tout simplement eclaircir ce point et faire
connaitre que j'etais tres heureux que la delegation des Etats-Unis et celle de la France se
declarent satisfaites.
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'ang1ais): Je n'aborderai pas id la question de
savoir si nous devons ou non renvoyer l'examen
de ce paragraph'e, ainsi que l'a propose le
representant de la Chine. Le point qui m'interesse est l'inclllsion dans le preambule de la
substance du dit paragraphe. Le representant des
Etats-Uriis vient de dire qu'il acceptera volontiers cette proposition, ce que ma delegation
regretterait. Toutefois, si cette acceptation est
definitive, nous ne nous y opposerons pas.
Cependant, un preambule definit un objecti~;
il indique un ensemble de circonstances et de
faits existants, ou encore ce qui fait le fond d'une
resolution, d'un traite ou de 'tout autre document.
Ici il ne s'agit pas du tout d'un preambule. n
s'agit d'un acte tout a fait positif. C'est la
premiere decision que nous prenons, celle
d'aclopter les propositions f~ites par la majorite.
A notre avis, il ne s'agi~ pas du tout d'un
preambule. C'est tres nettement une partie du
texte, et nous prefererions qu'elle constitue le
paragraphe 1.
M. HSIA (Chine) .(traduit de l'ang1ais): Je
nesouhaite pas prolonger plus longtemps la

us

1443

that I very much prefer the Colombian proposal
to the original wording, because certain words
in the original text create a difficulty. My intention is to remove difficultie<;\ as much as possible.
In my own mind-and perhaps my mind is
somewhat peculiar-the word "majority" is an
unhappy one. I 'should like to see every trace of
disagreement eliminated from this important
document. Should this resolution be eventually
adopted, I hope it may be adopted unanimously.
It seems unfortunate to have it stated here that
there has been disagreement in the Commission.
This may not be a ma,tter of great moment however.
Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): I simply wish to
call to the attention of the Council one word
which does not sound correct to me. I should
. like to ask the English-speaking members if it i'S
agreeable to them; if so, I shall consider that I
am mistaken.
In the United States proposal, there appears
the phrase "adopts the proposals." In this phrase
the word "adopts", I think, is correctly used.
In the French amendment, however, the phrase
appears as "adopts the substance of the proposals."
I consider that the word "adoption" implies
that the thing adopted is something definitely defined, like a resolution or a text; but the "substance" cannot be clearly defined. Therefore, it
might perhaps be better to state that the Security
Council views with favour the substance of the
proposals, or words to that effect. I do not know
what phraseology would be proper. However,
the "substance" of a thing, which is not defined,
should not be "adopted". I do not think the
word "adopt" is correctly used.

discussion. J e tiens seulement a declarer que
je prefere de beaucoup la proposition de la
Colombie a la redaction originale, parce que
certains mots du texte original soulevent des
difficultes et que je me propose d'aplanir les
difficultes autant que possible.
A mop.. se.'1S - mais il se peut que ce soit la
une notion quelque peu singuliere - le mot
"majorite" est un mot malheureux. J'aimerais
voir disparaitre de ee document important toute
trace de dissension. 8i cette resolution doit etre
eventuellement adoptee, fespere qu'elle pourra
l'etre a l'unanimite. Il semble deplorable qu'il
soit consigne ici qu'il y a eu desaccord au sein
de la Comniission. Mais c'est peut-etre la un
point de peu d'importan.:;.
M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je voudrais simplement attirer l'attention du
Conseil sur un mot qui ne me parait pas
correctement employe. Je serais heureux que les
membres de langue anglaise me disent s'ils
l'acceptent; si oui, je considererai que c'est moi
qui fais erreur.
\
On trouve dans la proposition des Etats-Unis
les termes "adopte les propositions". Le mot
"adopte" me parait etre employe a juste titre
dans cette phrase. Cependant, dans l'am~nde­
ment fran~ais, la phrase devient "adopte dans
leur substance les propositions".
SeIon moi, le mot "adopte" implique que la
chose adoptee est nettement definie, une resolution ou un texte par exemple. La "substance",
toutefois, ne saurait etre definie clairement. En
consequence, il serait peut-etre preferable de
declarer que le Conseil de securite se prononce
en faveur de ces propositions quant a leur
substance; on pourrait egalement employer une
autre formule a cet effet. J e ne sais quelle est la
redaction qui conviendrait le mieux; mais la
"substance" d'une chose, qui n'est pas definie,
ne doit pas etre "adoptee". J e ne crois pas que
le mot "adopte" soit correctement employe ici.

The PRESIDENT: May I ask the representative
of the United States for his reaction to the linguistic point that has been raised.

Le PREsIDENT (traduit de l'ang1ais):
Puis-je demander au representant des Etats-Unis
ce qu'il pense de la question linguistique qui
vient d'etre soulevee?

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America) :
It is sometimes difficult-or certainly I find it
so-to express in precise terms exactly what a
word or a group of words conveys to my mind.
However, the meaning of these words is quite
simple and' clear to me, although I may not be
able to convince the representative of Syria of
that.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (tra-,duit de l'ang1ais): 11 est que1quefois difficile tout au moins tel est le cas pour moi - d'expiimer en termes precis et de fa~on exacte ce
qu'evoquent un mot ou un groupe de mots.
Cependant, le sens des mots en question me
semble tres simple et clair, meme si je ne parviens pas a en convaincre le representant de la
Syrie.
Nous nous trouvons en presence d~un ensemble
de propositions. Si nous disons que nous adoptons
ces propositions, selon la suggestion originale de
la delt~gation des Etats-Unis, nous les adoptons
mot pOuf mot, telles qu'elles figurent dans le
rapport. En revanche, si nous les adoptons dans
leur substance, cela veut dire que nous reconnaissons que ces propositions renferment un
ensemble de faits indiscutables qui en sont la
substance; elles contiennent des elements qui sont

, We have a set of proposals. We say that we
adopt those proposals, which was the original
suggestion of the United States delegation; in
that case, we adopt them word for word as they
appear in the report. However, if we adopt their
·substance, that means we recognize that they
~ontain a set of hard facts; they have substance;
there are certain things in the proposals which
are essential and some which are not. When we
~ adopt the substance of the proposals, we adopt

1444
them in general, but we reserve the right to
accept and to offer modifications to them. We
simply do not accept them word for word. That
is all that is meant by the phrase. It does mean,
however, that the essential elements are accepted.
That is what is meant by "substance."

essentiels; et d'autres qui ne le sont point. Lorsque
nous adoptons la substance des propositions, nous
adoptons les propositions d'une maniere generale, en nous reservant le droit d'y apporter ou
d'accepter des modifications. Nous ne les acceptons pas a la lettre. Nous n'entendons pas autre
chose par cette expression; ,elle signifie bien,
toutefois, que les elements essentiels sont
acceptes. Voila done ce qu'implique le mot
"substance".

Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French): I should like to make a brief observation. We have before us two different English
translations of the French text. The first, on
white paper, was circulated this morning and
contains the words "in their substance," which
is an exact translation of the French. The second, on yellow paper, was circulated this afternoon and is drafted: ". . . adopts the substance
of ..."
I think that the former of these translations
is the better.

M. PARODI (France): Je voudrais faire une
breve remarque. Nous avons sous les yeux deux
traductions anglaises differentes du texte fran~ais. La premiere, sur papier blanc, a ete distribuee ce matin et contient les mots in their
substance, ce qui est la traduction exacte du
texte franc;;ais. La seconde, sur papier jaune,
nous a ete distribuee cet apres-midi et est ainsi
redigee: adopts the substance of •..
Je pense que c'est la. premiere de ces deux
traductions qui est la bonne.

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in '
charge of Legal Affairs): The text on white des questions juridiques) (traduit de l'anglais):
paper was prepared in a great hurry this morn- Le texte sur papier blanc a ete prepare ce matin
ing. We saw many imperfections in it. We there- en grande hate. Nous avons constate qu'il confore edited the second text, which was considered tenait de nombreuses imperfections. Nous avons
a better one. Now I see that, in this particular alors fait paraitre un deuxieme texte, juge meilinstance, the contrary happened, and I recognize leur. Je m'aperc;;ois maintenant que, dans ce cas
that it is the text on white paper which is the particulier, il n'en a rien ete; au contraire, c'est
better. Therefore, we have a new proof of the le texte sur papier blanc qui est le meilleur des
deux, j'en conviens. Ce qui prouve une fois de
French saying, Le mieux est I'ennemi du bien.
plus le bien-fonde du proverbe franc;;ais: "Le
mieux est l'ennemi du bien."
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
With regard to the translation which was given
us this morning, I should like to point out that
there were extreme inaccuracies. For instance,
as I mentioned this morning, the preamble as
given us in the English translation would have
been impossible f01" the United States to accept,
because it was in detail and in substance.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Je signale que la traduction
qui nous a ete distribuee ce matin renferme des
erreurs tres graves. 11 aurait ete notamment
impossible pour les Etats-Unis, ainsi que je I'ai
declare ce matin, d'aocepter le preambule tel
qu'il nous a ete presente en anglais; il etait en
effet inexact quant au fond, et contenait aussi
des erreurs de detail.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
The PRESIDENT: The representative of France
has written down on paper the text as he now ,Le representant de la France a redige le texte
envisages it. I shall read from the French text: tel qu'il le conc;;oit maintenant. Je vais donner
"Adopting in their substance the proposals sub- lecture du texte franc;;ais: "Adoptant dans leur
mitted by the majority of the members of the substance les propositions presentees par la
Qommission of Investigation, the Security Coun- majorite des membres de la Commission
cil decides"l and so forth.
d'enquete, le Conseil de securite decidel ... ",
et cretera.
'
J'ai prie le Secretariat de faire dactylographier
I am asking the Secretariat to have the text
le texte en tenant compte de la modification
re-typed with the proposed change.
proposee.
Je me demande si les membres du Conseil
I wonder whether the members of the Council
consider the discussion on this subject closed, or considerent comme close la discussion sur ce
whether they wish to wait until the final text sujet, ou s'ils desirent attendre que l~ texte
is presented to them? I think it might be de- definitif leur soit presente. Je crois qu'il serait
sirable to follow the latter course, as it will take preferable d'opter pour la deuxieme solution;
c~a ne demandera que quelques minutes.
only a few minutes.
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I do not desire to prolong the discussion, but I have given
1

This quotation was read in French.

Le colonel HODGSON (Austraiie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Je ne veux pas prolonger la discus1

Cette citation a ete lue en franc;ais.

»

1445
reasons why that portion should be a part of the
definitive text. I should like to ask those who are
making that proposal why they consider it part
of the preamble when it is not a pre:unble at all?

sion; j'ai deja expose les raisons pour lesquelles
ce passage devrait faire partie du texte definitif.
Je voudrais demander a ceux qui presentent la
proposition pourquoi ils la considerent comrne
faisant partie du preambule, alors qu'elle ne
constitue nullement un preambule.

Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French): I am not speaking at the moment in
reply to the Australian representative. Since we
are making a written draft of the text, I should
merely like to add the word "consequently" at
the beginning. The sentence would read as follows: "Consequently, adopting in their substance the proposals," etc. This would, moreover, be in conformity with the original United
States draft.

M. PARODI (France): Je ne prends pas la
parole en ce moment pour repondre au representant de l'Australie. Je voudrais simplement,
puisque nous faisons une redaction ecrite du
texte, ajouter a ce1ui-ci les mots "en consequence" au debut; la phrase se lirait ainsi:
"En consequence, adoptant, dans leur substance,
les propositions", etc. Ce serait reprendre
d'ailleurs le terme qui figure dans le projet initial
des Etats-Unis.

Mr. L6PEZ (Colombia): The matter which
was brought up by the representative of China
is not one of little moment; on the contrary, it
seems to us that it is highly important. If, by
the way we draft this paragraph we can succeed
in getting it generally accepted, it is worth-while
to stop and consider what wording is the most
likely to meet with the general acceptance of
the Council. That is why we have ventured to
suggest that, instead of adopting the proposals
before discussing them, we should say, "Following the proposals of the majority of the Corn. . ... "
nussIOn

M. L6PEz (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
La question qu'a soulevee le representant de la
Chine n'est pas de peu d'importance. Elle me
parait etre, au contraire, d'importance capitale.
Si la redaction que nous donnerons a ce paragraphe nous permet d'obtenir qu'il soit accepte
de tous, il y a interet, je crois, a nous arreter pour
examiner quel est le texte qui aura le plus de
chances de recueillir l'approbation generale du
Conseil. C'est pour cette raison que je me suis
permis de suggerer que, au lieu d'adopter les
propositions avant de les discuter, nous declarions
"suivant Ies propositions de la majorite de la
Commission ... "
Si, par un acte positif du Conseil, nous
specifions les recommandations, il parait inutile
de declarer que nous les adoptons avant de les
avoir repetees une a une. En consequence, je
pense que la proposition du representant de la
Chine, demandant que nous dec1arions "suivant
les propositions ... " au lieu de dire que nous
les adoptons, est d'une importance capitale.

If, by positive act of the Council, we are going
to specify'-the recommendations, it does not seem
necessary to say that we adopt them before we
repeat them one by one. Therefore, I think the
suggestion of the representative of China, to the
effect that we should say "following the proposals ..." instead of saying that we adopt them,
is highly important.

b

u

The PRESIDENT: It is now suggested that we
should simply say "following the proposals ..."

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
11 est maintenant propose de declarer simplement
"suivant les propositions ... "

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): That is an
entirely new concept. If we ad.opt what was
suggested by the representative of Colombia, I
quite agree that the phrase does become part of
the preamble; but the other way it becomes part
of the definitive text, because it is a very definite
action. That is the distinction I should like to
make.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): C'estla une notion entierement
nouvelle. Si nous adoptons ce qu'a propose le
renresentant de la Colombie, le membre de
phrase devient,' je le reconnais, partie du
preambule; mais, dans le cas contraire, il devient
partie du texte definitif, car il s'agit alors d'une
action bien precise. Telle est la distinction que je
desire etablir.

Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil): I have a suggestion to
make which may reconcile these differences. I
would suggest that we sa.y "taking note", and in
French prenant ~cte of the proposals, and so on.

M. MUNIZ (Bresil) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je voudrais presenter une proposition propre a
concilier les points de vue. Je propose que nous
disions en anglais taking note et en fran~ais
"prenant acte" des propositions, etc.

The PRESIDENT: Does the representative of
the United States wish to express an opinion on
that subject?

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Le representant des Etats-Unis desire-t-il exprimer son opinion a ce sujet?

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America) :
I agree with the observation made by the representative of Australia a moment ago, and I had
that in mind when I expressed my agreement

M~ JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (trdduit de l'anglais): J'approuve la remarque qu'a
formulee il y a quelques instants le representant
de l'Australie; c'est a cela que je pensais lorsque

1446
with the suggestion made by the representative
of Colombia. The, way he has worded paragraph 1. and incorporated it in his suggested p:reamble is entirely appropriate, as regards both
language and form, and it makes a very good
preamble. If, however, the word "adopts" is
retai.Tled, I think the representative of Australia
is correct; we must make a separate paragraph.
The United States delegation would follow
the will of the majority of the Council on either
of the following alternatives: the adoption of
the general phraseology used in the text as it
stands, in the form of a separate paragraph; or
the incorporation of the idea in the preamble,
along the lines suggested by the representative of
Colombia, omitting the word "adopts" but using
the word "following".
I believe that "taking note", suggested by the
representative of Brazil, is not quite as strong in
English as "following". "Following" suggests
that one is actually going along with a certain
.line of thought or recommendation, whereas the
other expression means that one merely takes
note of a recommendation, without suggesting
that one is going along with it.. I thank the representative of Br'azil for his suggestion, but I
would prefer the one made by the representative
of Colombia, if we are to make any change from
the text as it now stands containing the word
"adopts".

j'ai declare me rallier a la suggestion faite par
le representant de la Colombie. La maniere dont
ce dernier a redige le paragraphe 1 et l'a
incorpore dans son projet de preambule est des
plus satisfaisantes, tant du point de vue de la
redaction que du point de vue de la forme, et
ce preambule est excellent. Si toutefois on maintient le mot "adopte", alors je pense que le
representant de l'Australie a raison~ et que nous
devons rediger un paragraphe distinct.
La delegation des Etats-Unis se ralliera, suivant l'avis de la majorite du Conseil; a l'une
des deux solutions suivantes: soit adopter les
termes generaux qui figurent dans le texte tel
qu'il ~t actuellement redige, sous forme d'un
paragraphe distinct; soit incorporer l'idee dans
le preambule et, comme l'a suggere le representant de la Colombie, remplacer le mat "adopte"
par le mot "suivant".
A mon avis, les,mots "prenant acte" proposes
par le representant du Bresil ne sont pas aussi
forts que "suivant". "Suivant" implique qu'on
donne reellement son adhesion a une fa~on de
penser ou a une recommandation, tandis que
l'autre expression signifie que l'on prend simplement note d'une recommandation, sans laisser
entendre qu'on la fait sienne. Je remercie le
representant du Bresil d'avoir fait cette suggestion, mais, si nous decidions de modifier le
texte actuel qui contient le mot "adopte", je
prefererais la formule du representant de la
Colombie.

Mr. L6PEz (Colombia): I believe that this
also has to do with our general approach to the
problem. In our opinion, our suggestions are no
weaker than the others; but they are, perhaps, a.
little more conciliatory, a little more acceptable
from the point of view of those delegations which
so far have expressed their disagreement with the
original United States proposal. To that extent
we believe that it is very important, if the United
States representative has no objection, that we
should leave this phrase irt the preamble, according to our suggestion.

M. L6PEz (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
A mon avis, cette question se rattache egalement
a la maniere generale dont nous abordons le
probleme. Il ne me parait pas que nos sugges- ,
tions soient pius faibles que les autres; elles sont
peut-etre un peu plus empreintes de conciliation,
un peu plus susceptibles d'etreacceptees par les
delegations qui se sont jusqu'a ce jour prononcees contre la proposition initiale des Etats-Unis.
Nous pensons donc qu'il est tres important, si
le representant des Etats-Unis n'y voit pas
d'obstacle, de laisser cette expression dans le
preambule comme nous l'avons propose.

Mr. PARODl (France) (translated from
French): I am in favour of the words "following
in substance the proposals ...", which are suggested by the representative of Colombia. The
term "take note", which might also have been
used, does not go as well-in French at least-.
with the term "in their substance" which follows.
"To take note" suggests a legal finding, that is
to say, something precise which does not fit in
with a general remark like "in their substance".

M. PARODl (Fiance): J'appuie le~ mots "suivant, dans leur substance, les propositions ... ",
qui sont" suggeres par le representant de la
CQlombie. Le terme "prendre acte" qui aurait
pu, lui aussi, etre employe, va moins bien - en
fran~ais tout au moins par rapport au terme
"dans leur substance" qui vient ensuite. "Prendre
acte" evoque une idee de constatation juridique,
c'est-a-dire precise, qui va mal avec une reference generale comme celle qu'evoquent les mots
"dans leur substance".
La meilleure formule, celle que j'appuie en
ce qui me conceme, consiste a reporter le
deuxieme amendement que j'avais propose au
preambule, dans ces termes: "suivant, dans leur
substance, les propositions ... ", ainsi que le
representant de la Colombie fa propose.

The best wording, which I personally would
support, would be that which I proposed in my
second amendment ta the' preamble, namely:
"following in their substance the proposals .•."
as the Colombian representative has suggested.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
If the Colombian text is to be adopted, I object
to the insertion of the word "substance". I do

----_

......

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Si l'on adopte le texte propose
par la Colombie, je m'opposerai a l'inse._rt_i.o.n_
...

~~--~" _."."~._--~_._-"--_._"-----_

...- ...

A

1447

not object to using the word "substance" if there
is to be a separate paragraph, but "following the
substance" of something is not good English, and
the thought behind it is not clear either, in my
opinion. We are following the proposals. That
does not say we are adopting them word for
word, but we are following their spirit and their
intent. The language proposed by Mr. L6pez is
entirely logical as it is. I should not like to have
the first paragraph incorporated in the preamble
with both the words "substance" and "following" used. I should rather have it the way
Mr. L6pez has proposed it.

du mot anglais substance (substance). Je ne
m'oppose pas a ce que l'on emploie le mot
substance, si l'on redige un paragraphe distinct,
mais following the substance (suivant, dans leur
substance) n'est pas correct en anglais; d'autre
part, l'idee que ces mots veulent traduire
n'est pas claire. N ous suivons les propositions.
Cela ne veut pas dire que nous les adoptons
textuellement, mais que nous nous conformons
a leur esprit et a leur intention. Le texte propose
par M. L6pez est tout a fait logique sous sa
forme actuelle. Je n'aimerais pas que l'on
incorpore le premier alinea au preambule
avec les deux mots substance et following. Je
prefererais plutot le text propose par M. L6pez.

Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French): I am sorry, but I cannot agree to the
deletion of the words "in their substance". The
expression: "following the proposals of the majority of the members of the Commission"
means, in French, that they are being followed,
not in a general manner, but purely and simply.
That is why I adhere to the term~ "following in
their substance ..." From the point of view of
written language, the words are perhaps not very
good; it would certainly be bad if we said "following the substance of the proposals". But:
"following in their substance the proposals . . ."
would in my opinion be as good as: '~adopting
in their substance the proposals ..." in French,
at least, and I believe in English too. I think
that the United States representative could
accept this wording.

M. PARODI (France): Je regrette, mai! je ne
peux pas accepter d'abandonner les mots "dans
leur substance". l 'expression: "suivant les propositions de la majorite des membres' de la
Commission" indique, en fran~ais, qu'on les suit,
non pas d'une maniere generale, mais purement
et simplement. C'est pourquoi je tiens au terme:
"suivant, dans leur substance, ... " Les mots ne
sont peut-etre pas excellen~ au point de vue
de la langue ecrite; i1s seraient certainement
mauvais si l'on disait "suivant la substance
des propositions". Mais: "suivant, dans leur
substance, les propositions ... " peut, a mon
sens, aller aussi bien que: "adoptant, dans leur
substance, les propositions ... " en fran~ais, tout
au mains; et, je crois, en anglais aussi. Je pense
que le representant des Etats-Unis pourrait
accepter cette formule.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America) :
I think it may be argued that the expressions
"following. the proposals" and "the proposals, in
their substance" are almost synonymous, so that
if you combine them you have un double affaiblissement dans le texte original. I prefer that the
members of the Council should decide which
expression we should adopt. I would accept the
decision of the Counch either way.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Arnerique) (traduit de l'anglais): On pourrait peut-etre faire
valoir que les expressions "smvant les propositions" et "les propositions dans leur substance"
sont presque synonymes, de sorte qu'en ~es
combinant on obtient "un double affaiblissement
dans le texte original". A mon avis, il serait
preferable que les membres du Conseil se prononcent en faveur de l'une ou l'autre expression.
Pour ma part, je me rangerai a. la decision du
Conseil, queUe qu'elIe soit.

Mr. LAWFORD (United Kingdom): As one of
the English-speaking members of the Council, I
should like to say that "following in their substance" has a rather strange ring to me. It does
not sound like English at an, but it wo.uld not be
the first time that the Cou,lcil has accepted a text
which is not couched in beautiful English. Perhaps, therefore, it does not really matter. One
might have said "following in their spirit," but
"spirit" and "substance" are two completely different things, and I do not think that is what we
mean.

M. LAwFoRD (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
l'anglais): En tant que membre de langue
anglaise, je tiens a faire remarquer que l'expression following in their substance sonne assez mal
a mon oreille. Ce1a ressemble assez peu a de
l'anglais, mais ce ne serait pas la premiere fois
que le Conseil accepterait un texte qui ne soit
pas redige en un anglais parfait. Ce1a n'a done
peut-etre que peu d'importance. On aurait pu
dire following in their spirit (suivant, dans leur
esprit), mais spirit et substance sont qeux choses
entierement differentes, et je ne crois pas que
ce soit la ce que nous voulons exprimer.
PersonneUement, je prefererais la phrase
following the proposals (suivant les propositions) . EUe me paralt, en :fin de compte,
signifier la meme chose et n'etre pas tou" d fait
aussi 1:>arbare.

I.personally would be in favour of saying "followmg the proposals". I think it comes to the
same thing in the end and it does not sound
quite so barbarian.

1'tt7

. Mr. L6PEz (Colombia): I do not know Engh very well, but it seems to me that, if you

M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je ne connais pas tres bien l'anglais, mai! selon

~':r':rO

cannot "follow" the proposals, it is difficult to
see how you can "follow the substance".

I

moi,.si. ~n ne peut "suivre" les ptopositions, il
est difflcile de comprendre comment on pourra
"suivre la substance".

Mr. PARODl (France) (translated from
French): The idea is not to follow the substance, but follow the proposals in their substance. I do not know English very well either;
but I do not think that it would be much more
difficult to follow the proposals in their substance
than to adopt them in their substance.

M. PARODl (France): n ne s'agit pas de suivre
la substance; il s'agit de suivre les propositions
dans leur substance. J e ne suis pas, moi non
plus, competent en anglais; mais je doute qu'il
soit beaucoup plus difficile de suivre des propositions dans leur substance, que de les adopter
dans leur substance.

Mr. LAWFORD ,(United Kingdom): I can
only say that the English language is not as
logical as Mr. Parodi would like it to be.

M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
l'anglais): Tout ce que je puis dire, c'est que la
langue anglaise n'est pas aussi logique que le
voudrait M. Parodi.

The PRESIDENT: The proposed text has now
been distributed to the members of the Council,
and I wonder if we shall be able to finish this
point before we adjourn this evening. I shall
ask the representative of the United States
whether he is ready to adopt the text in its
present wording, and the other members of the
Council whether they desire to make any amendments.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Le texte propose a maintenant ete distribue aux
membres du Conseil. Je ne sais si nous pourrons
terminer l'examen de ce point avant de lever la
seance ce £jir. Je demanderai donc au representant des Etats-Unis s'il est dispose a adopter le
texte sous sa forme actuelle, et aux autres
membres du Conseil s'ils desirent y apporter des
amendements.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America) :
I do not wish to prolong this discussion unduly,
or to haggle over what might not be a matter
of substance. If the majority of the Council
wants this text, the United States delegation will
take it, but I think the last sentence is wretchedly
drafted so far as English is concerned. The
meaning, however, is perfectly clear.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Je ne desire pas prolonger
indument cette discussion ni chicaner sur ce qui
paurrait ne pal> ,;tre une question de fond. Si la
majorite du ConseD adopte ce texte, la delegation des Etats-Unis se rangera a son avis, mais
je pense que, dans le texte anglais tout au moins,
la derniere phrase est redigee de fa.~on pitoyable.
Le sens, toutefois, en est parfait~ment clair.
Je desire signaler egalement que le Secretariat,
au lieu de se servir, pour cette redaetion, du
nouyeau texte qui figure au document Si430;
a de nouveau utilise le texte distribue ce matin
sur papier blanc, qui est une tres mauvaise
traduction anglaise. On a employe le mot studied
au lieu de considered the report, et l'expression
finds that it is concerned with a dispute au lieu
de finds that a dispute exists, the continuance of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace. Le Secretariat s'est aervi,
pour rediger ce document, du mauvais texte
fran~ais que j'aurais cru .:iepuis longtemps
detruit.

I should like to point out also that the Secretariat, in preparing this, has again used the text
distributed this moming, 011 white paper, which
is a very bad English translation, instead of
using the new text contained in document Si430.
It has used the word "studied" instead of "considered the report" and "finds that it is concerned with a dispute" instead of "finds that a
dispute exists, the continuance of which is likely
to endanger the maintenance of international
peace". The Secretariat has used for this the
wrong French translation, one which I had
hoped would have been destroyed by now.
The PRESIDENT: It is true that the text in the
new translation should be the basis of the discussion. The representative of the United States
said that he is ready to accept the last sentence
of the French amendment to the preamble of
his draft resolution, if that is the wish of the
majority of the members.
A number of members have expressed their
views. I should like to know whether any other
members wish to speak.
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I wish to say,
as far as my delegation is concerned, that we
desire just "following the proposals".

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Il est exact que c'est le texte de la nouvelle
traduction qui devrait servir de base a la discussion. Le representant des Etats-Unis a declare
qu'il est dispose a accepter la derniere phrase de
l'amendement fran~ais au preambule de son
projet de resolution, si tel est le vreu de la
majorite du Conseil.
Un certain nombre de membrcf ont deja
donne leur avis. D'autres membres desirent-i1s
prendre la parole?
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Au nom de ma delegation, je declare
que nous preferons la formule following tke
......llI
proposals (suivant les propositions).

p

1449
The PRESIDENT: There are two versions:
"The Security Council, following, in their substance, the proposals" and so on, and "The Security Council, following the proposals . . ."

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Nous avons donc deux textes: "Le Conseil
de securite, suivant, dans leur substance, les
propositions", etc., et "Le Conseil de securite,
suivant les propositions ... "

Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): I think there may
be a third course: ". . . following the principles
embodied in the proposals ..." We are adopting
principles.

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je crois qu'il pourrait meme y avoir une troisieme
version: " ... suivant les principes contenus dans
les propositions ... " Car ce sont des principes
que nous adoptons.

The PRESIDENT: May I ask the representative
of France for his reaction to the remark of the
Syrian representative.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Puis-je demander au representant de la France
ce qu'il pense de l'observation du representant de
la Syrie?
M. PARODl (France) : Je serais assez favorable

Mr. PARODl (France) (translated from
French): I should be quite favourable to the
draft proposed by the representative of Syria;
strictly speaking, however, it is not principles
which are to be found in the conclusions of the
Commission of Investigation, but recommendations. Moreover, if you say "fo~l<?wing in their
principles . " ." you will meet the same difficulty
from the point of view of the English version.

parler des principes qui se trouvent dans les
conclusions de la Commission d'enquete: ce sont
des recommandations. D'autre part, si vous dites:
"suivant, dans leurs principes, ... ", vous retrouverez la meme difficulte au point de vue de la
version anglaise.

Mr. L6PEZ (Colombia): I agree with the
opinion of the representative of France that it is
not a matter of principles, but of very definite
recommendations. I venture to suggest, if it is
acceptable to the French representative and to
the United States delegation, that this last sentence should be modified. We say her~: "therefore resolves that . . .", and that does not go
very well with the text of the following amendments. I would suggest that we place that wording at the beginning of the text, as follows:
"Therefore, the Security Councv., following the
proposals made by the majority of the members
of the Commission of Investigation, resulves ..."
and so on.

M. L6PEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Je partage l'avis du representant de la France.
Il ne s'agit pas ici d'une question de principes,
mais bien de recommandations tres precises. Si
le representant de la France et la delegation des
Etats-Unis n'y voient aucun inconvenient, je
proposerai de modifier la demiere phrase. Nous
disons "Decide, en consequence, de ... ", ce qui
ne s'harmonise pas tres bien avec le texte des
amendements qui suivent. A mon avis, il serait
preferable de placer ce membre de phrase au
debut du texte, comme suit: "En consequence,.
le Conseil de securite, suivant les propositions
formuIees par la majorite des membres de la
Commission d'enquete, decide'\ etc.

The PRESIDENT: As far as correct English is
conserned, it seems to me that the representative
of Colombia is right. The word should be written at the beginning of the text.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais}:
Je crois que le representant de la Colombie a
raison du point de vue de la hngue anglaise.
C'est bien au debut du texte que ces mots
uevraient figurer.

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French): As regards this difficulty-I refer
to the words "followin.g. in substance the proposals ..."-1 am in the same position as the
United States representative. I shall support the
opinion of the majority. Nevertheless, in the
hope of reconciling the two versions, I venture to
suggest that we should say "The Security Coun.,.
cil, giving effect to the proposals of the majority
of the members of the Commission . . ."

M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Be1gique): En ce qui
conceme la difficulte dans laquelle nous nous
trouvons - je me refere aux mots: "suivant,
dans leur substance, les propositions ... " - je
suis dans une position identique a celle du
representant des Etats-Unis: je me rallierai a
l'opinion de la majorite. Toutefois, dans l'espoir
de rapprQt:her les deux formules qui ont ete
presentees, je me risque a faire la suggestion
suivante. On dirait: "Le Conseil de securite,
donnant suite aux propositions de la majorite
des membres de la COIlnnission, ... "

Mr. LAWFORD (United Kingdom): What is
the formula in English-"giving effect to"?

M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
l'anglais): Quelle sera la formule en anglais?
Sera-ce giving effect to?

..

Mr. PARODl (France) (translated from
French): I am prepar~d to accept that wording.
tmNeverth.e.less, I wonc1eI if the proposal to say
~.

a la redaction proposee par le representant de la
Syrie; cependant, ce ne sont pas a proprement

M. PARODI (France): Je suis pret a accepter
cette formule. Cependant, je me demande si la
proposition de dire " ... donnant suite a... ",

145U

ne

donnant suite ~, submitted by the Belgian representative; would not be translated into English
by "following".

presentee par le representant de la Belgique,
se traduirait pas, en anglais, par following.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
I have no objection to that translation, which
would leave the text as the representative of
Colombia has proposed. But I think the more
accurate a.lld precise English translation of
donnant suite a would be "giving effect to".
With all due respect to those who represent the
French language, I think the English meaning
of the words donnant suite ais "giving effect to".

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Je n'ai rien a redire a cette
traduction, qui ne modifie en rien le texte propose par le representant de la Colombie. Mais, a
man sens, une traduction plus exacte et plus
precise en anglais de "doimant suite a" serait
giving efJect to. Que les representants de langue
fran~aise vcuillent bien m'excuser, mais je crois
que les mats "donnant suite a" signifient en
anglais giving efJect to.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia) : My delegation
would object to that, because we do not think
"giving effect to" is correct. "Giving effect"
means that you have established the commission,
and it has performed all its tasks. That is "giving effect" to the proposals. We have not started
to give effect to them yet. So why not just use
the words "following the proposals"?

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Ma delegation ne saurait accepter
cette traduction; en effet, selon nous; giving
efJect to n'est pas exact. Giving effect signifie
que vous avez cree la Commission et que cel1e-ci
s'est acquittee de toutes les taches qui lui etaient
confiees. C'est cda qui est "donner'suite" aux
pr,opositions. Or, nous n'avons pas encore commence a leur donner suite. Pourquoi done
n'emploierions-nous pas simplement les mots
following the proposals (suivant les propositions) ?

Mr. PAROD! (France) (translated from
French): I can only speak for the French language. So far as the French language is con.~erned, the expression suivant les propositions . ..
is in my opinion more precise than the expression donnant suite aux propositions, and I am
under the. impression that, on the contrary, in
English "following" is broader and less precise
than "giving effect". In French, ID any case,
donnant efJet would on the contrary be very
predse; donner efJet is the most precise wording.
Suivant is precise; donnant suite is less precise.
I urge that we say donnant suite an proposed by
the Belgian· delegation.

M. PAROD! (France): Je ne puis pader que
pour la langue fran~aise. En ce qui concerne la
langue _[an~aise, l' expression "suivant les propositions ... " est plus precise, a mon avis, que
l'expression "donnant suite aux propositions", et
j'ai l'impression qu'au contraire, en anglais, following est plus large, mOlls precis que giving
efJect. En tout cas, en fran~ais, "donnant effet"
serait, au contraire, tres precis: "donner effet"
est la formule la plus precise; "suivant" est
preciS; "donnant suite" est mains precll:, J'insiste
pour que naus disions "donnant suite", ainsi que
l'a propose la delegation belge.

The PRESIDENT: Would there be agreement
between the representative of the United States
and the representative of France that the English
text should read "following the proposals", and
the French text donnant suite aux?

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Les representants des Etats-Unis et de la France
seraient-ils d'accord pour employer dans le texte
anglais la formule following the proposals et
dans le texte fran~ais "donnant suite aux"?

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
Without the word "substance"..

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): En supprimant le mat
"substance".

The PRESIDENT: I think both representatives
agree. U~ess other members wish to speak, we
shall finish the discussion on this point.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Je crois que les deux representants sl:>nt d'accord.
4. moins que d'autres membres ne desirent
prendre la parole, nous all"ns considerer ce point
comme regIe.
Je pense done que le representant des EtatSUnls ~cceote le nouveau texte comme faisant
part;.~ de ~S" resolution· et, par consequent,· je
co;:.i.ri.erf; '.le ceci est le "1:exte definitif du
p,·eaubule au projet de resolution propose par
Its Etats-Unis.

I understand that the representatIve of the
United States accepts the np-'t/ text as part of his
resolution, and com~quentiy, I shall consider this
to be the final' text of the preamble cif the draft
resolution pruposed by the United States.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
Before giving the formal approval of my delegation, may I inquire whether t~is text consists

I

M, JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduii de l'anglais): Avant d'app~ouver formellement le texte au nom de ma delegation, je
.....• ~

1451
of the former preamble and the former para- I voudrais savoir s'il est constitue par l'ancien
graph 1 combined? Will you read the text, or preambule et 1'ancien paragraphe 1 combines.
will the Assistant Secretary-General read the Pourriez-vous donner lecture du texte en anglais,
text in English?
ou bien le Secretaire general adjoint accepterat-il de le faire?
Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Legal Affairs): The whole text reads
as follows:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
des questions juridiques) (traduit de l'angltlis) :
Le texte est le suivant:

"The Security Council, being primarily responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, by virtue of Article 24 of the
Charter, having considered the report submitted
by the Commission of L~vestigation established
by the Council's resolution of 19 December
1946, finds that a dispute exists the continuance
of which is likely to endanger the m~intenance of
international peace and security. Therefore:

"The Security Council, being primarily
responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, by virtue of Article 24 of
the Charter, having considered the report submitted by the Commission of Investigation
established by the ':;ouncil's resolution of 19
December 1946, finds that a dispute exists, the
continuance of which is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Therefore:

"The Security Council, following the proposals made by the majority of the members of
the Commission of InvestigatioI'l, resolves . . ."

"The Security Council, following the proposals
made by the majority of the members of the
Commission of Investigation, resolves . .. "

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
I regret to seem to cavil over words; but the text
as read out is still the objectionable text which
was the first French translation of this morning,
with certain chan3'es. It changes the language
of the Charter which had been incorporated in
our original text; for example, it reads " . . .
being primarily responsible for the maintenance
of international peace ..." instead of " ... having primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security..."

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Je regrette de donner
1'impression de vouloir ergoter sur les mots, mais
ce que l'on vient de nous lire est encore le tcxte
discutable de la premiere traduction de ce matin,
auquel on a apporte quelQUe8 modifications. Ce
texte ne reproduit pas les termes de la Charte
qui avaient ete inclus dans notre texte original;
on lit, par exemple: being primarily responsible
for the maintenance of international peace, au
lieu de: having primary responsibility for the
maintenance of iT cernational peace and security.

It is a small thing, but I do not see why the
text of document 8/430, instead of the tentative
translation made -this morning, should not be
used as a basis for the new draft.

C'est un point de detail, mais je ne comprends
pas pourquoi on ne fonderait pas le nouveau
texte sur le document 8/430, au lieu de le fonder
sur la traduction provisoire faite ce matin.

The PRESIDENT: The representative of the
United States is correct and I shall see to it that
his suggestion is followed.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Le representant des Etats-Unis a raison et je
veillerai a ce que 1'on tienne compte de sa suggestion.
J e crois que ceci termine notre examen du
preambule et de ce qui etait le deuxieme
amendement.
Avant de lever la seance, j'aimerais ajouter
simplement quelques mots' en ma qualite de
representant de la POLOGNE. Le representant de
la Pologne a re~u une lettre du representant
de la Grece concernant un point du discours
qu'il a prononce le 17 juillet1 • Dans ce discours,
il a fait allusion a certaines propositions formulees par les partis grecs, membres de la coalition
de I'EAM, et, en particulier, a une proposition
concernant la neutralite de la Grece. "Cette
proposition est appuyee, non seulement par les
partis de 1'EAM, mais par tous les partis de
I'opposition grecque, notamment si nies renseignements sont exacts, par le parti liber~J de
M. Sophoulis."

I think this closes our consideration of the preamble and what was the second amendment.
Before I adjourn the meeting, I should just
like to say a few words as the ·represen1.~tive of
POLAND. The representative of Poland has received a letter from the representative of Greece
concerning one point in the speech he gave on
17 July.! This speech mentioned certain proposals of the Greek parties of the coalition of
EAM, in particular a proposal concerning the
neutrality of Greece. "This proposal has the
support, not only of the parties of the EAM, but
of all the parties of the Greek Opposition, including, if I am correctly informed, the Liberal
Party of Mr. Sophoulis."

...'

Y 1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second

~~~.:.,,~~,_ 159th meeting.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Dewaeme Annce, No 59, 15geme seance.

1452
The representative of Greece informs me of
the following: Mr. Sophoulis, leader of the
Liberal Party of Greece, called on the Prime
Minister of Greece on 18 July and categorically
denied that these are his views. More specifically,
he denied that he approved of the EAM terms
with respect to a general amnesty, to the neutralization of Greece and to the withdrawal of foreign troops.
I should like to submit this information to the
members of the Council,

Le representant & la Grece me fait coniiaitre
ce qui suit: le 18 juillet, M. Sophoulis, president
du parti liberal de Grece, a rendu visite au
Premier Ministre de la Grece, et a categoriquement dementi que telles fussent ses vues. Il a
precise, notamment, qU'il n'approuvait pas la
position de l'EAM en ce qui concerne une
amnistie generale, la neutralisation de la Grece
et le retrait des troupes etrangeres.
Je tiens a communiquer cette information aux
membres du Conseil.

Mr. DENDRAMIS (Greece) (translated from
French): I thank you, Mr. President, for having
been good enough to bring this communication
to the notice of the members of the Council.

M. DENDRAMIS (Grece): Je vous remercie,
Monsieur le President, d'avoir bien voulu faire
part de cette communication aux membres du
Conseil.

The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

La seance est levee a 18 h. 15.

A

SAtES· AGENTS OF TJNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS·
,

,

DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Argentina-Argentine
Editorial Sudamericana
S. A.
Alsina 500
BUENOS AIRES

Australia-AustraUe
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.

Belgium-Belgique
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A
14-22 rue du Persil
BRUXELLES

Bolivia-BoUvie
Libreria Cientifica y
Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ

Canada'
The R yerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO

Chile-ChiU
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO

China-Chine
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI

Costa Rica-Costa-Rica
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JOSE

Cuba

Ecuador--Equateur
Munoz Hermanos y Cia
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10-24
GUAYAQUIL

Egypt-Egypte
Librairie ':La Renaissance
d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CAIRO

Finland-Finlande
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI

France
Editions A Pedone
13, rue Souffiot
PARIS, Ve

Greece-Grece
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES

Guatemala
Jose Goubaud
Goubaud & Cia Ltda.
Sucesor
Sa Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA

Haiti-Haiti
Max Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
Bolte postale III-B
PORT-AU-PRINCE

India-Inde
Oxford Book & Stationery
Co.
Scindia .House
NEW DELHI

La Casa Belga
'Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA HABANA

Iran

Czechoslovakia
T checoslovaquie

Iraq-lrak

F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1

Denmark-Danemark
Einar Munskgaard
Norregade 6
KJOBENHAVN

Dominican Republic
Republique Dominicaine

Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD

Lebanon-Liban
Librairie universelle
BEYROUTH

L'uXembourg
Librairie J. Schumn:,c'
Place Guillauine
LUXEMBOURG

Libreria Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartado 656
CIUDAD TRUJILLO

Netherlands--Pays-Bas

Printed in the U.S.A.

Price in the United States: 50 cents

N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
s'GRAVENHAGE

New Zealand
N ouvelle-Zelande
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
WELLINGTON

Norway-Norvege
Norsk Bokimport A/S
Edv. Storms Gate 1
OSLO

Philippines
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN

Sweden-Suede
A-B. C. B. Fritzes Kungl.
Hofbokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM

Switzerland-Suisse
Librairie Payot S. A
LAUSANNE,GENEv~,VEVEY,

MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I

Syria-Syrie
Librairie universelle
DAMAS

Turkey--Turquie
Librairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU-IsTANBUL

Union of South Mrica
Union Sud-Africaine
Central News Agency Ltd.
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG, CAPETOWN,
DURBAN

United Kingdom
Royaume-Uni
H.M. Stationery Office

p.a. Box 569

LONDON, S.B. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops at
LONDON, EDINBURGH,
MANCHESTER, CARDIFF,
BELFAST and BRISTOL

United States of America
Etats-Unis d'Amerique
International Documents
Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.

Yugoslavia-Yougoslavie
Drzavno Preduzece
J ugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska Ul. 36
BEOGRAD
