Reeolutions adopted without referenee to a Main Committee

mittee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Requests the Special Committee, in its preparation of a draft declaration or a suggested programme
of action for consideration at the special commemorative
meeting, to co-operate as appropriate with other United
Nations bodies concemed and, in addition to carrying
out the other specific tasks assigned to it in the report,
to follow, in consultation with the Committee for the
Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations, the
implementation of the above-mentioned recommendations and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its twenty-fifth session.
1821st plenary meeting,
4 December 1969.
2536 (XXIV). Report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received and examined the report of the
Intemational Atomic Energy Agency to the General
Assembly for the year 1968-1969, 15
l. Takes note of the report of the Intemational
Atomic Energy Agency;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transrnit to
the Director-General of the Intemational Atornic
Energy Agency the records of the twenty-fourth session
of the General Assembly relating to the Agency's activities;
3. Invites the International Atornic Energy Agency
to take these records into account in its future work.
1828th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2548 (XXIV). lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Decernber
1960,
Recalling its resolutions 1654 (XVI) of 27 Novernber 1961, 1810 (XVII) of 17 Decernber 1962, 1956
(XVIII) of 11 December 1963, 1970 (XVIII) of 16
December 1963, 2105 (XX) of 20 December 1965,
2189 (XXI) of 13 Decernber 1966, 2326 (XXII) of
16 December 1967 and 2465 (XXIII) of 20 Decernber 1968,
Recalling also its resolution 2425 (XXIII) of 18
Decernber 1968 concerning the item entitled "Activities
of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southem Rhodesia, Namibia and Territories
under Portuguese domination and in all other Territories under colonial dornination and efforts to eliminate colonialisrn, apartheid and racial discrimination
in southem Africa",
1 5 International Atomic Energy Agency, Annual Report of
the Board of Governors to the General Conference,
1 July 1968-30 June 1969 (Vienna, July 1969) and supplementary report; transmitted to the Members of the General
Assembly by notes of the Secretary-General (A/7637 and

A/7637/Add.1).

5

Recalling further its resolution 2426 (XXIII) of
18 December 1968 concerning the implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the intemational institutions associated
with the United Nations,
Noting with grave concern that nine years after the
adoption of the Declaration rnany Territories are still
under colonial domination,
Deploring the refusal of the colonial Powers, especially Portugal and South Africa, to irnplement the
Declaration and other relevant resolutions on the
question of decolonization, particularly those relating
to the Territories under Portuguese domination, Namibia and Southern Rhodesia,
Bearing in mind that the continuation of colonialism
and its manifestations, including racism, apartheid and
activities of foreign economic and other interests which
exploit colonial peoples, and the attempts of sorne
colonial Powers to suppress national liberation movements by repressive activities against colonial peoples
are incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Deploring the attitude of certain States which, in
defiance of the pertinent resolutions of the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, continue to cooperate with the Govemments of Portugal and South
Africa and with the illegal racist minority régime in
Southern Rhodesia,
Recalling its resolution 2446 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 relating to the rneasures to achieve the rapid
and total elimination of all forms of racial discrimination in general and of the policy of apartheid in particular, especially paragraph 8 thereof,
Recalling the Manifesto on Southem Africa, 19 adopted
by the Assembly of Heads of State and Govemment of
the Organization of African Unity at its sixth ordinary
session,
Recalling that the year 1970 will be the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration,
l. Reafjirms its resolution 1514 (XV) and ali its
other resolutions on the question of decolonization;
2. Approves the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implernentation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples covering its work during
1969, 17 including the programme of work envisaged by
the Special Cornmittee during 1970;
3. Urges all States, in particular the administering
Powers, and the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations
including the various prograrnmes in the United
N ations system, to give effect to the recommendations
contained in the report of the Special Committee for
the speedy implementation of the Declaration and the
relevant United Nations resolutions;
4. Declares that the continuation of colonial rule
threatens international peace and security and that the
16 See O/Jicial Records of the General Assembly Twenty
fourth ~ession, Annexes, agenda item 106, document A/7754:
17
Ib,d., Twenty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/
7623/Rev.1}.

6

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

practice of apartheid and all fonns of racial discrimination constitute a crime against humanity;
S. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of the colonial peoples to exercise their right
to self-determination and independence, notes with satisfaction the progress made in the colonial Territories
by the national liberation movements, both through
their struggle and through reconstruction programmes,
and urges all States to provide moral and material
assistance to them;
6. Requests a1l States, as well as the specialized
agencies and intemational institutions, to withhold
assistance of any kind from the Govemments of Portugal and South Africa and from the illegal racist
minority régime in Southern Rhodesia until they renounce their policy of colonial domination and racial
discrimination;
1. Reiterates its declaration that the practice of
using mercenaries against movements for national liberation and independence is punishable as a criminal act
and that the mercenaries themselves are outlaws, and
calls upan the Govemments of all countries to enact
legislation declaring the recruitment, financing and
training of mercenaries in their territory to be a punishable offence and prohibiting their nationals from serving
as mercenaries;
8. Requests the colonial Powers to dismantle without further delay their military bases and installations
in colonial Territories and to refrain from establishing
new ones;
9. Condemns the policies, pursued by certain colonial Powers in the Territories under their domination,
of imposing non-representative régimes and constitutions, strengthening the µosition of foreign economic
and other interests, misleading world public opinion
and encouraging the systematic inffux of foreign immigrants white evicting, disµlacing and transferring the
indigenous inhabitants to other areas;
1O. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of the Declaration in all Territories which
bave not yet attained independence, and in particular
to formulate specific proposals for the elimination of
the remaining manifestations of colonialism;
11. Requests the Special Committee to make concrete suggestions which could assist the Security Council
in considering appropriate measures under the Charter
of the United Nations with regard to developments in
colonial Territories which are likely to threaten international peace and security, and recommends the
Council to take sucb suggestions fully into consideration;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the compliance of Member States with the
Declaration and with other relevant resolutions on the
question of decolonization, particularly those relating
to the Territories under Portuguese domination,
Southem Rhodesia and Namibia, and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session;
13. Invites the Special Committee to continue to
pay particular attention to the small Territories and to
recommend to the General Assembly the most appropriate methods and also the steps to be taken to enable
the populations of those Territories to exercise fully
their right to setf-determination and independence;
14. Urges the administering Powers to co-operate
fully with the Special Committee by permitting the
access of visiting groups to the colonial Territories in

order to secure first-hand information concerning the
Territories and to ascertain the wishes and aspirations
of the inhabitants of those Territories under their administration;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard
to the suggestions of the Special Committee, to continue to take concrete measures through all the media
at his disposal, including publications, radio and television, to give widespread and continuous publicity to
the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, to the situation in the colonial Territories
and to the continuing struggle for liberation being
waged by the colonial peoples;
16. Requests Member States, in particular the administering Powers, to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral in promoting the large-scale dissemination of
information on the work of the United Nations in the
implementation of the Declaration;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
the facilities necessary for the implementation of the
present resolution.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2575 (XXIV). Fourth lnternational Conference
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy

The General Assembly,
Reaf]irming its resolution 2406 (XXIII) of 16
December 1968 conceming the holding of the Fourth
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of
Atomic Energy,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 18
1. Endorses the proposals contained in the report of
the Secretary-General;
2. Approves the expenditures proposed for 1970
by the Secretary-General in his report;
. 3. Notes the Secretary-General's estimated expend1tures for 1971 and 1972 and requests him to advise
the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session of any
changes in those estimates;
4. Awaits with interest the draft agenda of the
United Nations Scientific Advisory Committee;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, with the continuing assistance of the United Nations Scientific Advisory Committee, in close co-operation with the International Atomic Energy Agency and in consultation
with appropriate specialized agencies, to continue preparations for the Fourth Intemational Conference on
the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, to be held at
Geneva for eight or nine working days on convenient
dates in 1971;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To transmit the draft agenda proposed by the
United Nations Scientific Advisory Committee to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session, including
whatever suggestions and comments he may deem
appropriate;
( b) To report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-fifth session on the preparations for the Conference.
1833rd plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
18 lbid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 22,
document A/7823/Rev.2.
