General ANembly--81idh Senion

76

Nations and the Camesie Foundation conceming the use of
the premises of the Peace Palace at The Hague as contained
in annex A to General Assembly resolution 84 (I), adopted
by the General Assembly on 11 December 1946, shall be
amended to read as follows :
"Article II

"The annual contribution payable by the International
Court of Justice in respect to the use of the Peace Palace is
hereby fixed at 68,400 Netherlands florins net."
2. This. Supplementary Agreement shall enter into fotcc as
of 1 January 1952.

587 (VI). United Nations Joint Staff Penaion
Fund: annual report of the Uaited Nations
Joint Staff Pemion Board
The General Assembly
Takes note of the annual report 18 of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board for the year ended
31 December 1950 and of the supplementary report 17
as of 31 May 1951.
360th plenary meeting,
12 January 1952.

598 (VI). Staff Regul■tiom of the United Nations
The Gene,-al Assembly
Adopts as the Staff Regulations of the United Nations the regulations annexed to the present resolution.
These regulations, which shall supersede all previous
staff regulations, shall become effective on 1 March
1952.
372nd meeting,
2 Febrnary 1952.
ANNEX

StaO Regulation• oJ the United Nationa

Scope and Purpose
The Staff Regulations embody the fundamental conditions of
""ice and the basic rights, duties and obligations of the
United Nations Secretariat. They represent the broad principles
of penonnel policy for the staffing and administration of the

Seerete,riat. The Secretary-Ge~ral, as the Chief Administrative Officer, shall provide and enforce such Staff Rules consistent with these principles as he considers necessary.
ARTICLE I

Duties, obligations and privileges

1.1. Members of the Secretariat are international civil ser-

588 (VI). United

Nations
system

telecommunication•

The Gener-al Assembly
Takes note of the report 18 of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations telecommunications system.
360th plena,-y meeting,
12 January 1952.
589 (VI). Headquarters of the United Nations
The Gene,.al Assembly

1. Takes note of the report 19 of the Secretary-Gen~
eral-on the Headquarters of the United Nations ;
2. Decides that the Headquarters Advisory Committee, established by General Assembly resolution 182
(II) of 20 November 1947, shall be continued with
the existing membership;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its seventh session on the progress
of construction of the Headquarters.
372nd plenary meeting,
2 Feb,-ua,-y 1952.

11
See Official Rec01'ds of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Supplement No. 8.
u Ibtd.
18
See document A/1919.
18
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 46, document A/1895.

vants. Their responsibilities are not 'national but exclusively

international. By accepting appointment, they pledge themselves
to discharge their functions and to regulate their conduct with
the interests of the United Nations only in view.
1.2. Staff members are subject to the authority of the
Secretary-General and to assignment by him to any of the
aetivities or offices of the United Nations. They are responsible to him in the exercise of their functions. The whole time
of staff members shall be at the disposal of the SecrctaryGeneral. The Secretary-General shall establish a normal workin1 week.
1.3. In the performance of their duties members of the
Secretariat shall neither seek nor accept instructions from
~ government or from any other authority external to the
Organization.
).4. Members of the Secretariat shall conduct themselves

al ~I times in a manner befitting their status as international
civil servants. They shall not engage in any activity that is
incompatible with the proper discharge of their duties with the
United Nations. They shall avoid any action and in particular
any kind of public pronouncement which may adversely reflect
on their status. While they arc not expected to give up their
national sentiments or their political and religious convictions,
they shall at all times bear in mind the reserve and tact incumbent upon them by reason of their international status.
1.5. Staff members shall exercise the utmost discretion in
re,ard to all matters of official business. They shall not communicate to any person any information known to them by
reason of their official position which has not been made
public, except in the course of their duties or by authorization
of the Secretary-General. Nor shall they at any time use such
information to private advantage. These obligations do not
cease upon separation from the Secretariat.
1.6. No member of the Secretariat shall accept any honour,
decoration, favour, gift or fee from any government or from
any other source external to the Organization during the period
of his appointment, except for war service.
1.7. Any member of the Secretariat who becomes a candidate for a public office of a political character shall resign
from the Secretariat.

77

Re1olution1 adopted on report• of the Fifth Committee
--------------=----___:;'--------------------1.8. The immunities and privileges attached to the United
Nations by virtue of Article 105 of the Charter are conferred
in the interests of the Organization. These privileges and immunities furnish no excuse to the staff members who enjoy
them for non-performance of their private obligations or
failure to observe laws and police regulations. In any case
where these privileges and immunities arise, the staff member
shall immediately report to the Secretary-General, with whom
alone it rests to decide whether ·they shall be waived.
1.9. Members of the Secretariat shall subscribe to the following oath or declaration :

"I solemnly swear (undertake, affirm, promise) tQ exercise
in all loyalty, discretion and conscience the functions entrusted to me as an international civil servant of the United
Nations, to discharge these functions and regulate my conduct with the interests of the United Nations only in view,
and not to seek or accept instructions in regard to the performance of my duties from any government or other authority external to the Organization".
1.10. The oath or declaration shall be made orally by the
Secretary-General and Assistant Secretaries-General at a public meeting of the General Assembly and by all other mem~
of the Secretariat before the Secretary-General or his authorized deputy.
ARTICLE

II

Classification of posts and staff
2.1. In conformity with principles laid down by the General
Assembly, the Secretary-General shall make appropriate provision for the classification of posts and staff according to the
nature of the duties and responsibilities required.
ARTICLE

III

Salm-ies and related allowances

3.1. Salaries of staff members shall be fixed by the Secretary-General in accordance with the provisions of annex I to
the present regulations.

32. The Secretary-General shall establish a scheme for the
payment of children's allowances and education grants under
the conditions specified in annex IV to the present regulations.
ARTICLE IV
Appointment and promotion

4.1. As stated in Article 101 of the Charter, the power of
appointment of staff members rests with the Secretary-General.
Upon appointment each staff member shall receive a letter of
appointment in accordance with the provisions of annex II to
the present regulations and signed by the Secretary-General or
by an official in the name of the Secretary-General.
4.2. The paramount consideration in the appointment, transfer or promotion of the staff shall be the necessity for securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity.
Due regard shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the
staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible.
4.3. In accordance with the principles of the Charter, selection of staff members shall be made without distinction as to
race, sex or religion. So far as is practicable, selection shall
be made on a competitive basis.
4.4. Subject to the provisions of Article 101, paragraph 3,
of the Charter, and without prejudice to the recruitment of
fresh talent at all levels, the fullest regard shall be had, in
filling vacancies, to the requisite qualifications and experience
of persons already in the service of the United Nations. This
consideration shall also apply on a reciprocal basis, to the
specialized agencies brought into relationship with the United
Nations.

4.5. Appointments of Assistant Secretaries-General, Pi-;ncipal Directors and officials of comparable status shall nom1ally
be for a period of five years, subject to prolongation or renewal. Other staff members shall be granted either permanent
or temporary appointments under such terms and conditions
consistent with these regulations as the Secretary-General may
prescribe.
4.6. The Secretary-General shall establish appropriate medical stanc\ards which staff members shall be required to meet
before appointment.
ARTICLE V
Annual and special leave
Staff members shall be allowed appropriate annual

5.1.
leave.
5.2. Special leave may be authorized by the Secretary-General in exceptional cases.
5.3. Eligible staff members shall be granted home leave
once in every two years. A staff member whose home country
is the country of his official duty station or who continues to
reside in his home country while performing his official duties
shall not be eligible for home leave.
ARTICLE VI

Social Security
6.1. Provision shall be made for the participation of staff
members in the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund in
accordance with the regulations of that Fund.

6.2. The Secretary-General shall establish a scheme of social
security for the staff, including provisions for health protection, sick leave and maternity leave, and reasonable compensation in the event of illness, accident or death attributable to the
performance of official duties on behalf of the United Nations.
ARTICLE VII

Tr<rvel and remc,val expenses
7.1. Subject to conditions and definitions prescribed by the
Secretary-General, the United Nations shall in appropriate cases
pay the travel expenses of staff members and their dependents.

7.2. Subject to conditions and definitions prescribed by the
Secretary-General, the United Nations shall pay removal costt
for staff members.
ARTICLE VIII

Staff relations
8.1. (a) A Staff Council, elected by the staff, shall be
established for the purpose of ensuring continuous contact
between the staff and the Secretary-General. The Council shall
be entitled to make proposals to the Secretary-General for improvements in the situation of staff members, both as regards
their conditions of work and their general conditions of life.
(b) The Staff Council shall be composed in such a way as
to afford equitable representation to all levels of the staff.
(c) Election of the Staff Council shall take place annually
under regulations drawn up by the Staff Council and agreed
to by the Secretary-General.

8.2. The Secretary-General shall establish joint administrative machinery with staff participation to advise him regarding personnel policies and general questions of staff welfare
and to make to him such proposals as it may desire for amendment of the Staff Regulations and Rules.
ARTICLE

JX

Separation from service
9.1. (a) The Secretary-General may terminate the appointment of a staff member who holds a permanent appointment
and whose probationary period has been completed, if the

General Auembly-Sixth Seuion

78

necessities of the service require abolition of the post or reduction of the staff, if the services of the individual concerned
prove unsatisfactory, or if he is, for reasons of health, incapacitated for further service.
(b) The Secretary-General may terminate the appointment
of a staff member with a fixed-term appointment prior to the
expiration date for any of the reasons specified in paragraph
(a) above, or for such other rea,on as may be specified in the
letter of appointment.
( c) Jn the case of all other staff members, including staff
members serving a probationary period for a permanent appointment, the Secretary-General may at any time terminate
the appointment, if, in his opinion, such action would be in the
interest of the United Nations.
9.2. Staff members may resign from the Secretariat upon
giving the Secretary-General the notice required under the
terms of their appointment.
9.3. If the Secretary-General terminates an appointment the
staff member shall be given such notice and such indemnity
payment as may be applicable under the Staff Regulations and
Staff Rules. Payments of termination indemnity shall be made
by the Secretary-General in accordance with the rates and
conditions specified in annex III to the present regulations.
9.4. The Secretary-General shall establish a scheme for the
payment of repatriation grants within the maximum rates and
under the conditions specified in annex IV to the present
regulations.
9.5. Staff mem hers shall not be retained in active service
beyond the age of sixty years. The Secretary-General may, in
the interest of the Orgaaization, extend this age limit in
exceptional cases.
ARTICLE

X

Disciplinary measures
10.1. The Secretary-General may establish administrative
machinery with staff participation which will be available to
advise him in disciplinary cases.
10.2. The Secretary-General may impose disciplinary measures on staff members whose conduct is unsatisfactory.

He may summarily dismiss a member of the staff for serious
misconduct.
ARTICLE

XI

Appeals
11.1. The Secretary-General shall establish administrative
machinery with staff participation to advise him in case of
any appeal by staff members against an administrative decision
alleging the non-observance of their terms of appointment,
including all pertinent regulations and rules, or against disciplinary action.
11.2. The United Nations Administrative Tribunal shall,
under conditions prescribed in its statute, hear and pass judgment upon applications from staff members alleging non-obser-

vance of their terms of appointment, including all pertinent
regulations and rules.
ARTICLE XII

General provisions
12.1. These regulations may be supplemented or amended
by the General Assembly, without prejudice to the acquired
rights of staff members.
12.2. The Secretary-General shall report annually to the
General. Assembly such Staff Rules and amendments thereto
as he may make to implement these regulations.
Annex I

Salary scales and related provi,ion,

1. An Assistant Secretary-General shall receive a salary of
$US 23,000 (subject to the staff assessment plan at the rates
laid down in General Assembly resolution 239 (III) of 18
November 1948 and to such changes as may be directed from
time to time by the General Assembly) together with an
allowance varying from $US 7,000 to $US 10,000 at the Secretary-General's discretion. The allowances for Assistant Secretaries-General are deemed to include all representation (including hospitality) and special allowances, such as housing, education and children's allowances, but not such reimbursable
allowances as travel, subsistence and removal costs upon
appointment, transfer or termination of appointment with the
Organization, official travel and home leave travel.
2. A Principal Director shall receive a salary of $US 17,000
rising after two years of satisfactory service to $US 18,000,
(subject to the staff assessment plan at the rates laid down in
General Assembly resolution 239 (III) and to such changes
as may be directed from time to time by the General Assembly, and to salary differentials wherever applied) and if
otherwise eligible shall receive the allowances which are available to staff members generally. In addition, he shall receive a
representation allowance varying from $US 1,000 to $US 3,500,
at the Secretary-General's discretion, provided that the incumbent of the post of Executive Assistant to the Secretary-General at the time the present annex is adopted may receive a
representation allowance up to and not exceeding $US 5,500.
3. A Director shall receive a salary of $US 15,000 rising in
two-yearly increments of $US 800 each to $US 17,400 (subject
to the staff assessment plan at the rates laid down in General
Assembly resolution 239 (III) and to such changes as may be
directed from time to time by the General Assembly, and to
salary differentials wherever applied) and if otherwise eligible
shall receive the allowances which are available to staff members generally. In addition, the Secretary-General is authorized
at his discretion to grant in special cases a representation allowance up to an amount of $US 1,500.
4. Except as provided in paragraph 6 of the present annex,
the salary scales for staff members in the Principal Officer and
Director category and in the Professional category shall be as
follows ( subject to the staff assessment plan at the rates laid
down in General Assembly resolution 239 (III) and to such
changes as may be directed from time to time by the General
Assembly, and to salary differentials wherever applied) :

_79

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Fifth CommittE"e
SALARY SCALES
(Subject to the staff assessment plan at the rates laid down in General Assembly resolution
239 (III), to such changes as may be directed from time to time by the General Assembly and
to salary differentials wherever applied.)
sr.pI
'us

Step III
'us

St,P IV
,us

Step V
,us

Step VI
'us

18,000
15,800.
14,000

16,600
14,670

17,400
15,400

16,200

17,000

11,690
9,460
7,600
6,000
4,500

12,080
9,7W
7,870
6,270
4,750

12,500
10,150
8,180
6,530
5,000

13,000
10,540
8,500
6,800
5,250

13,500
10,920
8,820
7,070
5,500

Step II
,us

s,,,z

Step VII
$ us

Step VIII
,us

Sut,IX
,us

14,000
11,310
9,140
7,330
5,750

14,500
11',690
9,460
7,600
6,000

15,000
12,0ID

,us

Principal Officer and Director Category
Principal Director .... 17,000
Director .............. 15,000
Principal Officer ....... 13,330
Professional CategMy

Senior Officer ......... 11,310
First Officer ........... 9,140
Second Officer ........ 7,330
5,750
Associate Officer
Assistant Officer ...... 4,250

5. Salary increments within the levels set forth in paragraph 4 of the present annex shall be awarded annually on the
basis of satisfactory service, provided that the period of satisfactory service required for increments to any salary step above
$15,000 shall be two years.
6. The Secretary-General shall determine the salary rates
to be paid to personnel specifically engaged for conferences and
other short-term service, to consultants, to field service personnel, and to technical assistance experts and social welfare
advisers.

7. The Secretary-General shall :fix the salary scales for staff
members in the General Service category and the salary or
wage rates for manual workers, normally on the basis of the
best prevailing conditions of employment in the locality of the
United Nations office concerned, provided that the SecretaryGeaeral may, where he deems it appropriate, establish rules
and salary limits for payment of a non-resident's allowance to
General Service staff members recruited from outside the local
area.
8. The Secretary-General shall establish rules under which
an extra payment may be paid to staff members in the General
Service category who pass an appropriate test and demonstrate
continued proficiency in the use of two or more official languages, such payment to be equivalent to an additional step
increment which would continue beyond the maximum of the
salary level of the staff member concerned.
9. The Secretary-General may adjust the basic salary rates
provided in paragraphs I, 2, 3 and 4 for duty stations away
from Headquarters, by the application of salary differentials
~~ich take into account relative costs of living, standards of
hvmg and related factors; provided that initial differentials
~hall be_ not less than 5 per cent with minimum adjustments
m multiples of 5 per cent, and provided further that these
differentials shall be applied only to 75 per cent of base salaries.

(3) The date at which the staff member is required to enter
upon his duties ;
( 4) The period of appointment, the notice required to terminate it and the period of probation, if any;
(5) The category, level, commencing rate of salary, and if
increments are allowable, the scale of increments, and the ma¥imum attainable;
(6) Any special conditions which may be applicable.
B. A copy of the Staff Regulations and of the Staff Rules
shall be transmitted to the staff member with the letter of appointment. In accepting appointment the staff member shall
state that he has been made acquainted with and accepts the
conditions laid down in the Staff Regulations and in the Staff
Rules.
Annex III
Termination indemnity

Staff members whose appointments are terminated shall be
paid an indemnity in accordance with the following provisions:
(a) Exceptasprovidedin (d) and (e) below,thefollowing
schedule shall apply to members holding permanent appointments or temporary appointments which are not for a :fixed
term;
Mo11ths of btJSe salary or wao•

,_!I

Compln,d
of s,n,.
Ke i11 th• S •crdoriot

0
1

Letters of appointment

A. The letter of appointment shall state:
(1) That the appointment is subject to the provisions of the
Staff Regulations and of the Staff Rules applicable to the
category of ,ap?ointment in q~estion, and to changes which may
be duly made m such regula!Ions and rules from time to time;
(2) The nature of the appointment;

Co11/iNKed P"'"°"""

appoi11tmnats

not applicable
not applicable
3

nil

.s

5

1
1
2
3
4

6

6

5

2
Annex II

12,500
10,150

9,790
7,870

3
4

7
8

9or more

3
4

7

8
9

6

7
8

(b) Except as provided in (d) and (e) below, staff members who have temporary appointments for a fixed term of
over six months which are terminated prior to the expirati011

ao

General Auembly~th Seaaion

date specified in the letter of appointment shall be paid five
days' indemnity pay for each, month of uncompleted service,
but not less than thirty working days' indemnity pay.
( c) Indemnity pay shall be calculated on the basis of the
staff member's base salary or wages at the time of termination.
(d) No indemnity payment shall be made to:
A staff member who resigns, except where termination
notice has been given and the termination date agreed upon;
A staff member who has a temporary appointment which
is not for a fixed term and which is terminated during the
first year of service ;
A staff member who has a temporary appointment for a
fixed term which is completed on the expiration date specified in the letter of appointment.
A staff member who is summarily dismissed;
A staff member who abandons his post;
A staff member who is retired under the United Nations
Joint Staff PensiOfl Fund Regulations.
(e) Staff members specifically engaged for conference and
other short-term service or for service with a mission, as consultants, or as experts, and staff members who are locally recruited for service in established offices away from Headquarters may be paid termination indemnity if and as provided
in their letters of appointment.
Annex IV

Children'• allmc,ance, education 11ran1 and
repatriation 11rant

Full-time members of the staff, with the exception of
those specifically excluded by resolution of the General Assembly, shall be entitled to a children's allowance of $US 200 per
annum in respect of each child under the age of eighteen years,
or, if the child is in full-time attendance at a school or a university (or similar educational institution), or is totally disabled under the age of twenty-one years; provided that, if both
parents are members of the staff of the United Nations, only
one allowance will be paid in respect of each of their children;
and provided further that, where the Secretary-General deems
it advisable, no allowance or an allowance of an amount other
than $US 200 may be paid under special circumstances, as for
uample, short-term assignments or assignments at duty stations where the levels of United Nations salary scales are fixed
at levels varying from the Headquarters scale.
2. Each full-time member of the staff, with the exception of
those specifically excluded by resolution of the General Assem.bly, entitled to receive a children's allowance under paragraph
1 above, who is employed by the United Nations in a country
-other than his own country, as specified in: his letter of appointment, shall be entitled to the following education grant:
(a) The sum of $US 200 per annum for each child, in re.spect of whom a children's allowance is payable, in full-time
attendance at a school or a university in his home country; provided that where a child attended such an educational institution for a period of less than two-thirds of any .one scholastic
year, the grant shall be reduced to sui;h proportion of $US 200
as the period so attended bears to a full scholastic year;
(b) Once in each scholastic year the travelling expenses of
the outward and return journey of such a child by a route
approved by the Secretary-General ;
(c) Should staff members elect to send their children to
special national schools in the area where they are serving, in-eluding international schools orga_nized for children of United
Nations staff members, rather than to schools in their home
countries, the United Nations will pay for each child otherwise
eligible for the education grant, a grant equal to the difference between the cost of education at the special school which
he attends, and the cost at a comparable school attended by chil-dren of persons normally resident in the area, provided that
1.

the rrant shall not aceed $200 per year. This grant shall l>e
payable only trhen there is a valid reason for the child not to
attend school in the home country; for instance, in the case of
children under thirteen years of age or when the health of the
child is such that return to the home country is not feasible ;
(d) If both parents are members of the staff of United
Nations only one grant will be paid in respect of each of their
children.
3. The Secretary-General. may decide in each case whether
allowances or grants under paragraphs 1 and 2 above shall
extend to adopted children or step-children.
4. In principle, the repatriation grant shall be payable to
staff members whom the Organization is obligated to repatriate,
except those terminated by summary dismissal. Detailed conditions and definitions relating to eligibility shall be determined
by tlie Secretary-General. The amount of the grant shall vary
with the lehgth of service with the United Nations (exclusive
of periods when an expatriation allowance was received). The
mwmwn rates payable shall be as follows :

..

After 2 years
" 34
"

4

6

8

"

5

7

"

"
"
"

8
9
10
11
12

"
"

5

6

7

9

10
11
12
13
14

8
10
12
14
16
18

zo

22
24
26
28

The tnaximum grant payable under this plan shall be
$US Z;,W net for a staff member without dependants and
$US 5;000 net for a staff member with dependants.

591 f\rl). Queations concerning the llquidatloa

of the lntemational Inatitute of Intellectual
Co-operation

The General Assembly,
. Recalling its resolutions 24 (I) and 79 (I) of 12
February and 7 December 1946 respectively, whereby
it act:epted the transfer to the United Nations of certain assets belonging to the League of Nations and its
dependent organizations or institutes,
Considering that the Assembly of the League of Natid!:is, by its resolution dated 17 April 1946,20 decided
to ,transfer to the United Nations its right in any articles and, in particular, the archiv-es and collections
of documents deposited in the premises of the International Institute of Intellectual Co-operation by its
Governing Body, as well as any property which had
been acquired by the Institute during its period of
operation,
Considering that, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 71 (I) of 19 November 1946, the SecretaryGeneral in order to ensure, under the auspices of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the continuity of the work performed by
90
See Official Records of the Gnswal Assn,ibly, Second part
of the first session, Fifth Committee, Annex 13 (C) (document
A/136).
