S/2012/692

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 September 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 6 September 2012 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication dated 30 August
2012, which I received from the Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-50224 (E) 140912

*1250224*

S/2012/692

Annex
Letter dated 30 August 2012 from the Secretary General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 2011 (2011),
I attach a report on the operations of the International Security Assistance Force
covering the period from 1 May to 31 July 2012 (see enclosure). I would appreciate
your making this report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Anders Fogh Rasmussen

2

12-50224

S/2012/692

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the Security Council on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force
Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to the request under Security Council
resolutions 1386 (2001) and 2011 (2011), informs the United Nations on the
progress of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), covering the period
from 1 May to 31 July 2012. As at 31 July 2012, total ISAF strength stood at
130,697 personnel provided by all 28 NATO countries and 22 non-NATO countries.
NATO and ISAF reiterate their invitation to additional United Nations Member
States to support this United Nations-mandated mission by providing advisers and
trainers for the Afghan National Security Forces and to increase their funding
support to the Afghan security forces and their support for the civilian sectors of
governance and development.
2.
Throughout the reporting period, ISAF continued to assist the Government of
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan in accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions. From 1 May to 31 July 2012, ISAF suffered 1,591 casualties including
104 killed in action, 1,481 wounded in action and 6 non-battle-related deaths.
3.
During this reporting period, the number of reported security incidents was in
keeping with seasonal trends. Insurgent-initiated attacks a increased slightly each
month this quarter, although the general trend was comparable to 2011. The slight
increase in insurgent-initiated attacks was principally in southern Afghanistan,
where the 10 most violent districts in the country generated 45 per cent of
nationwide insurgent-initiated attacks. The rise in the number of those attacks was
attributed mainly to a shortened poppy harvest, an earlier seasonal pre-Ramadan rise
in insurgent activity, improved reporting of attacks against the Afghan security
forces, and the high operational tempo maintained by the Afghan and ISAF forces.
Insurgent-initiated activity focused on attempted assassinations of Government and
security force officials, in order to undermine their effectiveness. Despite the media
attention given to some of the high-profile attacks, b they have been assessed by
ISAF as operational failures. The Afghan security forces’ reaction to the attacks,
which was fast and adequate, received positive media coverage.
4.

Noteworthy events for this reporting period include:

(a) On 13 May, President Karzai made the announcement of those districts
and provinces that would be part of tranche 3 of the transition. The three tranches
now comprise 260 districts and include all provincial capitals. Once tranche 3 is
fully implemented, 75 per cent of the Afghan population will live in areas where the
Afghan security forces have the lead responsibility for security;

__________________
a Enemy-initiated attacks have been renamed insurgent-initiated attacks for this report. No

definitions have been changed. Insurgent-initiated attacks comprise insurgent action (insurgentinitiated direct fire, indirect fire, surface-to-air fire) and explosive hazard events, including
executed attacks only (explosions of improvised explosive devices/mine strikes).
b Like the attack on forward operating base Salerno in Khost Province, Regional Command East,
on 1 June 2012, and the attack on 22 June 2012 on the Spochmai Hotel in Kabul.

12-50224

3

S/2012/692

(b) On 13 May, the Afghan-ISAF-Pakistan Tripartite Commission met in
Rawalpindi, Pakistan, to discuss cooperation and coordination along the border. This
was the first meeting of the Tripartite Commission since June 2011;
(c) On 20 and 21 May, during the NATO Summit in Chicago, ISAF troopcontributing countries underlined that the ISAF mission will terminate at the end of
2014 but reaffirmed their close partnership with Afghanistan beyond the transition
period, recalling the firm mutual commitments made between the broader
international community and Afghanistan at the Bonn Conference on 5 December
2011. The International Conference on Afghanistan held in Tokyo on 8 July was the
next international meeting to deliver concrete commitments to the promise of the
long-term partnership made at Bonn. At Tokyo the international community
committed US $16 billion for the period 2012-2015 and to sustain support “at or
near levels of the past decade” until the end of 2017;
(d) On 14 June, the “Heart of Asia” Ministerial Conference convened in
Kabul. The Conference was attended by 28 ministerial and high-level delegations
from Heart of Asia and supporting countries, including 11 delegations from regional
and international organizations. NATO was represented by the NATO senior civilian
representative in Kabul. The Conference was the first follow-up meeting to advance
the Istanbul process, intended to strengthen regional dialogue on Afghanistan,
develop confidence-building measures among Heart of Asia countries and
coordinate various regional cooperation efforts on key economic, political and
security issues. In spite of significant threat streams, the Afghan security forces, in
close coordination with ISAF, ensured that the proceedings concluded without
incident;
(e) On 4 July, Pakistan reopened the supply lines into Afghanistan after the
United States issued an expression of regret for the accidental death of 24 Pakistani
soldiers in an airstrike along the Afghan-Pakistani border in November 2011. The
agreement ended a seven-month political stalemate that forced ISAF troopcontributing countries to use alternative logistical routes, although with minimal
operational impact.
Security situation
5.
During this reporting period, insurgent-initiated attacks increased by 6 per cent
compared to the same period in 2011. Insurgents’ efforts to maintain operations with
high-profile attacks and assassinations were largely ineffective because Afghan
security force and ISAF operations continued to interdict the insurgents. As a result
of the improved effectiveness of the Afghan security forces, the insurgency did not
regain lost territory and the majority of Afghans remained unaffected by insurgent
violence. c

__________________
c A total of 80 per cent of the Afghan population does not directly experience the violence

associated with the insurgency.

4

12-50224

S/2012/692

6.
The insurgency continued to rely on indirect fire and the use of improvised
explosive devices, trying to avoid direct engagement. The assassination attempts
against Government officials remain another tactic of choice, in order to disrupt the
Government’s ability to carry out effective governance and to discredit it. During
the reporting period, the majority of insurgent-inflicted civilian casualties (58 per
cent) were caused by improvised explosive devices. The percentage of such devices
found and cleared as opposed to detonated involuntarily was approximately 60 per
cent.
7.

Regionally, the security situation can be described as follows: d

(a) Regional Command Southwest. Insurgent-initiated attacks for the
reporting period increased by 13 per cent compared to the same period in 2011. The
end of the poppy harvest, the period from late May to early June, witnessed an
immediate increase in insurgent-initiated attacks, followed by a minor drop in such
attacks at the beginning of Ramadan in July. Two factors will need to be closely
monitored during the next reporting period: the reduction of the surge forces in
Regional Command Southwest, and the impact of an early Ramadan which could be
followed by a longer insurgent fighting season before the effects of winter reduce
insurgent operations. The central Helmand River Valley will remain important to the
insurgents who will continue to contest it with both ISAF and the Afghan security
forces.

__________________
d Graphics are available on the ISAF webpage, at www.isaf.nato.int/article/news/monthly-

trends.html.

12-50224

5

S/2012/692

(b) Regional Command South. Insurgent-initiated attacks for the reporting
period increased by 6 per cent compared to the same period in 2011. It is assessed
that this increase is in part the result of insurgent attempts to negate losses in their
Pashto homeland during 2011. Conversely, the number of improvised explosive
devices found and cleared has increased in Regional Command South over the
previous three months. As in neighbouring Regional Command Southwest, the
impact of a longer post-Ramadan insurgent fighting season and the reduction of
surge forces remains to be seen. The insurgents continue to target the Government
and the Afghan security forces to undermine the confidence of the local population
in the institutions and attack the Afghan local police, which helps to prevent
insurgent access to this population. Improvised explosive devices continue to be the
primary means of engagement to minimize insurgent losses, followed by direct fire
attacks.

6

12-50224

S/2012/692

(c) Regional Command East. During the reporting period, the most densely
populated area in Afghanistan witnessed a 2 per cent decrease in insurgent-initiated
attacks compared to the same period in 2011. The security incident trend for this
reporting period mirrored the trend in the same period in 2011 and continues to be
influenced by focused Afghan security force and ISAF operations, particularly in the
border regions. The border regions of Regional Command East remain the most
challenging areas and can be considered to be the main source of instability for the
region. Insurgents exploit their freedom of movement and maintain the capability to
plan and execute attacks in the area. The insurgency in Regional Command East is
much more dispersed; individual insurgent groups follow their own agendas and
have close links to organized crime in the border region.

(d) Regional Command North. During the reporting period, insurgentinitiated attacks increased by 29 per cent compared to the same period in 2011.
While the insurgency has been unable to sustain a significant level of effort within
the area of operations of Regional Command North when compared to other
regional commands, there has been a slight increase in insurgent effectiveness
during the current reporting period compared to the same period in 2011. The
insurgency, more ethnically diverse and more closely linked to criminal
organizations than in other regional commands, retains a limited capability to
conduct attacks in northern Afghanistan but is still present and active. Insurgents
continued to attempt high-profile attacks in major population centres attempting to
reverse perceptions of security gains. Insurgents avoided sustained direct fire
engagements with ISAF and focused on Afghan security force personnel as a means
to undermine Government security and disrupt the development of the security
forces.

12-50224

7

S/2012/692

(e) Regional Command West. During the reporting period, insurgentinitiated attacks increased by 46 per cent compared to the same period in 2011. This
increase in events is largely because of aggressive ISAF security operations
encroaching on insurgent support zones, continued narcotic trafficking, and the
summer fighting season. Insurgent attacks against ISAF and Afghan security forces
and logistical convoys are likely to continue, throughout the west of Afghanistan, to
disrupt freedom of movement and attempt to regain strongholds lost during the
previous fighting season.

(f) Regional Command Capital. During this reporting period insurgentinitiated attacks in Regional Command Capital decreased by 22 per cent compared
to the same period in 2011 because of the improved capacity of the Afghan security
forces and effective security measures within Kabul Province. The attack on the

8

12-50224

S/2012/692

“Green Village” in Kabul on 2 May 2012 and the assassination of Arsala Rahmani, a
former Taliban minister and key member of the Afghanistan High Peace Council,
were the most significant events in this period. It is likely that Kabul Province will
continue to be the target of numerous high-profile attack attempts during this
fighting season because of the significant media and political attention such attacks
receive.

Afghan National Security Forces
8.
Over the past three months, the Afghan National Security Forces have steadily
increased in overall force size and remain on track to meet the approved goal of a
final strength of 352,000 by October 2012. This strength target is intended to
provide security for all of Afghanistan by the end of 2014 and is designed to permit
the consolidation of ISAF gains and to fully enable a successful transition to
Afghan-led security.
9.
Improvements have been made in the level of cooperation between the
Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Defence in the fields of logistics and
convoy execution. The quality and competence of the Afghan security forces
continue to improve steadily; significant enabler support from international forces is
still required, however. Partnered operations put pressure on traditional insurgent
facilitation routes, while a sustained presence degrades the insurgents’ ability to
resupply.
10. The first Afghan security force campaign plan developed by Afghans
(Operation Naweed 1391) is currently in progress and a planning cycle has
commenced for the next year. During this planning cycle, responsibility will
transition from the General Staff to the new operational-level Ground Force
Command once it achieves its full operational capability, which is expected in
October 2012.
11. Attrition and the shortage of non-commissioned officers remain challenging
for both services but efforts are being made to reduce the shortfalls. These efforts
include the special leave travel programme established to facilitate movement by air

12-50224

9

S/2012/692

of Afghan security force personnel on leave, from designated combat zones (South,
Southwest and West) to and from Kabul.
12. The percentage of Afghan security force units rated as “effective with
partners” or greater has increased since January 2012 from 52 per cent to 82 per
cent for Afghan National Army battalions and headquarters and from 58 per cent to
60 per cent for Afghan National Police units. The numbers of most effective units
assessed as “independent with advisers” have risen to 30 for the Army (from 15 in
the previous quarter), and 49 for the police (from 35 in the previous quarter). Four
operation coordination centres improved their effectiveness status, reaching
“independent with advisers”, demonstrating a positive trend. Development of
operation coordination centres is ongoing and all 40 required centres (regional or
provincial) should be established and assessed during future assessment cycles.
13. ISAF will continue to work with the Afghan security forces to improve Afghan
enablers (logistics, countering improvised explosive devices, aviation) to match
capability gaps and prioritize the professionalization of the Afghan police, and
continue to support the security forces in geographical areas of reduced ISAF
presence, while meeting the requirements of the ISAF drawdown.
Afghan National Army
14. During the reporting period, the Afghan National Army reached approximately
185,000 members, not including the Afghan Air Force. The Army remains on track
to meet the approved authorization of 187,000 ahead of the scheduled date of
October 2012. To reach a balanced force, soldier strength must be reduced while
increasing the number of non-commissioned and other officers.
15. The newly formed Special Operations Command division of the Afghan Army,
a force of approximately 10,000 personnel, provides a distinctive capability that
serves both as a command and a staff for a unique, enduring and elite military
organization. On 25 July the Special Operations Command executed its first allAfghan full mission exercise in preparation for a night operation. The Afghans
planned and prepared the operation and Afghan helicopter crews flew the Afghan
special operators and a small number of ISAF mentors to their objective.
16. The NATO Training Mission in Afghanistan, in cooperation with the Afghan
Ministry of Defence, continues its efforts to professionalize the force, diminish the
leadership shortfalls, decrease the attrition rates, and improve staff planning, tactical
coordination, and the logistical capabilities of the Afghan Army.
Afghan Air Force
17. Over the past nine months the Afghan Air Force has made marginal gains in its
force strength, reaching 5,933 personnel late in July 2012. The authorized force
strength of the Afghan Air Force is 8,067 by 2017. Owing to the technical skills
required throughout the Air Force, and to human capital restraints, it will continue
to grow slowly. To this end, important investments are required to improve Air
Force training sites and infrastructure. Consequently, the Afghan Air Force will
remain dependent on donor countries and other support until it achieves full
operational capability by 2017.

10

12-50224

S/2012/692

Afghan National Police
18. During this reporting period, the Afghan National Police reached
approximately 147,000 members. The reduced growth rate was a result of a
cessation in recruiting in favour of balancing the structure of policemen and
non-commissioned officers within the force. However, the current growth and
attrition rates indicate that the police are likely to achieve the October 2012 target of
157,000.
19. Trends in the assessment ratings of the Afghan police continued to be positive,
showing increased numbers of units rated “effective with advisers” or better. The
Afghan security forces will continue to focus on the police, and are preparing for
2013 being styled the Year of the Police. As the Afghan police are close to reaching
their requested manning, the focus is shifting from recruiting to professionalizing
the existing force through advanced training and promotion standardization.
Training development is evolving and the number of Afghan instructors trained is
increasing steadily (66 per cent of the positions are filled and 81 per cent of those
instructors are trained). Afghan perceptions of the police appear to have generally
improved as well, showing an increased awareness of their presence and generally
positive trends in regard to their professionalism and independence.
Afghan Public Protection Force
20. The Ministry of the Interior approved a transition plan for the Afghan Public
Protection Force to carry out Presidential Decree 62 beyond 20 March 2012 without
any security gaps. The plan granted interim risk management company licences to
31 private security companies. These licences allow such companies to continue to
provide security while their contracts are still under negotiation.
21. An interim risk management company is a continuation of the private security
company. Upon transition to a permanent risk management company status, the
guards will transition to the Afghan Public Protection Force. In the meantime guards
will continue to be uniformed as with the private security companies. While existing
guards were brought on through a private security company vetting process, they
will complete the regular Ministry of the Interior selection process during the
transition to the protection force. Because the interim licence period is not sufficient
to finalize all contract negotiations, the Ministry will allow the affected companies
to continue until their contract is concluded. The Public Protection Force is working
with interim risk management companies that failed to meet their transition
deadlines set by the Ministry to extend deadlines so that requirements for the
transition can be completed. The Ministry ordered the provincial chiefs of police not
to take any actions against private security companies without first consulting it. To
avoid further extension of the interim licences ISAF recommended a conditionbased interim licence period rather than a date-based period.
Civilian casualties
22. Civilian casualties are of great concern to ISAF, and the need to effectively
manage the consequences of such incidents is considered to be critically important.
ISAF has been successful at reducing civilian casualties, and continues to emphasize
adherence to the Directives of the Commander of ISAF to avoid future civilian
casualties. In the period from 1 January to the end of July 2012, reduction efforts

12-50224

11

S/2012/692

produced a 51 per cent reduction in ISAF-caused civilian casualties compared to the
same period in 2011.
23. Reporting for the current quarter indicates that the insurgents are responsible
for causing approximately 87 per cent of all civilian conflict-related deaths and
more than 92 per cent of all incidents with related civilian casualties. ISAF was
identified as having responsibility for 8 per cent of all such incidents, including the
responsibility for 13 per cent of civilian conflict-related deaths. The figures reported
in the chart reflect incidents of conflict-related civilian casualties (deaths and
wounded) that have been confirmed through investigation to have been caused by
either ISAF or insurgents. ISAF policy requires all credible allegations of civilian
casualties to be reviewed. e

Number of Civilian Casualties

800

Civilian Casualties caused by ISAF
Civilian Casualties caused by Insurgents

700
600
500
400
300
200
100

Jul 12

May 12

Jan 12

Mar 12

Sep 11

Nov 11

Jul 11

May 11

Jan 11

Mar 11

Nov 10

Jul 10

Sep 10

Mar 10

May 10

Jan 10

Nov 09

Jul 09

Sep 09

May 09

Jan 09

Mar 09

0

Counter-narcotics
24. ISAF continues, in conformity with its mandate, to provide support to the
counter-narcotics programmes and operations of the Government of Afghanistan in
order to disrupt, neutralize and influence the narcotics industry and its funding of
the insurgency in Afghanistan.
25. Since the conclusion of the poppy harvest in the major producing areas, poor
opium yields have been reported in Helmand, Uruzgan, Kandahar, Farah, Nimroz
and Nangarhar. The poor crop resulted from the shifting of poppy cultivation to
areas with poor growing conditions, undesirable weather for cultivation, and poor
farming practices by new, inexperienced poppy farmers. Opium prices have
increased slightly as a result of a decrease in the opium yield, but not as
dramatically as the price increase resulting from the 2010 poppy blight.
__________________
e Graphics are available on the ISAF web page, at www.isaf.nato.int/article/news/monthly-

trends.html.

12

12-50224

S/2012/692

26. Afghan security force and ISAF operations in key narcotics processing and
trafficking areas in southern Afghanistan have limited some narcotics movement and
increased the risks associated with narcotics trafficking. In addition, during this
reporting period, particularly during the month of May, substantial narcotics
seizures were made by the Counter-Narcotics Police of Afghanistan, which included
over 19,000 kg of opium and 550 kg of heroin in the months of May and June alone.
27. A decrease in harvest output along with ongoing counter-narcotics and
counter-insurgency operations presents an opportunity to pressure insurgent funding
streams. Continuing to limit the freedom of movement of narcotic traffickers will
increase the risks associated with trafficking, which will result in a depression of
opium prices. This could be one reason why opium prices have only marginally
increased, instead of spiking as in 2010. Furthermore, the inherent risks associated
with a poor crop and depressed prices will aid in any campaign to deter poppy
cultivation.
Governance
28. ISAF continues to provide support to Afghan-led governance efforts,
particularly in key areas of transition, reintegration, counter-corruption and rule of
law improvement.
29. Security responsibility continues to be transitioned from ISAF to the Afghan
security forces and, as the Afghan National Army and Afghan National Police
develop, they are taking an increasing lead in conducting security operations. One
important indicator of the success of the transition is the 15 per cent decline in
insurgent-initiated attacks on average year over year in tranche 1 and 2 areas. As the
transition continues, planning for the period beyond 2014 develops and work has
been done to synchronize understanding of the campaign between ISAF, Afghan
security ministries, non-security ministries, the Afghan security forces and the
international community.
30. The Afghan Peace and Reintegration Programme is still encountering
challenges, but has seen improvements in implementation capacity in the past
quarter. However, provincial joint secretariat teams are still in need of support and
the joint secretariat, the United Nations Development Programme and ISAF are
working to address this through mentoring and formal training. As at 31 July 2012,
the Peace and Reintegration Programme had officially reintegrated a total of 5,036
insurgents. This represents an increase of around 1,000 persons reintegrated over the
previous quarter.
31. Formal reintegration has contributed stabilizing effects in the north and west,
where the programme has had most success. Encouraging progress has been noticed
recently in the east, south and south-west, but it is more likely that informal
reintegration occurs in those regions because of a lack of security in some areas,
fear of Taliban retaliation for reintegrating, and cultural, honour-based sensitivities.
A Joint Ministerial Order issued in June directed the Afghan security forces to
support and promote the Peace and Reintegration Programme. Consequently,
training measures were implemented in order to spread awareness of the
Programme.
32. Ramadan and Eid al-Fitr provide an opportunity for the Government of
Afghanistan to leverage a cultural and religious event to provide reintegration

12-50224

13

S/2012/692

impact on a national level. Also at this level, a National Peace and Unity Week is
planned for September 2012 with a range of Afghan-led countrywide events to
demonstrate the Government’s commitment.
33. The NATO-led building integrity initiative continues to develop the
capabilities of the Afghan Ministries of Defence and the Interior to support the
Afghan security forces. For the period 2012-2014, priority will be given to the
planning and management of financial and human resources. This work will be
taken forward in the framework of the Enduring Partnership. The building integrity
group continued its work with the NATO Training Mission on reviewing the
integration of appropriate courses for the security forces in order to ensure the
integration of good governance and anti-corruption practice and process. On 26 July,
President Karzai issued a Presidential Decree that focuses on improving governance
and tackling corruption. The Decree reflects the President’s stated determination to
address these issues.
34. The NATO Rule of Law Field Support Mission continues to work with the
Government to improve the provision of State justice with qualified personnel at the
provincial and district levels. The support mission also continues to assist the
Afghans in countering threat networks through the development of Afghan forensics
and biometrics capabilities.
Development
35. Together with the transition implementation in the provinces, the provincial
reconstruction teams are in the process of transferring their functions to the
Government and channelling enduring assistance through the Government or
traditional development actors (international and non-governmental organizations
and the private sector). The countries providing the teams agreed on a set of
principles for the evolution and ultimate dissolution of their teams, many of which
are already evolving, shifting their focus from direct delivery to enhancing the
effectiveness of Afghan national and provincial government structures. By the time
transition is complete, all teams will have handed over their functions to the
Government, traditional development actors, non-governmental organizations and
the private sector, and will have been phased out. Pursuing this process, one team
closed during the reporting period (United States team Laghman) and four more
could close in 2012. As at the end of the reporting period, 25 provincial
reconstruction teams remain operating in Afghanistan, but all will be transferred by
the end of 2014.
Children affected by armed conflict
36. ISAF stays committed to its support for monitoring and reporting violations
against children by armed actors, in accordance with Security Council resolution
1612 (2005). ISAF and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan have
jointly taken several practical steps to support Afghan institutions in implementing
an action plan to stop and prevent grave violations of children’s rights, including
actions to prevent underage recruitment to the Afghan security forces, sexual abuse
and killing and maiming of children.

14

12-50224

S/2012/692

Resolution 1325 (2000) and gender perspective
37. The implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is still an
ISAF priority internally as well as externally. ISAF focuses on establishing more
concrete policies and guidelines through standard operating procedures and
fragmentary orders and on increasing awareness through standardized in-theatre
training.
38. ISAF continues to monitor and support the Government of Afghanistan in
creating a more gender-sensitive environment. Although there is a growing
recognition for female roles in the Afghan security forces, women account for
roughly 1 per cent of the total force. As at 20 June 2012, there were 1,409 women
members in the Afghan police, 379 in the Afghan Army and 27 in the Afghan Air
Force. The Government has established target numbers (to be reached by the end of
2015) for women members of the security forces but there are still obstacles to be
overcome before the objectives will be met. These challenges are on the one hand of
a material and structural nature but on the other hand they are also of a cultural
nature. In the police force, women’s training and participation is often not valued,
their presence is deemed pointless, and consequently they are marginalized and
relegated to non-police work.
39. ISAF continues its proactive work towards the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), and welcomes the continued efforts of the international community to
encourage the Government to integrate the gender perspective as a natural part of
the social and political environment in Afghanistan. Although the political and
social representation of women increased, their effective participation in political
processes and economic activities remains limited. Furthermore, violations of
women’s rights remain prevalent despite existing legislation, while women’s access
to education and health services remains low.

12-50224

15
