S/PV.9147

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9147th meeting

Thursday, 6 October 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adamo/Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Kan-Dapaah
Mr. Muraleedharan
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia/Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Al Nahyan
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Strengthening the fight against the financing of armed groups and terrorists
through the illicit trafficking of natural resources
Letter dated 30 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Gabon
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/728)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-61733 (E)
*2261733*

S/PV.9147

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Strengthening the fight against the financing of
armed groups and terrorists through the illicit
trafficking of natural resources
Letter dated 30 September 2022 from
the Permanent Representative of Gabon
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2022/728)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Central
African Republic, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Morocco
and Senegal to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Ghada Fathi
Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime; His Excellency Mr. Bankole
Adeoye, African Union Commissioner for Political
Affairs, Peace and Security; and Mr. Paul-Simon Handy,
Regional Director for East Africa and Representative of
the Institute for Security Studies to the African Union.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/728, which contains the text of a
letter dated 30 September 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Gabon to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the ministers. Their
presence here today underscores the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
I now give the floor to Ms. Waly.
2/30

06/10/2022

Ms. Waly (spoke in French): I am grateful for the
opportunity to address the Security Council. I would
like to thank the Gabonese presidency for its invitation
and to commend its commitment to the fight against
poaching and the trafficking in natural resources and
to protecting the environment. I also thank Gabon for
being one of the first countries in Africa to promote
carbon trading.
The threat of terrorism and organized crime is
taking hold in Africa. Last year, there were 3,500
victims of terrorist acts in sub-Saharan Africa, which
is almost half of the victims worldwide. The Sahel in
particular is under assault from some of the world’s
most active and deadly terrorist groups, both in terms
of attacks and recruitment strategy.
The Security Council has repeatedly expressed
its concern about the scourge of terrorism and the
activities of armed groups and criminal networks,
which destabilize Africa and profit from the continent’s
natural resources.
It is essential to better understand the links
between organized crime and terrorism in Africa
through rigorous data and evidence collection and the
development of appropriate programmes and policies.
There is evidence that the illegal exploitation of
minerals, such as gold, silver and diamonds, provides
armed groups, rebel groups and terrorists with
significant sources of revenue. The proceeds of such
trafficking can also benefit armed groups that control
the mining areas or trafficking routes.
Such sources of income, also obtained through
extortion and the illegal imposition of taxes on the
population, allow those groups to acquire arms and
other commodities to maintain their hold on territory
and conflict zones. Strategic and lucrative access
to trafficking routes is also a factor of power among
armed groups.
(spoke in English)
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) works with Member States to prevent and
respond to crimes that threaten the environment,
including wildlife, forest and fisheries crimes, illegal
mining and trafficking in precious metals and waste.
From 2019 to 2021, UNODC conducted research into
the illicit trafficking of minerals into bordering areas
of Gabon, Cameroon and Congo, known as the TriNational Dja-Odzala-Minkébé area, Chad and the
22-61733

06/10/2022

Peace and security in Africa

Central African Republic as a source of funding for
terrorist groups in the region. Based on the outcomes
of that research, we established that illegally mined
gold and other precious metals are being fed into the
legitimate market, providing huge profits for traffickers.
In late 2020, UNODC and INTERPOL coordinated
a firearms operation, which seized 40,000 sticks of
dynamite and detonator cords. They were intended
for illegal gold mining by armed terrorist groups in
the Sahel.
Wildlife trafficking has also been reported as
a possible source of funding for armed groups. The
illegal trade in ivory alone generates $400 million in
illicit income each year.
With Africa’s population of approximately
1.3 billion, almost 500 million Africans lived in extreme
poverty last year. Such criminal exploitation strips the
people of Africa of a significant source of revenue. It
robs the millions of people who depend on those natural
resources for their livelihoods, and it fuels conflicts
and exacerbates instability.
The climate emergency and the coronavirus
disease pandemic have wreaked havoc on already
fragile economies. The illicit trafficking of natural
resources further jeopardizes development and winds
back progress on the Sustainable Development Goals,
and it severely undermines Agenda 2063. It is clear that
there can be no sustainable development without peace
and stability, and there will be no peace and security
without sustainable development.
Our work goes far beyond border seizures. UNODC
is the guardian of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime — the main
international instrument in the fight against such
crimes. We support member countries in putting in
place the policies, legislation and operational responses
required to better address terrorist threats. We also work
closely with our African counterparts to strengthen
their capacity to investigate and prosecute crimes that
affect the environment.
In 2021 alone, we implemented 25 counterterrorism projects in sub-Saharan Africa, with over 160
activities delivered, and trained 2,500 people. As part
of the efforts to combat terrorism in the Sahel, we are
currently organizing training workshops with the United
Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research
Institute to strengthen the understanding and skills

S/PV.9147

of criminal justice officials to work across agencies,
share intelligence and information and bring down
terrorist networks and those who fund them. UNODC
also supports 10 Member States across sub-Saharan
Africa in improving their frameworks to counter
terrorist financing and money laundering, including
in the Central African Republic, Chad, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Niger and Somalia.
Under our West Africa counter-terrorism financing
initiative, we support countries in implementing
national asset-freezing mechanisms. That has already
led to the first designations on a national sanctions list.
This year, six nationals operating in the gold sector
were designated under resolution 1373 (2001) to prevent
the financing of terrorist acts.
We also work to strengthen inter-agency
coordination among intelligence services, law
enforcement agencies, financial intelligence units and
prosecutors and to promote the financial investigation
of natural resources and wildlife trafficking. We build
partnerships between the private sector, including
the companies involved in mineral supply chains,
and public and civil society stakeholders, and help to
improve understanding of national and cross-border
illicit financial flows related to mineral crimes.
In a similar vein, our environment team runs
specialized workshops and training for magistrates,
law enforcement officers and wildlife forensic experts
engaged in the fight against environmental crime to
promote a coordinated and holistic response.
In the Central African region, we are also rolling
out a European Union-funded €6 million project on
wildlife trafficking and the illegal exploitation of
natural resources to support the Economic Community
of Central African States. It promotes improved national
and regional cooperation and response to wildlife and
timber trafficking and a better understanding of illegal
mining and trafficking in precious metals. UNODC
wildlife and timber trafficking programmes address the
cross-border theft of natural resources. The focus is to
increase the prevention, investigations and prosecutions
of trafficking in those natural resources.
In Africa, conflict zones are disproportionately
affected by illegal mining and trafficking in precious
metals. Mineral supply chains are often linked to child
abuse, human trafficking, forced labour and other
human rights violations. With 60 per cent of Africa’s
population under 25 years of age, young people are

22-617333/30

S/PV.9147

Peace and security in Africa

both the future of the continent and its most vulnerable
citizens. But we also know that, when empowered, young
people are powerful agents of change. They can create
a better future, advocate on behalf of themselves and
their communities and protect their natural resources.
I am especially proud of the UNODC youth-driven
peacebuilding project. In partnership with UNESCO,
we are empowering youth to become weavers of peace
in the cross-border regions of Gabon, Cameroon and
Chad. The aim is to create a network of 1,800 young
weavers of peace, to enable them to become actors in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding in cross-border
regions and identify alternative livelihoods for crossborder communities.
UNODC remains fully engaged in supporting
Africa’s fight against the criminal trade in wildlife
and natural resources. I welcome the attention of the
Council to the growing concerns that those illicit
revenues are financing terrorist activities and armed
groups. We stand ready to assist the people of Africa
in their right to peace, stability, justice and prosperity,
today and for future generations, leaving no money for
terrorists and leaving no one behind.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Waly
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Adeoye.
Mr. Adeoye: It is an established fact that terrorists
and armed groups continue to execute their activities,
largely dependent on their ability to adequately and
sustainably finance their preparation, planning and
execution of attacks. From the Sahel to the Horn of
Africa and from Cabo Delgado to the Lake Chad
basin, the same tactics are used by those dastardly
groups. Large terrorist organizations, including small
or extremist cells, as well as foreign terrorist fighters
and so-called lone wolves, require stable funding
to operate, with varying approaches to securing the
required funding. Indeed, funding remains the biggest
enabler for terrorists.
In Africa, various means of terrorist financing
and equipping exist, in particular kidnapping for
ransom; drug and human trafficking; the smuggling
and trafficking of weapons; the illicit transfer of goods
and funds to individuals; cattle rustling; the use of
charitable organizations; the illegal exploitation and
trafficking of natural resources; and illegal taxes, inter
alia. It is also important to emphasize that extortion
4/30

06/10/2022

and taxation systems in areas controlled by terrorists
have also served to fund their operations. Natural
resource-related crimes, such as the exploitation of
illegal mining, as was mentioned by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, in particular gold, as well
as poaching and illicit trade, all contribute to terrorists’
sources of funding.
There is also increasing evidence that terrorists are
turning to transnational organized crime to generate
funding and acquire logistical support to carry out
their violent activities. Preventing terrorist financing
is therefore one aspect of what must be a multifaceted
approach to eliminating terrorism on the continent and,
indeed, globally. By cooperating nationally, regionally
and internationally, we can use the intelligence
gathered in financial investigations to detect, disrupt
and dismantle terrorist networks and their financing.
For its part, the African Union has been deploying
a number of initiatives, including the establishment
of national counter-terrorism fusion centres, national
financial intelligence units and law enforcement at
the national level to ensure that no forms of terrorist
financing become part of their arsenal. More recently,
the African Union Heads of State gathered in Malabo
in May to respond to the scourge of terrorism and
unconstitutional changes of Government and called for
an in-depth study on the issue, to which the African
Union Department of Political Affairs, Peace and
Security is now committed. That study will look at
all sources of terrorist financing, as well as the role of
foreign interests and local collaborators in exploiting
those forms of financing.
Therefore, there is a need for enhanced cooperation
in terms of capacity-building and the transfer of
knowledge in favour of countries in post-conflict
situations and still in conflict to better control their
natural resources and establish national databases
on the matter. Similarly, the capacities of national
financial intelligence units should be enhanced.
Sanctions regimes against terrorist individuals, groups
or organizations need to be strengthened. We will
require the cooperation of the Council in that regard.
Such sanctions regimes need to target parties providing
support to armed and terrorist groups involved in the
illegal exploitation of natural resources.
Let me highlight the need to strengthen the existing
financial control and monitoring systems, including
the strict enforcement of prudential rules for financial
22-61733

06/10/2022

Peace and security in Africa

institutions, on-site inspections and monitoring the
transfer of off-activity funds, particularly those
that have been executed through stockbrokers. Such
monitoring will help ensure transparency in the public
collection of funds and that the proceeds are not used to
finance terrorist activities. The African Union also calls
for the enhancement of the exchange of information,
collaboration and coordination in matters related to
terrorism at the national and regional levels, as well
as the need for unified typology reports on moneylaundering and terrorism financing in our continent.
A similar collaborative effort between the African
Centre for Studies and Research on Terrorism and other
specialized entities in the area will be critical.
As we move forward, it is imperative to highlight
that terrorists are determined, with a high degree of
adaptability, innovation and creativity, to continue
to exploit the weaknesses in our institutional, legal
and structural systems. That is why we need to step
up our level of commitment. We need to step up in
order to remain ahead of the terrorist groups in terms
of creativity and innovation. We must think outside
the box.
We require a robust policy and institutional
framework to be the core of our success as the
international community. The African Union stands
ready to continue to work with regional mechanisms,
as well as relevant research centres, on our continent,
to find the best means to address this scourge. A robust
criminal justice response to terrorism and its financing
will also be appreciated.
Let me conclude by assuring the Council of the
African Union’s continued readiness to cooperate
with the United Nations agencies and all concerned
to ensure that we frustrate the terrorists in terms of
their financing in order to reduce and eliminate their
operations for the sake of peace on our continent and
in the world.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Adeoye for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Handy.
Mr. Handy (spoke in French): I would first like to
thank the Gabonese presidency of the Security Council
for having invited me to this debate. At the same time,
I would like to thank the Permanent Representation of
the International Organization of la Francophonie for

S/PV.9147

involving the Boutros-Ghali Peacekeeping Observatory
in this discussion.
Given the time constraints, I would like to focus my
briefing on three main areas. The first is the complex
nature of illicit trafficking by non-State and terrorist
armed groups. I will then briefly touch on the many
tools available to us, the international community. I
will finish with some courses of action.
With regard to the different situations and the
various armed groups and terrorists, the current
understanding of the nature of armed groups operating
in crisis theatres across Africa suggests that the
contexts are very diverse. From the Sahel to the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the borders of
Somalia, non-State armed and terrorist groups vary in
structure, modus operandi and composition.
Such diverse situations remind us of the need to
avoid generalization in the kind of response needed
to strengthen the fight against the income-generating
activities of armed groups. While there is reason
to focus on the trafficking in natural resources,
it is particularly important to emphasize that it is
the existence of trafficking in general that must be
addressed. Natural resources are only one dimension
of that trafficking, which includes human beings and
cultural and monetary items, as well as drugs.
Numerous examples in the Sahel illustrate how
violent extremist groups exploit transnational criminal
networks and local conflicts to finance their activities
and establish themselves in areas. In the Central
African Republic, some non-State armed groups
manage to generate millions of dollars a year just by
taxing transhumance, or livestock migration, routes.
The second point that I would like to make is about
the often little-used tools at our disposal. Thanks to the
work of many specialized organizations, including the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, represented
here, and research centres around the world, regional
and international organizations have taken an increasing
number of measures to combat the trafficking in natural
resources by armed and terrorist groups.
However, to be effective, those tools need at least
two things: increased State capacity — administrative,
security and judicial — and international cooperation,
particularly given the often-transnational nature of
the organized crime that underpins the commercial

22-617335/30

S/PV.9147

Peace and security in Africa

06/10/2022

activities of armed and terrorist groups. Individual
State action is necessary, but not sufficient.

that the presence of those criminal networks is likely to
prolong the scourge.

What we are facing is more a crisis of inaction
than a crisis of tools and other countering means, for
the tools exist. They can be refined, adjusted and better
adapted to changing contexts. But they certainly exist in
the form of various United Nations resolutions, African
Union and regional economic community protocols and
various bilateral treaties between countries.

Lastly, on improving due diligence processes,
regional organizations have developed highly
sophisticated certification processes. Due diligence
processes, such as those of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development and the
Kimberley Process, have significantly evolved,
transformed and adapted. For example, instead of
embargoing entire countries, thereby depriving States
of vital tax revenue, it has now been realized that
embargo regimes on natural resources should be applied
selectively. Their application should take into account
developments on the ground, in particular expanding
State authority.

I will end with some courses of action. That leads
me to share the courses of action that I think would
be useful in order to strengthen the fight against the
financing of non-State armed groups through the
trafficking in natural resources.
The first, which was mentioned by some speakers,
is to modernize sanctions regimes. It is common to
criticize sanctions regimes today, but it should be
noted that various United Nations sanctions regimes
have greatly helped to improve understanding of the
nature of non-State armed and terrorist groups and
their financing and operating methods. Thanks to the
investigative work of expert groups, many channels
were uncovered, and their actors exposed.
But sanctions regimes would probably benefit
from being modernized and made more sophisticated.
I will give just one example from recent experience to
illustrate that.
Assets freezes and travel bans are among the
most-used tools of sanctions regimes. The ability of
some actors to circumvent them should prompt new
measures targeting not only individuals, but probably
also networks of actors or individuals that facilitate
trafficking in natural resources in different conflicts.

It follows from what I just said that one of the key
indicators for verifying which measures are being taken
in combating the financing of non-State and terrorist
groups is their impact on a country’s tax revenue. If
the implementation of the measures does not lead to
a corresponding increase in revenue in a given area,
then something is probably not working properly. The
measures are probably less effective than they appear.
Concerted action by States is therefore essential to
successfully combating the financing of non-State and
terrorist armed groups through the illicit trafficking in
natural resources.
Holding this debate is clearly a sign that the
Security Council is seized of this matter.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Handy
for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs for Gabon.

But — and this is the second step — criminal
networks within administrations and often armed forces
must also be broken up. United Nations resolutions now
recognize that criminal networks clearly exist within
the administrations and armed forces of countries
affected by illicit trafficking in natural resources.

I thank the Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly; the African
Union Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and
Security, Mr. Adeoye; and the Regional Director for
East Africa and Representative to the African Union,
Institute for Security Studies, Mr. Handy, for their
informative briefings.

In many African countries, a combination of
adverse factors often contributes to the formation of
criminal networks within the armed forces, which
are often the ones whose task it is to fight against
non-State and terrorist groups. That therefore often
results in competition between the armed forces and
the non-State armed groups. Representatives will agree

The mapping of armed groups attests to the clear
link between their location and control over natural
resources. The illicit exploitation of natural resources,
be they biological or mineral, is linked to human
trafficking, kidnapping for ransom and drug trafficking
and is a major source of financing for armed and terrorist
groups. It is indisputable that natural resources, mainly

6/30

22-61733

06/10/2022

Peace and security in Africa

from the soil and subsoil, fuel conflicts as a source of
funding and, at the same time, are the principal goals
of such conflicts.
The African continent abounds in innumerable
natural resources. Those resources, which are the
pride of the continent, are unfortunately at the heart
of well-organized trafficking that sows terror within
our villages and cities, within which the people are
the indiscriminate victims of atrocities. A new illicit
triangular trade is linking Africa as an exporter of
raw materials to countries that export weapons and
mercenaries through countries that offer parallel
financial arrangements.
Furthermore, armed and terrorist groups have
progressively set up supply channels for various types
of resources in order to better finance themselves.
Consequently, underground criminal economies have
been established in certain parts of States’ territories
and cross-border areas. As a result of the predatory
exploitation of natural resources, conflicts are selfsustaining, with mineral revenues financing the purchase
of arms and the recruitment of militias. A military and
criminal economy has been established based on trade
in wild species of fauna and flora, coltan and gold, as
well as on tin mines and child labour. That parallel
economy is being run by military groups, security
companies, buyers, brokers and clandestine exporters,
with regional and international repercussions.
Beyond today’s discussion, the Security Council
must address that alarming situation, which is affecting
several regions of the African continent, and find
urgently needed solutions to adequately deal with the
bloodshed and hardship resulting from the financing
of armed and terrorist groups. The scope of the task
requires a multidimensional response involving both
security and development.
We must identify the grey areas of the criminal
economy and its links with the official economy.
Determining the links among companies, armies,
transporters, arms dealers and traffickers, banks,
illegal financial networks and the wide array of
intermediaries, including companies that enjoy
respectability via a veneer of legitimacy, is a must. In
that regard, we reaffirm our support for the Kimberley
Process and welcome the measures taken by African
States and international organizations to regulate the
mineral supply chain in order to promote transparency

S/PV.9147

and establish a certification system that ensures that
mineral resources are not used to fund arms groups.
Such certification systems must include both
the producers and the buyers. Moreover, it is also
imperative that the assets of armed and terrorist groups
overflowing in Africa be tracked with the same rigour
as international terrorist groups through the use of the
full range of counter-terrorism financing mechanisms,
both at the supply chain level and with regard to end
buyers. The strengthening of cross-border security
cooperation through joint regional operations, the
exchange of financial information among countries,
combating environmental crime, the freezing of
assets, extrajudicial cooperation, countering the
illicit circulation of small arms and light weapons and
combating money-laundering are all measures that
must be implemented in a coordinated manner at the
regional and global levels.
(spoke in English)
It is of paramount importance that we nurture a
general understanding of the complex links that exist
among natural resources, their exploitation and violent
conflicts through better coordination of the activities
of the various peacebuilding actors. We need to initiate
a positive dynamic and overcome political divisions,
conflicts of interest and hidden agendas in order to build
a consensus based on shared standards and actions on
conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
Gabon calls on the Security Council to strengthen
the mechanisms available to combat the networks that
plunder natural resources to finance armed groups in
Africa. In addition, we seek the Council members’
support, without reservation, for the efforts and
advocacy of the African Peace and Security Council.
At this critical moment, the African continent is
plagued by the proliferation of armed groups, assaults
by terrorist groups and other asymmetric threats to
peace and stability.
To conclude, I would like to stress the urgent need
for the Council to act with greater determination to
cut off the financing of armed groups that increase
instability and violence in many regions of the world.
Natural resources should not be a curse for the countries
in which they exist.
(spoke in French)
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

22-617337/30

S/PV.9147

Peace and security in Africa

I call on the Minister for National Security
of Ghana.
Mr. Kan-Dapaah (Ghana): I would like to begin
by commending Gabon for convening such a high-level
debate aimed at deliberating on ways to strengthen the
fight against the financing of terrorists via the illicit
exploitation and trafficking of natural resources.
On behalf of Ghana, I also thank Ms. Ghada Waly,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, and Ambassador Bankole Adeoye,
African Union Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace
and Security, for their thought-provoking briefings.
A flip through the atlas of African history reveals
that the battle for control of natural resources, which
often results in civil conflicts, is a well-known
phenomenon. It has served as a key driver of a number
of civil wars that have occurred on the African
continent, particularly in the latter decades of the
twentieth century, prominent among which were the
civil wars of Sierra Leone and Liberia. At the turn of
the new millennium, which heralded an evolution of the
security dynamics on the continent, and when terrorism
and violent extremism began to gain root in many parts
of sub-Saharan Africa, an additional element of that
phenomenon emerged.
Terrorists and violent extremists, who continue
to wreak havoc on countries, particularly in the Sahel
region of West Africa, are increasingly seizing areas
rich in natural resources such as gold and diamonds,
with the aim of exploiting those resources to generate
funds to sustain their heinous crimes against humanity.
To further highlight the nature of that new and
emerging approach, natural resources that could have
been utilized for the development of States continue to
be exploited through illegal mining by terrorist groups,
a development that portends adverse implications for
the natural ecosystems of those States, including, but
not limited to, the destruction of forest reserves and
bodies of water, all of which, of course, contribute to
climate change.
The funds generated from such illegal exploitation
of natural resources are then used for the acquisition of
arms and ammunition to perpetrate terrorist activities,
leading to loss of lives and the destruction of private
and public infrastructure. Currently, such a mode of
terrorist financing, with its attendant implications for
global peace and security, is operating in full force in
countries such as Burkina Faso and Mali. Certainly,
8/30

06/10/2022

the illegal exploitation of natural resources for terrorist
financing creates a vicious cycle that threatens the
territorial integrity of affected States, undermines
efforts to safeguard human security and impedes
actions to meet global climate change goals.
The existential threat posed by that model of
terrorist financing to numerous African Member States
of the United Nations therefore underscores the need
for urgent concerted action by the Security Council,
the wider United Nations membership and other key
stakeholders. Against the backdrop of the prevailing
context, we would like to highlight a number of points
regarding our efforts to prevent terrorist financing
through the exploitation of human resources.
First, a full understanding of the complex nature
of the utilization of natural resources to finance
terrorism appears to be lacking within the international
community. In this regard, we believe there is the need
to enhance all stakeholders’ understanding, including
State and non-State actors. We therefore welcome
today’s debate and encourage other efforts aimed at
raising awareness about terrorist financing through the
exploitation of natural resources.
Secondly, the illicit trafficking of natural resources
for terrorist financing in Africa is sustained by the
ease of cross-border movement of such resources due
to challenges relating to border security management.
We believe that technical, technological and human
capacity-building support aimed at enhancing border
security towards curtailing the illicit export and
movement of natural resources is imperative. We
therefore urge the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and other multilateral and bilateral
partners to provide continued support in the broader
fight against terrorism, including for the enhancement
of border security.
Thirdly, the evolving mode of terrorist financing
through the exploitation of natural resources is
underpinned by weak regulatory policies and
enforcement mechanisms that govern their extraction.
States must therefore be supported in order to
aggressively pursue the building of robust natural
resource policies and the implementation of measures
that eradicate opportunities for terrorist financing
through the exploitation of natural resources. We believe
that must be accompanied by greater transparency
regarding the trade of such resources within the
22-61733

06/10/2022

Peace and security in Africa

international supply-chain system and the promotion of
new investments in Africa for the processing of natural
resources in a manner that supports legitimate trade
and offers better returns to the State.
Fourthly, we believe that support for regional
counter-terrorism
frameworks
that
prioritize
information-sharing among nations and the conduct of
joint operations aimed at curtailing the illicit trafficking
of natural resources across borders is imperative. In
that regard, and without violating the tenets of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, we believe
that home-grown counter-terrorism frameworks such
as the Accra Initiative, which is a cooperative and
collaborative security mechanism between seven
West African countries aimed at curbing the spread
of terrorism and violent extremism from the Sahel
region to coastal West Africa, must be supported to
prevent terrorist financing via the illegal trafficking
of natural resources. The Accra Initiative, through
the joint ad hoc operations that have been undertaken
under its auspices, has thus far been successful in
dismantling terrorist cells and hubs for transnational
organized criminal groups along the common borders
of member States. We believe that with the support
of the international community, the Accra Initiative
can serve as a potent subregional counter-terrorism
initiative that promotes multi-country collaboration to
prevent terrorist financing through the exploitation of
natural resources.
At the national level, the Government of Ghana
continues to enforce the existing laws established to
prevent terrorist financing. The anti-terrorism act, which
was enacted in 2008, criminalizes terrorist financing
and material support for terrorists, among others. In
addition, Ghana has completed the development of
a comprehensive anti-money laundering bill, which
when passed into law, would criminalize uncontrolled
financial transfers and illicit wealth acquisition. We
have also established a Financial Intelligence Centre
that has been instrumental in ensuring real-time
monitoring and the flagging of suspicious transactions
from banks and other financial institutions.
More important, the Government of Ghana
continues to enforce laws regarding the acquisition of
mining concessions by private individuals and entities,
while clamping down on illegal mining. In that regard,
the Government of Ghana has enhanced efforts at
establishing State presence in the vast areas along the
country’s borders to prevent the creation of terrorist

S/PV.9147

cells for transnational organized crime, which often
facilitate illegal trafficking in natural resources.
In conclusion, I must emphasize that Africa deserves
the full dividends that accrue from the extraction of
its abundant natural resources to enable the continent
to deliver on its promise of providing sustainable
development for its people. That has become even more
imperative in view of the prevailing global economic
challenges arising from the shocks of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, among other things.
The evolving phenomenon of terrorist financing
via the illicit exploitation of Africa’s natural resources
therefore presents a clear and present danger to the
stability of African States. That phenomenon cannot be
viewed solely as an African problem, because the funds
that are generated from the exploitation of the natural
resources in Ghana could be used to finance terrorism
in other parts of the world.
Concerted efforts by all stakeholders within the
international community is required — for that, we
believe, is the surest path to deprive terrorist groups of
the funds they so need to unleash terror on the world.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America and member of President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I would like to thank Gabon for calling this
important meeting and welcome you, Foreign Minister
Adamo, to preside over it today. I also want to thank
Commissioner Bankole Adeoye and Executive Director
Waly for their informative briefings. I welcome the
participation of Ghana’s Minister for National Security,
India’s Minister of State for External Affairs and the
United Arab Emirates’ Minister of State.
We all have an interest in countering the illicit
trafficking in natural resources in Africa, which
amounts to stealing wealth away from the people of
Africa. It is in our interests to prevent traffickers from
using their criminal activities and their illicit wealth
to fuel conflict and terrorism. And it is in our power
to prevent the environmental degradation, the use of
child labour, the displacement of populations, human
rights violations and abuses and the loss of Government
revenue that is a by-product of illicit trafficking.
Today I would like to focus on three core areas
we believe the Security Council and the entire United
Nations system should focus on to counter those

22-617339/30

S/PV.9147

Peace and security in Africa

activities: first, the dangers of individuals linked to
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) and terrorist-linked groups across Africa;
secondly, the threat posed by the Wagner Group in that
area; and third, the tools that we have at our disposal to
weaken those who plunder natural resources to finance
armed conflict and terrorism. Let me take them one
by one.
First, in the African context, the presence of
Al-Qaida and ISIS-linked individuals and groups
warrants close monitoring and action. Those groups
threaten Somalia, Mozambique, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Nigeria, the Sahel and Sinai
regions and, through ISIS financial facilitation networks
in countries, including South Africa. Money continues
to be the lifeblood of terrorists. We must bolster our
efforts to go after financiers and financial facilitators
of terrorists and terrorist organizations, and we must
stymie vital resource streams that take advantage of
weak regulatory oversight.
Secondly, one of the most immediate and growing
concerns in Africa is the Kremlin-backed Wagner
Group’s strategy of exploiting the natural resources of
the Central African Republic, Mali and the Sudan, as
well as other countries. Those actions are thoroughly
documented and irrefutable. We know those illgotten gains are used to fund Moscow’s war machine
in Africa, the Middle East and Ukraine. Rather than
being a transparent partner and improving security,
the Wagner Group exploits client States that pay for
their heavy-handed security services in gold, diamond,
timber and other natural resources. That is part of the
Wagner Group’s business model. Make no mistake:
people across Africa are paying a heavy price for the
Wagner Group’s exploitative practices and human
rights violations.
We have the power to go after those who exploit
natural resources and fund armed conflict and terrorism,
and we have to wield that power effectively and with
urgency. The Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, along with the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and the other Counter-Terrorism Compact entities, have
an essential role to play in that regard.
10/30

06/10/2022

In the 1267 Committee, Member States must take
a more proactive approach to countering Al-Qaida
and ISIS in Africa. We applaud the 1267 Monitoring
Team’s recent reports, which keep the Committee
apprised of the evolving terrorist trends in Africa.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
also play critical roles in working with Member States
on a range of counter-terrorism practices, and in June,
CTED published a trend alert on that very topic. And
CTED Member States’ assessments provide crucial
information that can strengthen whole-of-society
and whole-of-Government approaches to prevent and
counter terrorism financing.
Sanctions are also integral to combating the
trafficking in natural resources. The sanctions regimes
of the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Libya, Somalia and South Sudan
have specific sanctions designation criteria concerning
the illicit trafficking of natural resources. And from
a counter-terrorism perspective, the 1267 ISIL and
Al-Qaida sanctions regime is an effective Security
Council tool to stop the flow of resources through the
designation of specific ISIS and Al-Qaida branches,
members and their support entities.
Finally, I want to make clear that all counterterrorism efforts must respect the rule of law and human
rights. Failing to comply with those international
obligations contributes only to increase radicalization
to violence. Again, I want to thank my colleagues from
Gabon for raising this vital issue at the start of their
presidency. I look forward to us working together in
the days, months and years ahead to cut off the funding
that drives conflict and stamp out the illicit trafficking
in natural resources.
Mr. Muraleedharan (India): Let me begin by
conveying my best wishes and greetings to you,
Mr. President, on Gabon’s presidency of the Security
Council for this month. The topic chosen for the debate
is extremely important not just for Africa, but all of us
in the context of the global fight against terrorism.
I thank Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
His Excellency Mr. Bankole Adeoye, African Union
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security,
and Mr. Paul-Simon Handy, Regional Director for East
Africa and Representative to the African Union Institute
22-61733

06/10/2022

Peace and security in Africa

for Security Studies, for their valuable briefings that
have enriched today’s debate.
In recent years, terrorist and armed groups have
been making deep inroads by exploiting security gaps
and fragile governance institutions on the continent,
particularly in the Horn of Africa, the Sahel and East
and Central Africa. These regions have remained
vulnerable to money-laundering and terrorist financing.
Terrorist and armed groups are increasingly funding
their activities through illegal exploitation of natural
resources, the trafficking of wildlife, and extortion,
among other well-known activities. Terrorist groups
have also found new ways to finance their activities
by exploiting the rapid development of information
and communication technology and other technologies
related to financial transactions, encryption and varied
modes of transportation and delivery.
Preventing these inimical outfits from gaining
access to financial resources is therefore crucial to
effectively countering their violent attacks. While
some States lack the legal operational frameworks and
necessary capacities for countering the financing of
terrorism, other States are clearly guilty of aiding and
supporting terrorism and wilfully providing financial
assistance and safe haven to terrorists. While we must
enhance capacities of the former, the international
community must collectively call out the latter and hold
them accountable for such double-speak.
The global fight against terrorism cannot succeed
without conscious and coordinated efforts to counter
the financing of terrorism; it is the same with the global
fight against armed groups. In this context, allow me
to flag the following key aspects for the Security
Council’s consideration.
First, we need to recognize the fact that terrorism,
like armed conflicts, is expanding in Africa. Al-Qaida
and terrorist groups in different parts of Africa
affiliated with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) have gathered significant strength in recent
years, thriving on the illegal mining of artisan gold,
rare minerals, gemstones, uranium, coal and timber,
and so on, through illegal trade networks facilitated
by transnational criminal networks. Such terrorist
groups as Al-Shabaab have put in place elaborate
revenue-collection networks to support their terrorist
activities. If left unaddressed, terrorism may seriously
jeopardize peace prospects in several parts of Africa
already ravaged by armed conflicts.

S/PV.9147

Secondly, as has been pointed out by our African
colleagues in the Security Council, groups in Africa
linked with and inspired by ISIL and Al-Qaida are
embedding themselves in multiple domestic conflicts,
attempting to influence and control the political
agenda. Engaging them in national reconciliation will
only provide legitimacy to terrorism and give them
access to the necessary financial means and resources.
This will be a self-defeating goal. What we need is a
zero-tolerance policy towards all forms of terrorism,
irrespective of their motivation.
Thirdly, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the States of the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
(CEMAC) have been playing an important role in
combating the financing of terrorism. Such initiatives
as the Intergovernmental Action Group against MoneyLaundering in West Africa and CEMAC’s regulations
against money-laundering and terrorist financing have
helped to create institutional frameworks in the African
States. These regional and subregional measures need
to be further strengthened, in line with the standards
prescribed by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF).
Fourthly, the FATF has been promoting effective
implementation of legal, regulatory and operational
measures for combating money-laundering, terrorist
financing and other related threats to the integrity
of the international financial system. It is important
that Member States, including African States, bring
their anti-money-laundering and anti-terror-financing
monitoring frameworks to par with international
standards, including those promoted by the FATF. We
also believe that more cooperation between the FATF
and various United Nations entities, including the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT)
will benefit Member States.
Fifthly, the international community needs to
enhance assistance to African countries to strengthen
capacities to fight illegal exploitation of and trade in
natural resources. Furthermore, a violence-free Africa
would need to be freed from the shackles of external
forces driving the exploitation of natural resources on
the continent. In this regard, India has been calling for
a development paradigm that is Africa-led and Africaowned and centred on the progress and development
of the people of Africa. India has been contributing
proactively to further international cooperation to
combat the financing of terrorism at regional and
international levels. In 2018, India contributed $550,000

22-6173311/30

S/PV.9147

Peace and security in Africa

to the UNOCT’s programmes that target capacitybuilding in the countries of East and Southern Africa.
In 2021, too, we contributed $1 million to further
strengthen these efforts.

06/10/2022

terrorists and their backers against open, diverse and
pluralistic societies.

Sixthly, we need to support national and regional
security initiatives and capacity-building efforts
aimed at effective border surveillance and security.
Such African security initiatives as the Multinational
Joint Task Force, the South African Development
Community Mission in Mozambique and the African
Union Transition Mission in Somalia have proven their
success in countering terrorism. These are Africa’s
home-grown solutions, led by African countries, which
have a better understanding of their own issues. The
international community should provide sustainable
and adequate financial and logistical support to such
regional security initiatives.

Sheikh Al Nahyan (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to thank Your Excellency
Mr. Moussa Adamo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Gabon, for convening this important and timely debate.
I welcome the participation of the African Union
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security,
Ambassador Bankole Adeoye, and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Ms. Ghada Waly, and thank them for their
valuable briefings. I join others in welcoming the
participation in this meeting of the representatives of the
Central African Republic, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, the Arab Republic of Egypt, the Kingdom
of Morocco and Senegal, as well as the Head of the
European Union Delegation to the United Nations.

Lastly, the continuing lack of representation of
Africa in the permanent category of membership of the
Security Council is a historical injustice that needs to
be corrected sooner rather than later. Given that more
than half the Security Council’s work is focused on
Africa, India has been consistently calling for greater
representation of the continent, through an increase
in seats in both the permanent and non-permanent
categories of membership of the Council, in line with
the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration.

The United Arab Emirates is deeply concerned
about the consequences of the illegal exploitation of
natural resources on the peoples meant to be the first to
benefit from those resources. As they plunder resources,
armed groups, organized criminal networks as well as
terrorist groups operating transnationally, are inflicting
unprecedented levels of violence and depriving entire
communities from enjoying their basic rights, sense of
security and economic well-being, hence turning those
resources into a curse.

India has been at the forefront of the global fight
against terrorism. As a country that itself has been a
victim of State-sponsored cross-border terrorism for
the past nearly three decades, India is acutely aware
of the socioeconomic and human cost of terrorism.
In 1996, long before the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001), India took the initiative to pilot the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
with the objective of providing a comprehensive legal
framework for combating terrorism. We have signed
and ratified all the major conventions and protocols on
terrorism adopted by the United Nations, and we are
part of all major global initiatives including the FATF.

The illegal exploitation of natural resources is a
challenge with a long history of negative impacts on
peace and security, both in Africa and elsewhere in the
world. According to the United Nations, the exploitation
of natural resources has fuelled at least 18 violent
conflicts since 1990. The magnitude of that challenge
cannot be overstated. The problem is not just the illegal
nature of resource exploitation, it is also the corruption
and unequal distribution of revenues that negatively
affects the growth and sustainable development of
communities. Indeed, the illegal exploitation of natural
resources has been supporting activities undertaken
by terrorists and criminal groups that use resource
revenues to fund their operations and spread their
influence, at the expense of peoples and States that are
supposed to benefit from them.

As the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
this year, India will be hosting a special meeting of
the Committee in Mumbai and New Delhi later this
month, on 28 and 29 October. I reiterate our invitation
to Member States to participate in this meeting and
hope that it will contribute positively towards creating
a global architecture that is fit for purpose and
effectively responds to the new tech tools deployed by
12/30

This problem is not limited to national or regional
borders; it also affects countries that act as centres for
processing and trading in raw materials, developed
countries that consume and increase demand for those
resources and all countries whose security is threatened
22-61733

06/10/2022

Peace and security in Africa

by cross-border terrorist groups and organized
criminal networks. In addition to those consequences,
the irresponsible exploitation of those resources and
the unsustainable practices by those groups lead to
environmental degradation that exacerbates one of the
most difficult and most dangerous global challenges in
our era, namely, climate change. There is an undeniable
correlation between the illegal exploitation of
resources, climate change and the spread of terrorism.
As the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres,
reported to the Council in December 2021 (see
S/PV.8923), environmental degradation contributes to
enabling non-State armed groups to exert influence and
manipulate resources to their advantage. As we have
seen in the Sahel, the regions that are most vulnerable
to climate change tend to also be vulnerable to the
scourge of terrorism.
We note that there continue to be signs indicating
that, across Africa and beyond, transnational terrorist
groups are diversifying their revenue streams through
involvement in the illicit exploitation of, and trafficking
in, natural resources. They take advantage of the lack
of sufficient understanding within the international
community of the growing links between the illicit
use of natural resources and terrorism financing. At
a time when terrorist groups are using more new and
emerging technologies to achieve their goals, existing
regulatory frameworks are struggling to keep up with
those developments, which may prevent them from
achieving desired results. Accordingly, the United
Arab Emirates calls on the international community
to hold accountable all those individuals and entities,
including terrorist groups, corporations and other
actors, who partake in the illegal exploitation of natural
resources. Furthermore, we call on the international
community be unrelenting in its joint efforts to ensure
that the proceeds of natural resources are not used to
kill innocent people, including women and children,
and instead to ensure that those proceeds are used to
serve communities across the continent, to advance
them, sustain their development and support their
safety and stability.
In addition to being a legal obligation, the United
Arab Emirates believes that working in earnest to counter
the illegal exploitation of African natural resources
is a moral imperative and a strategic investment that
directly benefits the entire world. Having chaired the
Kimberley Process in 2016, we have demonstrated
our endorsement of strong regulatory frameworks as

S/PV.9147

well as the necessity for coordination among different
mechanisms in order to ensure community protection
across Africa, especially for women and children. The
United Arab Emirates has ensured that its regulations
are in line with international standards to counter
illegal trading of natural resources. We have also put
in place an infrastructure to achieve those goals, and
we continue to develop and improve best practices in
that regard.
While reaffirming the need to strengthen
cooperation among States, we also stress the need to
devise a stronger collective response to that threat, as
called for by the Council in its resolution 2482 (2019),
which underlined the link between organized crime
and terrorism, as well as recognizing the benefits
that terrorist groups derive from organized crime.
The United Arab Emirates will continue to work
with our African partners to counter terrorist groups
and criminal networks, including those that smuggle
weapons between our two regions and help terrorist
groups such as Al-Shabaab and the Houthi militias to
build up their deadly arsenals.
In the context of today’s discussion, I suggest that
we promote our efforts in the following areas.
First, we must continue discussions such as this
one and reflect further on how to devise mechanisms
that allow for engaging key relevant actors on this
issue, including other international organizations and
the private sector. In that regard, we can benefit from
the role played by the African Union and other regional
actors that have a better understanding of the complex
ramifications of the problem before us today. That
should help us to take joint preventive measures and
move from a reactive approach to a proactive one.
Secondly, the Council must remain ready to use the
various tools available to counter the illicit exploitation
of natural resources when it affects international
peace and security, including through sanctions and
peacekeeping mandates.
Thirdly, there is a great need for building the
capacity of States in the sustainable management
of natural resources, upon their request and with
full respect for their sovereignty. Developing an
inclusive and complete response by the United Nations
means increasing capacity-building support for
Governments — especially those dealing with conflict
and in post-conflict situations — as well as directly
affected communities.

22-6173313/30

S/PV.9147

Peace and security in Africa

In conclusion, I thank you once again, Mr. President,
for your efforts and leadership role in bringing this
matter to the attention of the Council. I reaffirm the
commitment of the United Arab Emirates to continue
working with other members and partners to address
challenges to peace, stability and prosperity in Africa.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation once again congratulates Gabon
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We welcome you, Mr. Foreign Minister, to
preside over this meeting. State Councillor and Foreign
Minister Wang Yi asked me to convey his warm
greetings to Your Excellency and reiterate China’s
full support for Gabon’s presidency. I believe that,
under Gabon’s leadership, the Council will have a very
productive month. China will continue to strengthen
its collaboration with Gabon and all the other African
members of the Security Council to see that the
Council plays its due role in resolving hotspot issues
and addressing common challenges in Africa. I thank
Executive Director Waly and Commissioner Adeoye
for their valuable briefings just now. I also listened
carefully to Mr. Handy’s briefing.
Africa is a continent with rich natural resources
and great development potential. In recent years, many
African countries have formulated policies on resource
development appropriate to their national conditions,
developed energy and mining industries in an
orderly manner, advanced industrialization and made
remarkable achievements in sustainable development.
At the same time, in some conflict areas, the illegal
exploitation of, and trafficking in, natural resources,
including wildlife resources, is rampant, benefiting
armed groups and terrorist forces and becoming an
important trigger and enabler of conflict.
As the Foreign Minister said, natural resources
should not become a curse to the peace and
development of African countries. The international
community should pay close attention to the issue
and support and assist African countries in devising
effective responses. In that connection, I would like to
make the following points.
First, we should help African Governments to
strengthen their capacity to manage natural resources.
It is a country’s sovereign right to appropriately protect,
use and manage their natural sources, but that is based
on the premise that national Governments are able to
exercise effective control over territories with such
14/30

06/10/2022

resources. Without that, development is out of the
question, and armed groups and terrorist organizations
are free to profit from illegal trafficking.
Enhanced governance capacity can effectively
reduce opportunities for the illegal trafficking of
resources for illicit gains. As we have seen, the
Government of Mozambique has recovered territories
in the north of the country from terrorist groups with the
help of the Southern African Development Community.
By creating a favourable environment for oil and gas
development, the Government of the Central African
Republic has expanded its exercise of State power and
subjected the diamond trade and export to regulations.
The international community should give its
full support to African Governments’ leading role
in resource management and help Governments of
conflict-affected countries to improve their capacities
in industrial planning, financial oversight and secure
enforcement, to transform their resource advantage
into development gains.
Secondly, we should support African countries in
deepening regional cooperation and jointly tackling
challenges. In recent years, through the cross-border
activities of armed groups and criminal organizations,
Al-Shabaab has frequently operated in Somalia’s
neighbouring countries, in particular Ethiopia and
Kenya. Terrorist forces in the Sahel have spilled over
to countries along the Gulf of Guinea. In Central
Africa and the Great Lakes region, armed groups are
deeply involved in the cross-border trafficking of
natural resources.
To solve those problems, the countries in the region
need to work together to strengthen cooperation in
joint law enforcement and border control to crack down
on illegal trafficking in natural resources. Equally
important is the need to develop legal trade, leverage
comparative advantages and build regional industrial
supply chains to unlock regional development potential.
In that regard, the Office of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
has made great efforts to promote the transparent and
sustainable development of natural resources in the
region. The African Union and other regional and
subregional organizations have supported African
countries in strengthening resource management and
fostering regional cooperation and have made positive
progress in that regard. The international community
22-61733

06/10/2022

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.9147

should lend strong support to such efforts so that natural
resources can truly benefit regional development.

their negative impacts on the exploitation of natural
resources and export revenue generation in Africa.

Thirdly, we should focus on systematic
and underlying issues and promote sustainable
development. Armed groups and terrorist forces tend
to thrive in underdeveloped regions. Local populations’
involvement in illegal trafficking is often driven by
poverty, unemployment and other livelihood concerns.
That situation is exacerbated by the severe inadequacy
of international development aid and humanitarian
assistance to Africa. In the final analysis, sustainable
and inclusive development is the key to achieving longterm stability and lasting peace.

China has always supported African countries
in the sound development and utilization of natural
resources, under the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation and Belt and Road Initiative frameworks,
by adhering to the principles of equity, equality, mutual
benefit and win-win cooperation. In China’s friendly
cooperation with Africa, we attach great importance
to the coordinated development of economic, social
and environmental aspects and strive to help African
countries to achieve sustainable development and
improve the well-being of local populations.

China hosted the ministerial meeting of the
group of friends of the Global Development Initiative
during the high-level week of the General Assembly
and announced seven major actions to implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development with
a view to promoting the alignment of development
strategies among countries and regional organizations
and garnering more resources and means for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
hope that the international community, in particular
developed countries, will honour their commitments,
step up efforts to help Africa to eradicate poverty, ensure
food security, accelerate infrastructure development,
promote education and employment and provide more
substantive development assistance.

China will continue to work with the international
community to support African countries in harnessing
their natural resource dividends and making a greater
contribution to maintaining peace and stability and
achieving common development.

Fourthly, we should work to establish a more fair
and equitable global resource value system. In some
African countries, we have observed peculiar situations
in the development of natural sources. Some have rich
mineral resources but are financially strapped as a
country. Some have outrageously high gasoline and
diesel prices while being large producers of crude oil.
While some Western energy and mining businesses
reap windfalls in Africa, local populations are getting
poorer. The underlying cause of those peculiarities is
the unfair and inequitable international economic order,
which has chronically trapped African countries at the
low end of the global industrial chain. The situation
should be rectified as soon as possible.
The international community should support
African efforts to derive more added value from their
natural resources and elevate their position in the
global value chain. Those countries that have imposed
unilateral sanctions should lift them in order to reduce

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome you, Mr. Minister, as you
preside over the Security Council today. We thank the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly; the African
Union Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace
and Security, Mr. Bankole Adeoye; and the Regional
Director for East Africa and Representative to the
African Union at the Institute for Security Studies,
Mr. Paul-Simon Handy, for the assessments they have
shared with us. We would also like to express our
gratitude to the Gabonese presidency for convening
this meeting on such an important topic and greet all of
the high-level representatives participating today.
Natural resources are an extremely important
factor for sustainable development and are often
the basis of the economies of many developed and
developing countries, and States have inalienable
sovereignty over them. In that regard, the fight against
illegal mining activities is also the prerogative and
duty, first and foremost, of the Governments of the
countries with such resources. It is our view that the
natural resources found in African soils belong to the
peoples of those countries and it is they who should
be the main beneficiaries of such wealth. African
countries have not yet recovered from the damage
inflicted by the colonial Powers, who transformed them
into one big quarry. The local population gained next
to nothing, while the Western metropolises profited at
their expense. This continues to date, with the majority

22-6173315/30

S/PV.9147

Peace and security in Africa

of profits from natural resources going straight into the
pockets of multinational corporations in certain wellknown countries and to the banks.
Given the significant resource potential of the
countries in sub-Saharan Africa, the broadening
influence of illegal armed groups in conflict-affected
African countries — such as Mali, Burkina Faso,
Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Congo, Somalia, the Central African Republic and
Mozambique — results in them gaining control
over mineral deposits to obtain additional sources
of financing.
We note the efforts undertaken by national
Governments to combat illegal armed groups in
order to ensure security, stability and control over
natural resources in the interests of the socioeconomic
development of their own countries. We consider it
fundamentally important to ensure that the leading role
in that process is played by Africans themselves. We
welcome the approach taken by States facing challenges
in that regard to collectively resolve issues, including
the issue of combatting illegal armed groups, ensuring
border control, supporting small domestic mining
businesses and compiling joint registries.
Resolution 2482 (2019) is aimed at countering
the nexus between terrorism and organized crime.
Implementing the goals of the resolution will require a
package of measures aimed at, inter alia, strengthening
cooperation between national judicial and law
enforcement agencies. It is also important to improve the
system of international treaties on extradition and legal
assistance in criminal cases. Another important step in
this respect involves the comprehensive criminalization
of participation in organized criminal groups, as
provided for by the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, while also establishing
severe penalties for such participation.
We advocate the provision of comprehensive
assistance in strengthening relevant national
mechanisms through the United Nations. At the
same time, we believe that such assistance should be
provided at the request of the States concerned, while
fully taking into account their national priorities
and specific needs. A one-size-fits-all approach to
providing assistance is unacceptable and creates more
problems than it resolves. We note the readiness of the
African Union and regional organizations to provide
the needed assistance.
16/30

06/10/2022

We consider the Kimberley Process as an
important international mechanism in preventing
illegal armed groups from profiting from the illegal
trade in natural resources in Africa. Russia is a
responsible member of that multilateral format, and its
work is aimed at preventing the fuelling of conflicts
through the proceeds of illegal mining and trade in
rough diamonds. Russia’s 2021 chairmanship of the
Kimberly Process made a significant contribution to
the substantive implementation of the Process’ current
goals. At the same time, we believe that attempts
to politicize the activities of the Kimberly Process
are counterproductive. Its mechanisms should help
gain effective control over resources, not lead to
their misuse by which the authorities are limited in
exporting diamonds and armed groups profit from their
sale. That is unfortunately the situation in the Central
African Republic.
The illegal trafficking in natural resources
financing terrorists and illegal armed groups has
another equally important side. Who is buying those
resources? After all, it is common knowledge that illicit
trafficking in natural resources is a long-established
way of financing terrorism. Who provides the illegal
armed groups with the funds, weapons and explosives
to carry out terrorist acts and attacks? We regularly
draw attention to the violations of the arms embargoes
against terrorist organizations in various regions of the
world, including the African continent.
We are convinced that the problem of the provision
of military goods to terrorists cannot be silenced. It is
important to monitor the channels that sustain terrorists
and take measures to cut them off. We cannot ignore
the imbalance in the sanctions regimes imposed on a
number of African States, which do not correspond to
the actual situation, interfere with the State-building
plans of national Governments and prevent them from
effectively establishing control over their territory.
At the same time, the same sanctions and arms
embargoes are unable to curb the process of arming
illegal armed and terrorist groups, which only continue
to strengthen their positions, including with the
proceeds from the exploitation of natural resources.
As a result, non-State entities are often better armed
than Government troops, as was the case in the
Central African Republic. The arms embargo prevents
the Sudanese authorities from adequately training
and forming its military contingent to ensure peace
22-61733

06/10/2022

Peace and security in Africa

and security in Darfur and resolve the issue of its
porous borders.
In Somalia, the Federal Government has been asking
for years for the heavy weaponry needed to effectively
fight Al-Shabaab, which, at the same time, has been
expanding its own supply chains and profiting from
smuggling charcoal. In order to facilitate the training
of joint armed forces and State security structures, we
believe that considering the possibility of relaxing the
sanctions regime imposed on South Sudan is justifiable.
Illegally exploiting and smuggling minerals and timber
is an acute problem in that country, including in the
Equatoria states.
In conclusion, we would like to express our regret
that, in its anti-Russian rage, the representative of
the United States has gone so far as to put the issue
of assistance to African partners through Russian
companies at the centre of his country’s statement.
That reveals their real plans and objectives in terms
of what they truly need from African countries. The
words of the representative of the United States
concerning “client” States are surprising. Clearly, that
is the language and the category that only the United
States uses. We do not use such terminology. For us,
African countries are not clients, but partners. Besides,
let us recall that, in Syria, under the guise of counterterrorism, the United States is stealing Syrian oil. In
the beginning, a company with an obscure past was
designated for that purpose; then, when the situation
seemed scandalous, even to Washington’s allies, the
American side returned to stealing Syria’s natural
resources through other means — its military.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate. I thank our briefers, as well, for their insights. I
would like to highlight three considerations.
First, as today’s briefers and previous speakers
underlined, we recognize the clear link between the
illicit trading in natural resources and conflict. From
Somalia to the Sudan, to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the illicit trade in natural resources of
charcoal, timber and gold has helped fund conflict and
the activities of armed groups. And we should bear
in mind that the increased global demand for critical
minerals essential to decarbonization and our green
growth goals risks exacerbating the illegal sourcing of
natural resources, if appropriate action is not taken.

S/PV.9147

We therefore need a concerted and coordinated
effort to tackle illicit trafficking as a root cause of
conflict. In that context, I welcome the African Union’s
efforts in conflict prevention, including the work of
Commissioner Bankole Adeoye and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. As the Security
Council too, we should look at ways to strengthen
the Council’s sanctions regimes against individuals
and entities that illegally exploit natural resources to
fund, prolong or provoke conflict. The Council acted
in Somalia by banning the export of charcoal to inhibit
Al-Shabaab’s revenue streams. We can and should do
more across other mandates.
Secondly, we need stronger regulation and
governance efforts to tackle the illicit trafficking in
natural resources, including stringent certification
and verification processes. In that context, the United
Kingdom is proud to support a number of international
mechanisms that deliver in that regard, including the
Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains
of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk
Areas of the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development and the Kimberley Process, which
helps stop the flow of conflict diamonds.
Lastly, we share the view of previous speakers on the
dangerous consequences of the exploitation of Africa’s
natural resources by private military companies.
There is significant independent reporting outlining
the exploitation of gold resources in the Sudan and
the Central African Republic through Wagner Group
subsidiaries like Meroe Gold. Gold extraction and
smuggling operations risk undermining local stability,
present significant ecological and human rights risks
and are a significant loss to the Sudan. The United
Kingdom reiterates its concerns about the Wagner
Group’s activities in Africa, which undermine effective
resource governance and offer no sustainable solutions
to Africa’s security challenges.
In conclusion, I once again thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate during Gabon’s
presidency of the Security Council.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mr. President, I would like welcome you and
the other senior ministers who are here in the Security
Council today. First of all, I appreciate the timely
initiative of your country, Gabon, in convening this
debate. I also thank the briefers for their statements.

22-6173317/30

S/PV.9147

Peace and security in Africa

Mexico maintains that in order to effectively combat
terrorism and armed groups’ activity, it is essential
to draw a clear distinction between the two. That is
precisely why we have different legal frameworks in
this area, each with its own corresponding institutional
framework. Strategies for combating terrorism and
armed groups active in Africa certainly have to
consider the links between the exploitation and illicit
trafficking of natural resources, among other variables.
However, it is vital to understand that the criminal
activity perpetrated under the general umbrella of
this phenomenon is extremely varied. There are
differences, both in terms of organization and the scope
of the commercial networks, between the exploitation
and trafficking of diamonds by armed groups in the
Central African Republic and the theft of livestock
on transhumance routes in the Sahel. And there are
differences between those two practices and the illegal
collection of taxes on agriculture and livestock or
Al-Shabaab’s exports of Somali charcoal.
What all those illicit practices have in common is
that they thrive where State institutions are absent or
unable to perform their functions. We are concerned
about the possibility that groups such as Al-Shabaab
may even supplant State authority by acting as
providers of services in communities that receive little
support from their Governments. I would like to point
out three issues based on those considerations that I feel
are relevant to today’s discussion.
First, we call for combating the financing of
terrorism and other armed-group activities on a basis
of objective and specific conclusions, with the aim of
identifying the causes of violence as well as the legal
instruments and public policies needed for effective
action. Mexico believes that the reports of the panels of
experts of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council
can provide valuable information on the ways that
certain illicit activities contribute to financing armed
and terrorist groups. We therefore urge all Member
States to support their work and use their reports in
decision-making. Some of those reports, such as those
on the Central African Republic or the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, show that illicit transfers of small
arms and light weapons are financed by revenues from
the exploitation of natural resources. Those weapons
are involved in many of the attacks on civilians and
humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel. In order to
specifically combat that scourge, my country supported
18/30

06/10/2022

resolution 2616 (2021), whose implementation must
be ensured.
Secondly, regional coordination is indispensable,
given the transnational nature of natural-resource
exploitation and trafficking networks. To that end, it
will be essential to strengthen judicial cooperation
measures to investigate and punish those involved
in such activities. Legislation in the area should
also be harmonized and judicial and fiscal systems
strengthened. It should also be recognized that
predominantly military solutions are inadequate and
can help to spread conflict. The geographic expansion
of violence in the Sahel is a clear example of that.
For that reason, thirdly, my country urges for
greater attention to the causes that lead young people
to join the ranks of terrorist organizations and armed
groups. The international community must come up
with new strategies and greater support resources,
for example through the peacebuilding architecture,
in order to promote the creation of economic, labour
and comprehensive training opportunities for young
people. Mexico has contributed to implementing
those types of programmes in some countries in our
region, with positive results. It would be good to
deepen our exchanges on those experiences because
they are tools for preventing violence and building
sustainable development.
Finally, Mexico stresses that combating terrorism
and armed groups should be done in strict compliance
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. A failure to do so runs counter to the
obligations of States and compromises the legitimacy
and effectiveness of combating such threats.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s very important
meeting, and to express my best wishes for your
country’s presidency of the Security Council. I also
thank Executive Director Waly, Commissioner Adeoye
and Mr. Handy for their briefings today.
As previous speakers have noted, Africa possesses
an abundance of natural wealth. Yet for far too long
the illegal exploitation of those resources has hampered
growth and contributed to instability. Across the
continent, armed groups and terrorist organizations
are engaging in the illicit exploitation and trafficking
of natural resources, which sustain and fund their
activities while acting as a clear obstacle to sustainable
development. This prevents local communities from
22-61733

06/10/2022

Peace and security in Africa

benefiting from their environment, diverts income and
exacerbates vulnerabilities, and particularly affects the
lives of women, girls and marginalized groups. In the
Lake Chad basin, cattle rustling and livestock raids have
funded Boko Haram and the Lord’s Resistance Army.
In the Horn of Africa, Al-Shabaab generates funds
through illicit taxes on agriculture, livestock, wildlife
and charcoal. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
revenue from timber, cocoa, coffee and gold has been
linked to terrorism funding. In northern Mozambique,
the illicit trade in gold, rubies and other resources is
helping to finance the ongoing insurgency.
The Secretary-General has noted that environmental
degradation enables non-State armed groups to extend
their influence and manipulate resources to their
advantage. The situation is being exacerbated by
growing climate-related security risks and conflictrelated hunger, which are driving displacement,
creating vulnerability and increasing tensions owing
to competition over scarce resources. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo is home to many of the world’s
most valuable resources, including cobalt, tantalum
and lithium, which power our phones and laptops and
are essential to the green transition. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo is also home to more than
100 armed groups, including some affiliated with
sanctioned entities and terrorist organizations. There
are transparency and governance issues to address as
well, and when they go unresolved, they benefit those
who continue to have access to these valuable resources.
Ireland echoes the calls to encourage all States
to continue efforts to end those illegal activities and
to hold to account all who are complicit in that illicit
trade. Lack of accountability is a problem that goes
beyond national borders. We would welcome stronger
legislative and regulatory frameworks and greater
investigative and institutional capacities so as to better
understand, prevent and counter crimes related to
the illegal trafficking in natural resources and illicit
financial flows. Achieving that requires the cooperation
of all relevant stakeholders.
Ireland commends the work of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. The Kimberley
and Nairobi Processes are some of the mechanisms
that illustrate how the issue can be tackled. The
implementation of the recommendations from the 2021
high-level regional workshop on natural resources in
the Great Lakes region in Khartoum could also have

S/PV.9147

an important impact. Ireland served as a co-lead for
the Financial Action Task Force’s study on moneylaundering arising from environmental crime. The
Task Force’s 2021 report showed that those engaging in
environmental crime are generating significant profits
by using front companies to mix legal and illegal
goods and payments early on in their resource supply
chains. Ireland fully supports the report’s conclusions
and recommendations.
We reiterate the importance of good governance
and engaging with Member States and regional
and subregional organizations and entities, and we
encourage the effective implementation of all the
relevant Security Council resolutions and key United
Nations conventions. We recognize the implementation
of the Financial Action Task Force standards as an
effective tool for combating money-laundering from
environmental crime, and we support the mandated
sanctions regimes and the work conducted by their
respective Panels of Experts. It is imperative that
they be given the tools they need to carry out their
investigations and reporting on this urgent matter.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Ms. Waly, Mr. Adeoye and Mr. Handy for their
briefings. I would like to stress several points.
First, it will be crucial to strengthen our knowledge
of the financing of armed and terrorist groups in Africa
through the direct exploitation of natural resources.
There is still a lack of data, especially on terrorist groups,
but the work being done within the framework of the
United Nations and the African Union is particularly
useful in that regard. The Panels of Experts also have
an important role to play, and I would like to cite as
an example the Panel of Experts on Somalia, which
this year, in cooperation with the Somali authorities
and those of several States in the region, managed to
prevent an export of charcoal that violated the embargo,
a practice that has been a major source of funding for
Al-Shabaab in the past.
Peace operations could also give greater
consideration to these factors in the implementation
of their mandates. The illegal exploitation of natural
resources enables some armed groups to remain outside
peace processes, such as in the Sudan and South Sudan.
We must continue cooperating on efforts to counter
such issues, which are destabilizing the continent.
We should strengthen tracing and certification
processes for natural resources such as the Kimberley

22-6173319/30

S/PV.9147

Peace and security in Africa

Process and combat impunity for crimes linked
to natural resources. In that regard, we encourage
Kimberley Process partners to work together to
redefine conflict diamonds in a way that is adapted to
new patterns of conflict, which will also help to foster
the economic prosperity of the States in the region.
Progress has been made. I welcome the work of the
Regional Committee of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region in combating the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, which was held in
April in Kinshasa and has made it possible to make
progress on implementing a strategy for artisanal gold.
France is fully engaged in those efforts as a member
of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.
In 2021 we also joined the European Partnership for
Responsible Minerals, which has a number of projects
aimed at improving the sustainability of mineral supply
chains, including in the Great Lakes region. France
continues to support the African Legal Support Facility,
which helps strengthen financial and administrative
governance in the extractive sector.
Finally, the international community must be clearsighted in the face of the predatory strategy deployed
by the Wagner Group’s mercenaries on the continent.
There is no doubt that the Wagner Group’s involvement
in the sovereign activities of several countries, while
supposedly for security reasons, is partly aimed
at controlling their gold and diamond mines. That
involvement has been accompanied by a decline in
democracy, the weakening of the sovereignty of the
host States and the closure of public space, and has
led to massive human rights violations and to colossal
payments that could otherwise have been aimed at
benefiting the local populations. In particular, we
encourage the African Union to include the exploitation
of natural resources in the planned discussions on the
review of the 1977 Convention for the Elimination of
Mercenarism in Africa.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank you, Mr. President,
for putting this important topic on the agenda, and
Ms. Waly, Mr. Adeoye and Mr. Handy for their
insightful briefings.
Conflict over the management of natural resources
is one of the key drivers of violence against civilians,
and crimes related to such resources have given rise to
one of the largest illicit economies in the world. It is
closely linked to terrorism, organized crime, corruption,
human rights violations, financial crime and other
threats to peace and security. In many African countries,
20/30

06/10/2022

illicit trafficking in natural resources constitutes a
significant source of revenue for armed groups. Gold,
minerals, timber, charcoal and wildlife products are all
exploited and smuggled illegally out of conflict zones.
Those activities fuel violence and other conflict drivers
locally and in the region. Indeed, recent analysis by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
describes this method of financing as strategically
important for a range of affiliates on the African
continent of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Al-Qaida. We therefore clearly need a collaborative
and holistic approach to ending illegal exploitation,
strengthening natural resources management and
addressing systematic weaknesses that enable illicit
flows and economic corruption. Let me explore three
lines of work that should be taken up towards that end.
First, institutional weaknesses need to be
tackled at the national level. It is important to create
robust governance mechanisms and strengthen core
institutions and democratic oversight. Domestic
regulatory frameworks are crucial, including licensing
regimes, monitoring practices and enforcement
mechanisms such as law enforcement. In that regard,
technical assistance remains important.
Secondly, regional cooperation is vital to support
for both national and global efforts. The African
Union’s High-Level Panel on Illicit Financial Flows
from Africa and its report demonstrated important
leadership. Regional bodies are often best placed to
promote effective knowledge-sharing. Furthermore,
the Financial Action Task Force is the global standardsetter for combating money-laundering and terrorist
financing. Its global network with regional bodies is
important to ensuring effective implementation of
the standards.
That brings me to my third point, which is that
global and multilateral cooperation is key. Illicit flows
do not respect national borders. Norway and the United
States recently launched the Nature Crime Alliance.
We hope that will encourage political will, mobilize
financial commitment and bolster operational capacity.
The recommendations of the High-level Panel on
International Financial Accountability, Transparency
and Integrity for Achieving the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development also provide important
food for thought on addressing the limitations of
current financial systems. Increased transparency
and global anti-corruption standards are among
its recommendations.
22-61733

06/10/2022

Peace and security in Africa

Security Council sanctions are also an important
contribution to ending illicit trafficking. They could
be strengthened by adopting further designations, not
just of direct perpetrators but also of entities and actors
benefiting from the illicit trade in natural resources
further down the supply chain. And we would like to see
better synergy among United Nations efforts, including
through the creation of a closer link between the work
of the Panels of Experts, peacekeeping missions and
the relevant national Governments and of dedicated
focal points to exchange information related to the
exploitation of natural resources.
The Security Council itself has already recognized
the negative impact that the illegal exploitation
and trafficking of natural resources has on conflict
prevention, post-conflict peacebuilding and the
consolidation of peace. To meet the scale of the threat,
we need broad-ranging and targeted national, regional
and multilateral efforts.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, and through you, His Excellency
Mr. Michael Moussa Adamo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, on Gabon’s assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October. Kenya
holds Gabon’s principled and cooperative efforts in
the Council in high regard. We therefore have every
reason to anticipate, Sir, that your presidency will be
exemplary, and, to that end, our delegation will provide
with you every support.
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
important debate, and I also thank Ambassador Bankole
Adeoye, Ms. Ghada Waly and Mr. Paul-Simon Handy
for their briefings. I further welcome the participation
of the representatives of the Central African Republic,
Egypt, the European Union, Morocco and Senegal in
today’s meeting.
Terrorist groups affiliated with Al-Qaida and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant are a dire threat
to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of — and
human rights in — far too many countries in Africa.
Their militant campaigns begin with real or imagined
grievances that are shaped by fascist ideologies into
violent demands for political and social change.
In time, even as the poverty of their ideas and the
political impossibility of their positions become
clear, sustaining their campaigns becomes an end in
itself. Their need for financing, smuggling and other
criminal capabilities tips the scales as their ideological

S/PV.9147

commitment falls. The motivation for personal financial
gain and corruption among their leaders and financiers
takes deep root. Groups that started claiming the
moral prestige of a just cause eventually become thinly
veiled brutal criminal enterprises. We fear that if they
are not defeated in the Sahel, the Horn of Africa, the
Great Lakes and elsewhere, the promises of security,
development and human rights that bind the United
Nations will remain unmet.
Unfortunately, Africa is filled with opportunities
for these malign actors. According to the United Nations
Environment Programme, the continent possesses
30 per cent of the world’s mineral reserves, 8 per cent of
the world’s natural gas and 12 per cent of the world’s oil
reserves. It has 40 per cent of the world’s gold and up to
90 per cent of its chromium and platinum. The largest
reserves of cobalt, diamonds, platinum and uranium in
the world are in Africa. And, in most African countries,
natural capital accounts for between 30 per cent and
50 per cent of total wealth.
Africa’s immense riches are at the core of the world’s
industrial production and wealth creation. But the fact
that they originate in countries with limited criminal
justice systems makes them an irresistible opportunity
to terrorists and insurgents. They dominate and hold
territory to trade in illicitly acquired natural resources.
Counter-terrorism and counter-insurgency efforts
are being undertaken by States, regional forces and
international partners. They are necessary and must
continue, but by now we can all agree that they are
insufficient because the groups are able to financially
replenish themselves. We can also agree that African
States making heroic efforts are doing so with limited
financial means, significantly because they cannot
stop or tax illicit revenues. When the wealth is instead
claimed by criminal actors, the State cannot meet
its obligations, citizens become disillusioned, and
grievances grow and feed into terrorist recruitment. To
truly come to grips with the challenge, we need to grant
that militants are not the only ones partaking of this
destructive exploitation.
By recognizing the fundamental underpinnings of
today’s debate, we are led by logic to conclude that the
protection of peace and security in Africa is impossible
if the continent’s natural resources are not reclaimed
for the people. For real development to be achieved, we
must break with the inhumane approaches used in the
last few centuries, in which African natural and human

22-6173321/30

S/PV.9147

Peace and security in Africa

resources have been an important part of international
trade and production. We therefore propose that the
bottom line of our debate be that law and order must
prevail in the extraction, transport, sale and utilization
of Africa’s natural resources, and that law and order
must reflect fairness and equity to Africa. To deliver
peace and security, we must minimize illegality and
immorality in relation to Africa’s natural resources at
the local, national, regional and international levels.
During our presidency of the Security Council in
October 2021, we convened a high-level debate on the
Great Lakes Region about utilizing the region’s natural
resources lawfully to promote peace (see S/PV.8884).
By consensus, the Council, in a presidential statement
adopted at that meeting (S/PRST/2021/19), renewed its
commitment to support countries in the Great Lakes
to address the root causes and drivers of conflict by
harnessing the region’s natural resources for social
and economic transformation. Our urgent task now
is to build on this promise and extend it to all other
regions suffering from illicit extraction. We must then
go beyond the statements and practically support the
following measures if security is to prevail in Africa.
First, the main changes must be directed at the
private sector. All companies globally importing and
processing African natural resources should have
in place conflict-minerals-awareness and conflictminerals-monitoring
systems.
Governments
in
countries receiving these resources should deliver the
necessary regulation and compliance oversight as a way
of contributing to peace and security. Transparency
to enable pro-peace advocacy will help ensure that
offending companies deal with reputational and
market consequences.
Secondly, on the global nature of illicit trade,
we have to close the gaps that enable illicit financial
flows from natural resource sales in Africa. This needs
effective legislation, sectoral risk assessments and
rules against conflicts of interest. Corporate structures
must be made more transparent. Trade invoice fraud
must be punished. Supply chains must be analysed for
weaknesses, and countermeasures must be deployed.
Providing expertise and funding in these areas is a win
for peace and security.
Thirdly, with regard to supporting States in the
fight, support for national and regional military actions
must be accompanied by campaigns to strengthen States
in accordance with national priorities. We also urge
22/30

06/10/2022

that the Council consider additional ways of supporting
affected countries to ensure that under-governed
spaces are properly controlled by States. This will
require either changing the nature of United Nations
peacekeeping or providing predictable and adequate
financing, including from assessed contributions, for
regional forces. The Peacebuilding Commission has a
valuable role to play as well.
Fourthly, with regard to action at the regional
and continental level, Africa’s peace and security
architecture should incorporate the tools we have
recommended. Further, the implementation of the
Africa Continental Free Trade Area should account for
conflict minerals so that the Area strongly supports
countering terrorist and insurgent groups.
Fifthly and finally, the Security Council must be
more committed to dismantling terrorism networks in
Africa. As we have stated often, the Council must apply
in an equal manner its counter-terrorism architecture
against terrorist groups and their affiliates, including
those in Africa, such as the Al-Qaida-linked Al-Shabaab.
This should include sanctions against dealing in what
we want to call “terrorist minerals”.
It is time for Africa’s natural resources to fully
benefit the African people. Our common efforts to
this noble end will determine the human condition
in the twenty-first century. It is our determination to
change the old ways of doing business that will deal
the greatest blows to terrorist groups and their cruel
assaults on the innocent.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Let me begin by echoing
others in thanking the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
Ms. Waly, African Union Commissioner Adeoye and
Regional Director Handy for their insightful remarks
and recommendations. Albania commends the
achievements and commitments already made by the
African Union and UNODC on this matter.
We attach great importance to today’s discussion,
as insecurity across Africa creates a breeding ground
for terrorists and non-State armed groups to benefit
from the illicit trafficking in natural resources. As we
heard from other speakers, terrorist groups and private
military companies are using the natural resources
in Africa as a key source of funding. We regret that
instead of natural resources being positive agents of
growth, they have brought more misery, displacement
and violence to local populations. The misuse of
22-61733

06/10/2022

Peace and security in Africa

natural resources has a direct and vast impact on the
security and development of a State. Weak States
with inadequate legal and regulatory frameworks are
particularly vulnerable to mismanagement, corruption
and the unfair distribution of natural resources.
Albania strongly condemns the illegal exploitation
of, and trafficking in, natural resources. Responses
to those illicit activities cannot focus on national and
military solutions alone — they require robust regional
and international action. Natural resources are widely
used in complex international supply chains, and we
urge all actors to play their role in ensuring that the
local populations reap the benefits of their use.
As previous Council resolutions have called for, a
deeper understanding of the nexus between terrorism
and organized crime using natural resources is required
to formulate effective policies. Governments must
strengthen their legal frameworks in order to better
address the threat and ensure that terrorist and armed
groups are held accountable, as well as foster greater
coordination between regional and international actors
in order to end this illicit business.
Albania calls on the States of the Great Lakes
region to engage in the effective implementation of
the Protocol against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources in the Great Lakes Region. We strongly
support structures such as the Regional Certification
Mechanism and Kimberley Process certification so as
to better monitor and control the exploitation of, and
trade in, natural resources. We encourage the support of
international partners to implement commitments from
the Lusaka Declaration to Fight Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources in the Great Lakes Region.
In conclusion, we believe that improving the
traceability and disruption of illicit financial flows is
key to countering terrorism and organized crime. We
encourage all actors to strengthen information-sharing
and adopt a global policy response in order to identify
illicit financial flows. A holistic approach is required
to disrupt criminal and terrorist networks, and it must
be complemented with programmes that incorporate
socioeconomic growth, particularly those that create
opportunities for youth, as they bear the greatest cost.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): At the outset, I take the
liberty of saying that I am honoured to participate in
this debate. The presence of Minister Michael Moussa
Adamo is a clear demonstration of the Gabonese
Republic’s commitment to the maintenance of

S/PV.9147

international peace and security. I am also appreciative
of the valuable inputs provided to the Security Council
by the briefers.
The recourse to the illicit trafficking in natural
resources, including wildlife, for pursuing other
criminal enterprises is a concerning trend in Africa.
The link between natural resources and conflict
prevention remains relevant, and the Council must
make its contribution, within its mandate, to the fight
against illegal trafficking in natural resources, where
they relate to armed conflict.
Almost four years ago, the Secretary-General
was invited to brief the Council and highlighted how
the control and exploitation of, and access to, natural
resources had been a catalyst for armed conflicts
(see S/PV.8372). In June 2022, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate issued a worrisome
trend alert on the use of proceeds from the exploitation,
trade and trafficking of natural resources for the
purposes of terrorism financing, a phenomenon about
which the Security Council already expressed its
concerns in resolutions 2195 (2014), 2462 (2019) and
2482 (2019).
Precious metals, such as gold and silver, as well
as copper and diamonds, along with other natural
resources, like timber, charcoal and wildlife, have been
a source of financing for terrorist groups. For instance,
Da’esh has profited from its control of large swaths of
territory in Syria and Iraq in order to generate income
from oil and natural gas. Al-Shabaab has been imposing
taxes on agriculture and livestock and, therefore,
maintaining its resilience against the efforts to curb
its action. It is also fresh in our memories how Boko
Haram resorted to illegal trafficking in fish products in
the Lake Chad basin. Reports allude to gold mining as
a source of funds for terrorist groups in the Sahel and
Central Africa. Creative and diversified illegal means
of financing enable armed groups of all sorts to have
far-reaching clout.
There are open avenues for a constructive role by
the Council, within the scope of its mandate, to address
this issue. Capacity-building is a central element.
Exploring how peacekeeping operations, for instance,
could contribute to strengthening local institutional
capacities management and regulation of extractive
resources could be an avenue. One example was the
authorization for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the

22-6173323/30

S/PV.9147

Peace and security in Africa

06/10/2022

Congo to support the regulation of mining resources in
that country.

case-by-case manner, taking the specificities of each
situation into account.

The Security Council may also have a role in
encouraging capacity-building initiatives for domestic
and international actors to curb the illicit exploitation
and trade of natural resources in conflict-affected
countries. One way to do so is in partnership with the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Given its unique
composition and bridging mandate, the PBC is well
placed to put forward coordinated efforts within
the United Nations system, with a view to creating
sustainable cycles of peace and development.

As is widely recognized, there are no necessary
or mechanical linkages between the exploitation of
natural resources and armed conflict. On the contrary,
such resources are generally a significant source of
prosperity and stability, and they must be seen as such.

The Council has also already imposed sanctions on
the trade in natural resources, with the aim of preventing
it from fuelling armed conflicts. The sanctions regimes
in Somalia and South Sudan are examples of that
approach. It remains imperative, however, that all
precautions be taken in order to avoid indirect harm to
local populations.
Supporting compliance with the legal framework
provided by the Convention on International Trade
in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora is
also essential in order to counter illicit trafficking.
In that regard, police cooperation, including within
multilateral initiatives, is a particularly useful tool.
Police operations conducted worldwide have resulted
in significant seizures and arrests, underscoring the
relevance of intelligence-sharing among agencies
and States. Initiatives that, for instance, increase
certified extraction of natural resources, promote fairtrade practices and support the development of local
communities in conflict-affected areas are also key.
Those projects not only reduce the lawlessness that
afflict extractive industries in many countries, but
they also help Governments to combat the corruption
schemes that lubricate links between illicit production
and armed activity. In fact, the Kimberley Process has
revealed how cooperative arrangements involving civil
society, Governments and international organizations
may lead to sound regulation. Trade in conflict
diamonds has sharply decreased as a result.
Terrorism
and
organized
crime
are
different phenomena. The fight against them requires
distinct approaches and legal remedies. Equating one
with the other runs counter to the goal of finding an
effective solution to the different challenges that they
present. In order to address the issue, the Security
Council should tailor its approach to each case in a
24/30

Brazil condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. The repudiation of terrorism is a
constitutional principle, which guides our international
relations. Brazil is also firmly committed to the fight
against organized crime and takes its responsibility
to protect the environment and promote sustainable
development seriously. We pledge unwavering support
for the international efforts against the illicit traffic in
natural resources and its use as a source of funding by
any armed group.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I just wanted to note that, at the very beginning
of her statement, the representative of France said
that we needed to collect data and numbers and find
out more about the illicit exploitation of resources by
illegal armed and terrorist groups and how to combat
it. We fully support that, and it is fully in line with
the topic of today’s meeting. However, because of some
statements made by colleagues, including our French
colleague, our meeting is also taking on a new topic,
which we already mentioned earlier in our statement,
relating to Russian assistance to African countries.
In that regard, I would like to pose the following
question. It would probably be a good idea to find and
calculate the data on how many hundreds of billions
of dollars were received by France under agreements
with French-speaking States on providing them with
independence. How much money was made by France
in exploiting the resources of countries that used to be
under their colonial yoke and in the context of what
followed that, namely, colonialism under contract,
much of which is still continuing? Once we know that,
we will be ready to talk about predatory strategies
and policies.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of France has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
22-61733

06/10/2022

Peace and security in Africa

Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
Council members will understand that I wish to again
take the floor after the statement by the representative
of the Russian Federation. I want to specify that, in
my statement, I did not mention relations between
Russia and Africa. I am therefore quite surprised to
hear this statement by the representative of the Russian
Federation. I just mentioned the case of mercenaries of
the Wagner Group. That is the end of my statement.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the floor
to the representative of the Central African Republic.
Mr. Nzessioue (Central African Republic) (spoke
in French): The Central African Republic is very
honoured to participate in this important debate. We are
glad to see light being shed at a very high level, under
the Gabonese presidency, on an issue that is important,
if not crucial, to international peace and security,
and which, in our view, represents a not insignificant
pathway for resolving long-standing conflicts.
The link between the exploitation of resources,
security and the financing of conflicts is clear. For us, it
is therefore important to find the best and most effective
ways and means to overcome that challenge and
prioritize actions to combat both the illegal exploitation
of natural resources and the illicit financial flows from
such trafficking and transnational criminal networks.
In that context, we think that State capacity-building
in terms of security, criminal justice and strengthening
international and regional cooperation to better secure
borders is essential. The same applies to the need for
effectiveness and consistency in international actions
and decisions.
Against that backdrop, I would like to talk about my
country, the Central African Republic. We have been
dealing with repeated conflicts, in which the illegal
exploitation of resources has been widespread since
2013 with the emergence of the Séléka coalition and
perpetuated today by the Coalition des patriotes pour le
changement, supported by the remaining mercenaries
from the border conflict zones. Armed groups, through
the full or partial control that they have over certain
strategic trade routes, such as the livestock migration
routes in the northern and western parts of the Central
African Republic and the trade route towards the
north-east, impose all kinds of taxes, customs duties
and mandatory escorts to fund themselves and equip
themselves with weapons. The same routes are used
for trafficking in basic goods, livestock and minerals,

S/PV.9147

mainly gold and diamonds, coming from areas under
their control.
In 2007, a study by the International Peace
Information Service showed that the trade route
towards the far north-eastern part of the Central African
Republic alone generated approximately €2.5 million
annually for the benefit of armed groups. That is a
considerable amount in the Central African Republic,
and it is enough to sustain the conflict and ensure their
continued plundering of the economy.
We are not trying to shift the primary responsibility
for that state of affairs from the Central African
Republic. The inherent weaknesses of the State,
combined with a chronic lack of governance for
decades, largely contributed to that. The Central
African Republic has repeatedly tried to deal with that
through grass-roots talks in 2014, the Bangui Forum
on National Reconciliation in 2015 and, recently, in
March, a national dialogue, which resulted in strong
recommendations for better control and redistribution
of resources, which we are striving to implement.
I would like to commend and pay tribute to the
international community, which has consistently
supported the Central African Republic in that task.
Nevertheless, I would like to highlight some decisions
taken by the international community, which, instead
of helping to resolve or ease the problem, exacerbated it
from our viewpoint and experience.
I would first of all like to talk about the sanctions
under the Kimberley Process, introduced in 2013 at the
height of the crisis, which had an adverse impact. The
total suspension of diamond exports from the Central
African Republic completely disrupted the sector and
encouraged an upsurge in illegal activities, fraud and
the development of criminal networks. Easing the
sanctions regime and implementing an operational
framework, with areas that are considered to be in line
with various Government initiatives, would enable us
to resume some activities today. In our experience, the
sanctions under the Kimberley Process are applicable
only to areas under State control, leaving entire areas
under the control of armed groups without a solution.
We therefore need to now think about how the
Kimberley Process sanctions could be more effective in
those areas beyond Government control.
Another important point that needs to be
underscored here, as we mentioned, is the need to
restore State authority throughout the country’s entire

22-6173325/30

S/PV.9147

Peace and security in Africa

territory. That objective must be prioritized in any
strategy aimed at fighting criminal and illicit activities.
However, the introduction of the arms embargo on
the Central African Republic has completely prevented
the State from exercising its full authority and has
allowed armed groups to take root across the country.
Due to the absence of State authorities, those armed
groups have been able to spread across the Central
African Republic’s territory and conduct their activities
without any resistance from, or counteraction by, the
international forces entrusted with the mandate to
prevent that scenario.
We commend the considerable progress made in
the context of resolution 2648 (2022), which affords
the Central African armed forces the opportunity to
equip themselves. We will nevertheless continue to ask
that the arms embargo imposed on the Central African
Republic be fully lifted in order to enable the State to
exercise full control over its territory.
The counter-offensive led by the Central African
Republic against the backdrop of the attack by
the Coalition des patriotes pour le changement in
December 2020, aided by the Russian Federation,
Rwanda and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, contributed to weakening the hold of those
armed groups on Central African Republic territory.
Control over certain strategic roads and mining areas
was regained, considerably diminishing the capacity
of the armed groups to conduct their activities and
inflict damage.
In that context, we believe that we will be able
to make progress in that regard, namely, by taking
coherent decisions that will not undermine the capacity
of States but rather help States to restore their authority
over their entire territory and build their capacity to
combat cross-border organized criminal networks.
We believe that is the path that will lead us to jointly
achieve those goals in the interest of sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Kenya has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I apologize for taking the
floor again, but I was tempted by other members doing
the same.
The resources in Africa have been key to its vicious
oppression since at least the Berlin Conference. We
26/30

06/10/2022

can debate today over who is most to blame, but what
is important is the future. That is a future of African
ownership, where Africans benefit from our resources.
They should be protected, including through changes
to the permanent membership of the Security Council,
so we have Africans able to sustain a campaign for
fairness, justice and sustainability.
We have heard the appetite for reform from the
membership of the Council. Let us now act on it so
that Africa is not just a subject of conversations about
who is responsible for what, but rather an empowered,
respected and included participant.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, I should like to congratulate
the sisterly Republic of Gabon for presiding over the
Security Council for this month. I wish you a successful
and distinguished presidency. We commend you on
your choice of the important topic under consideration.
We also thank Ms. Ghada Waly, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
Mr. Bankole Adeoye and Mr. Paul-Simon Handy for
their valuable briefings today.
The illicit exploitation by criminal and armed
groups as well as terrorist organizations of the
abundant economic resources of our African continent
constitutes a major challenge that requires stepping
up efforts to address it as an essential pillar of our
comprehensive efforts to combat those illegal outlaw
groups. In that regard, I should like to focus on the
following few points.
First, it is important to bolster the legal national
and international laws that address the exploitation of
natural resources so that they do not fall into the hands
of criminal groups. That should be done by acceding to
various relevant regional and international conventions
as well as developing the necessary national laws.
Secondly, we reiterate the pivotal and irreplaceable
role of a strong nation state in addressing all criminal
and outlaw acts perpetrated by terrorists and armed
groups that attempt to benefit from the vacuum caused
by weak national institutions in some States. The
international community should provide all forms of
necessary support to those States upon their request so
as to promote their capacity and allow them to gain full
22-61733

06/10/2022

Peace and security in Africa

control over their territories, impose the rule of law and
prevent any attempt to exploit State resources.
Thirdly, believing in African solutions to African
problems, it is important to promote the efforts led by the
African Union and the regional economic communities,
which adopt practical approaches that take into account
the specific circumstances of every region.
Fourthly, it is also important to combat illicit
trafficking networks of natural resources. In the absence
of demand, there will be no supply. In that regard, we
need to undertake inclusive and collective efforts based
on political, ethical and legal commitment by States
receiving those resources. That should be implemented
through partnerships with the private sector, including
transport, insurance and industrial companies and so
on, so as to ensure that they never deal with any African
natural resource if there is any suspicion that it is the
subject of illicit trafficking by outlaw groups.
Egypt is implementing all Security Council
resolutions related to addressing money laundering and
terrorist financing. We have therefore implemented
our national strategy to address money laundry and
the financing terrorism, while integrating the concept
of risks at the national level with all relevant national
authorities and the private and public sectors, as well as
civil society. Egypt continues to support peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts at the international and
African levels, including contributing military troops
and police to peacekeeping operations. In addition, we
provide our African brothers with technical support and
capacity-building pursuant to their national priorities,
especially in capacity-building for armed forces, lawenforcement and police troops. In that context, Egypt
stresses the importance for the Security Council to
respond and support Africa’s fair request to provide
African peace operations with the necessary funding
and resources through the United Nations budget.
As a country with deep roots in African, Egypt will
continue to support the efforts of its African brothers in
maintaining peace and security throughout the African
continent so as to tackle the underlying causes of
conflicts and address criminal outlaw groups.
Finally, I would like to align myself with the
valuable statement just made by Mr. Kimani, Permanent
Representative of Kenya, before I took the floor.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Skoog.

S/PV.9147

Mr. Skoog: First of all, we want to thank Gabon
for putting this important topic on the agenda of the
Security Council. We congratulate Gabon on assuming
its Security Council presidency for the month of
October, and we are very grateful for the possibility
to participate in this high-level debate. I also want to
thank the briefers for their insights on this topic.
There is indeed an urgent need to understand how
armed groups and terrorists finance their activities
through the illicit trafficking in natural resources, as
well as to identify the tools that can be used to tackle
the problem.
In conflict-affected countries, especially in Africa,
terrorist and insurgent groups often exploit the control
of areas and key transit and trade hubs to profit from
illicit trafficking and environmental crime. The
management of natural resources can unfortunately
fuel conflict and radicalization. Insurgents are able to
exploit the lack of governance to benefit from black
markets and illicit trafficking. That criminal activity
is problematic on many levels. Not only does it sustain
terrorists and armed groups, enabling them to establish
themselves and expand their activities, it also deprives
the population of precious resources that should be used
for its own development. It can also lead to significant
environmental damage or the over-exploitation of
timber and wildlife, for example, as we heard earlier.
Let me express our appreciation for the efforts
of Gabon and other African countries in fighting
terrorism and preventing terrorists and armed groups
from gaining control over natural resources. The
European Union (EU) is contributing to those efforts
through its training and capacity-building missions on
the African continent in the Sahel, Somalia, the Central
African Republic and Mozambique. The EU Naval
Force Operation ATALANTA, off the coast of Somalia,
fights piracy and armed robbery at sea, but it has also
responded to the illicit trade in charcoal that finances
terrorism in Somalia.
The fight against the financing of terrorism and
money-laundering is a priority for us. The EU is also
committed to providing capacity-building to third
countries in order to build their anti-money-laundering
capability. We support several projects in West Africa
and the Horn of Africa aimed at strengthening the
anti-money-laundering and financial investigation
capacity of the countries concerned. We also have
counter-terrorism experts in five of our EU delegations

22-6173327/30

S/PV.9147

Peace and security in Africa

in Africa who help build partnerships between the EU
and Africa in that crucial area — very much in the
spirit that our colleague from Kenya just referred to
regarding African ownership.
The problem, however, is not only technical, it is
political. That is the reason why trafficking and natural
resources are at the heart of the European Union Great
Lakes strategy, which is currently being discussed with
EU member States and will hopefully be adopted before
the end of the year. We are also working to prevent
terrorist groups from gaining access to international
money and natural resources markets. That means
tackling money-laundering at the international level.
The EU has developed a solid regulatory framework
for preventing and combating money-laundering and
terrorist financing threats.
In addition to targeting the financial flows directly,
we also have to target the natural resources that are
being traded. In that regard, I would like to mention the
Kimberley Process, in which the EU has been actively
engaged from the beginning. We have learned a lot
from the Process. The traffic in conflict diamonds has
virtually stopped. We have also managed to change
attitudes, reinforcing the idea that natural resources
belong to their communities, not to militias. We have
sparked a debate on responsibility in sourcing natural
resources. The EU’s Conflict Minerals Regulation
requires all EU importers of tin, tantalum, tungsten and
gold to carry out due diligence on their supply chain.
Africa is a continent incredibly rich in natural
resources, from forests and wildlife to minerals and
precious stones. Whenever terrorist groups take control
of those resources to enrich themselves and sustain
their criminal activities, it means that development
opportunities are lost for local communities. It means
that profits and livelihoods that should belong to the
people are stolen. It means that tax revenues that
should have funded schools and hospitals are lost.
Instead, the exploitation fuels violent conflict and
leaves environmental destruction in its wake. We all
share the responsibility to combat it together. The
European Union remains committed to partnering
with African countries to fight the financing of armed
groups and terrorists through the illicit trafficking of
natural resources.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
28/30

06/10/2022

Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me once again warmly congratulate our
brother country of Gabon and you personally, Sir, on
your presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October. I want to assure you of the Kingdom of
Morocco’s full support. I also welcomed the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Michael Moussa Adamo, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Gabon, who presided over the
start of meeting. And I want to thank Ms. Ghada Waly,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Bankole Adeoye,
African Union Commissioner for Political Affairs,
Peace and Security, and the civil-society briefer.
Today’s debate is extremely important, as it is
unfortunately taking place in a context in which the
African continent continues to suffer from the plight
visited on it by armed terrorist and separatist groups,
which are hindering Africa’s development, prosperity,
stability and integration. Transnational organized
crime, terrorism and separatism are intertwined. They
threaten regional and international peace and security
and undermine the stability and territorial integrity
of States. Illicit trafficking in fish stocks, wildlife
resources, oil and gas products, precious stones and
rare-earth metals and the illicit exploitation of forests
and charcoal have become widespread means of
financing terrorism and armed groups in Africa. In that
regard, the international community should commit
more urgently than ever to preventing and combating
such activities and eradicating the groups that are
placing international and regional peace and security
in peril.
The Kingdom of Morocco welcomed the adoption
of resolutions 2195 (2014), 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019),
which not only acknowledge the exploitation of natural
resources as a source of financing for organized crime
and terrorism but also encourage Member States to
pursue efforts to ensure the accountability of all those
responsible for and complicit in illicit trafficking.
My country would like to pay heartfelt tribute to the
Secretary-General for his tireless efforts in support
of our collective action against organized crime and
terrorism. In that regard, I commend the important
achievements of the Office of Counter-Terrorism and
UNODC in combating those scourges and definitively
drying up their illicit sources of financing. Similarly,
the commitment of the international community and the
consensus reached by the Security Council in line with
its primary responsibility for maintaining international
22-61733

06/10/2022

Peace and security in Africa

peace and security, as well as the role of regional and
subregional organizations, have been fundamental
and decisive in blocking armed and terrorist groups
from illicitly exploiting natural resources, particularly
in Africa.
In upholding its international obligations, Morocco,
which is a State party to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, considers the
financing of terrorism a serious crime in its national
legislation and regulations. In that context, I should like
to outline some of the measures my country has taken
to combat the financing of terrorism, including through
the illicit exploitation of natural resources.
First, we have implemented a multidimensional
and proactive strategy combining both a holistic
approach and cutting-edge initiatives, integrating legal,
institutional, financial and security aspects.
Second, we have upgraded the national mechanism
responsible for this area with the establishment in 2021
of a national commission under the aegis of the National
Financial Intelligence Authority, which is responsible
for monitoring and implementing the sanctions imposed
by the relevant Council resolutions, that is, resolutions
1373 (2001), 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004).
Third, in 2022, among other things, the presidency
of the Middle East and North Africa Financial Action
Task Force prioritized pursuing the implementation
of the action plan agreed on with the Financial Action
Task Force, consolidating the governance foundations
within the group, improving evaluation processes
and monitoring and strengthening the group’s role in
various international bodies and activities.
Fourth, in May Morocco hosted the ninth ministerial
meeting of the Global Coalition against Da’esh, the
first to be convened in Africa, bringing together 84
countries, with a session dedicated to Africa, including
on aspects related to financing.
Fifth, the Security Council sanctions regimes for
the financing of terrorist activities and armed groups
have been rigorously implemented.
Sixth, there has been full cooperation with
international bodies in strengthening our national
system for combating money-laundering and terrorist
financing and bringing it into line with the provisions
of international conventions.

S/PV.9147

Seventh, we have ramped up information-sharing
and financial intelligence at the regional and
international levels.
Lastly, we have provided assistance to and
cooperated and shared our expertise with countries of
the region and all others wanting to do so.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco reaffirms
its firm commitment to combating and pursuing
regional and international cooperation with a view to
eliminating the sources of financing of armed, terrorist
and separatist groups and promoting peace and stability
in Africa and throughout the world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Equatorial Guinea.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): As I take the floor in this very important
debate, I would first of all like to congratulate the
Republic of Gabon on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October, commend it
for preparing an excellent programme of work, wish it
every success this month and convey our pleasure that
it has included today’s topic — such an important and
relevant topic for our African region — in its programme
of work. I would say, as Ambassador Tommo Monthe of
Cameroon has said, that October is the month of Africa
in the Security Council, since all the topics on the very
important programme of work have to do with our
African region.
I would also like to welcome the presence here today
of Mr. Michael Moussa Adamo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Gabon; Mr. Bankole Adeoye, African Union
Commissioner for Political Affairs; Ms. Ghada Fathi
Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime; and Mr. Paul-Simon Handy,
Regional Director for East Africa and Representative
to the African Union Institute for Security Studies,
and I commend and recognize their work in their
respective roles.
Natural resources are a meaningful factor in the
economic development of a country, as they provide
tangible value that has a positive impact on its economic
and social development. However, the exploitation and
illicit trafficking of such natural resources is one of
the factors that leads to conflict, as they are used to
finance armed groups and terrorists. Despite the fact
that, ultimately, a country’s natural resources should
be used to improve the standard of living and well-

22-6173329/30

S/PV.9147

Peace and security in Africa

being of its people, unfortunately, the exploitation and
illicit trafficking of those resources is connected to the
acquisition, use and proliferation of weapons by armed
groups, which gives rise to war and conflict, as we have
seen and continue to see in many of the conflicts in
our region.
It is well-known that natural resources, while they
are not the only cause, are at the origin of most of the
conflicts in the world in general and more particularly
on the African continent, where they lead to violence,
desolation, the destabilization of Governments, loss of
innocent human lives, famine and poverty. In short, all
types of development are halted in areas where such
resources are exploited and traded to finance armed
groups and terrorists.
Agents and companies operating in those areas
directly or through their subsidiaries that by and
large acquire such resources through illicit activities
by means of illegal trafficking are supporting and
contribute to fuelling those conflicts without taking
into account the consequences that their actions may
have on the affected communities.
In the light of everything I have just mentioned,
and in order to address this desperate situation, my
delegation believes that the following issues should be
taken into account.
First, we should further strengthen the cooperation
between the Security Council, the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the regional and
subregional communities, strengthen the frameworks
for the prevention, management and resolution of
conflict and find practical and efficient solutions to be
implemented in combating the financing of armed and
terrorist groups through the trade and illicit traffic of
natural resources.

30/30

06/10/2022

Secondly, we should establish a mechanism that
requires companies operating directly or through
subsidiaries in conflict zones to identify themselves,
and require them to carry out due diligence in their
commercial operations to ensure that they are not
trading in conflict resources. Not complying with
due diligence or directly or indirectly supporting or
contributing to conflict for the ultimate purpose of
gaining profit should be sufficient grounds for such
national or multinational companies to be placed
on a sanctions list, which in many cases does not
happen. That is because, up to this point, only groups,
legal entities and facilities physically present in the
countries in question have been sanctioned, but never
the companies or third parties involved in the illicit
exploitation, transformation and commercialization
of the resources that are used to finance armed and
terrorist groups and fuel conflict.
Thirdly, we should envisage the possibility of
developing traceable systems to monitor the origins,
transport routes and destinations of illicitly traded
resources. As we understand it, there are mechanisms
already in place, such as the African Peace and Security
Architecture, the African governance architecture and
the regional economic communities, but they must
work more closely together.
In conclusion, our delegation hopes that the Security
Council, in close collaboration with the African Union
Peace and Security Council and in consultation with
the countries concerned, will intervene more forcefully
to protect the human lives that have fallen victim to the
atrocities perpetrated by armed and terrorist groups.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

22-61733
