VI.

Resolutions adopted on tbe reports of tbe Tblrd Committee

Crimes against Humanity, 201 the lntemational Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment ofthe Crime of Apartheid12 and other relevant intemational instruments,
Reaffirming that the ideologies and practices described
above are incompatible with the purposes and principies
of the Charter of the United Nations and the above-mentioned intemational instruments,
Mindful that the fortieth anniversary of the end of the
Second World War served to mobilize efforts ofthe world
community in its struggle against those ideologies and
practices,
Viewing with deep concern that the proponents of Fascist
ideologies have, in a number of countries, intensified their
activities and are increasingly co-ordinating them on an
intemational scale,
Expressing its concern that Fascist and Nazi and other
totalitarian ideologies and practices are inherited, inter
afia, by repressive racist régimes practising gross and flagrant violations ofhuman rights and the systematic denial
of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
1. Again condemns ali totalitarian or other ideologies
and practices, including Nazi, Fascist and neo-Fascist ideologies, based on racial or ethnic exclusiveness or intolerance, hatred and terror, which deprive people of basic
human rights and fundamental freedoms and of equality of
opportunity, and expresses its determination to combat
those ideologies and practices;
2. Urges ali States to draw attention to the threat to
democratic institutions by the above-mentioned ideologies
and practices and to consider taking measures, in accordance with their national constitutional systems and with
the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the Intemational Covenants on Human Rights,
to prohibit or otherwise deter activities by groups or
organizations or whoever is practising those ideologies;
3. Invites Member States to adopt, in accordance with
their national constitutional systems and with the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the Intemational Covenants on Human Rights, as a matter
ofhigh priority, measures declaring punishable by law any
dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or
hatred and ofwar propaganda, including Nazi, Fascist and
neo-Fascist ideologies;
4. Calls upon ali States, in accordance with the basic
principies of intemational law, to refrain from practices
aimed at the violation of basic human rights and which
constitute a threat to peace and intemational security;
5. Welcomes the fact that on 8 May 1985 the Economic and Social Council held a solemn commemorative
ceremony, in the light oí General Assembly resolution 39/
114, the purpose of which was to underline the continuing
relevance ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations, the importance of intemational co-operation towards peace, security
and development and the promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedoms and in particular the fundamental
right to life, liberty and security of person;
. 6. Gives e~p~ession to the respect felt by today's generat1on for the v1ct1ms of and the struggle of peoples against
nazism and fascism in the Second World War and for the
establishing of the United Nations in order to save mankind from the scourge of war and to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights and in the dignity and worth ofthe
human person;
7. Appea/s to ali States that have not yet done so to
become parties to the lntemational Covenants on Human
Rights, the Convention on the Prevention and Punish20l Resolution 2391 (XXlll), annex.
202 E/CN.4/1503*.

257

ment of the Crime of Genocide, the Intemational Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Convention on the Non-Applicability of
Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes against
Humanity and the lntemational Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid;
8. Reiterates its request to the appropriate specialized
agencies, as well as other intergovemmental organizations
and intemational non-govemmental organizations, to initiate or intensify measures against the ideologies and practices described in paragraph 1 above;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat pays
due attention to the dissemination of information exposing the ideologies and practices described in paragraph 1
above;
10. Invites ali States and intemational organizations to
submit to the Secretary-General their comments and
information on the implementation of the present resolution;
l l. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report,
through the Economic and Social Council, to the General
Assembly at its forty-first session in the light ofthe discussion that will talce place in the Commission on Human
Rights and on the basis of comments provided by States
and intemational organizations.
116th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985

40/149. Human rights and mass exoduses
The General Assembly,
Mindful of its general humanitarian mandate under the
Charter of the United Nations to promote and encourage
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Deep/y disturbed by the continuing scale and magnitude
of exoduses of refugees and displacements of population in
man y regions of the world and by the suffering of millions
of refugees and displaced persons,
Conscious of the fact that human rights violations are
among the multiple and complex factors causing mass exoduses of refugees, as indicated in the study of the Special
Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on this
subject, 2º2
Considering the efforts which have been made to address
this subject within the United Nations, in particular by the
Commission on Human Rights,
A ware of the recommendations conceming mass exoduses made by the Commission on Human Rights to its
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities and to the special rapporteurs for
their study of the violations of human rights in any part of
the world,
Deep/y preoccupied by the increasingly heavy burden
being imposed upon the intemational community as a
whole, particularly upon developing countries with limited
resources of their own, by these sudden mass exoduses and
displacements of population,
Stressing the need to improve intemational co-operation aimed at the prevention ofnew massive flows ofrefugees in parallel with the provision of adequate solutions to
actual refugee situations,
Taking note of the report of the Group of Govemmental
Experts on Intemational Co-operation to Avert New
Flows of Refugees, 203
203 A/401385. annex.

258

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

Taking note once again of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on human rights and mass exoduses, 204
Recalling its resolutions 35/196 of 15 December 1980,
37/186 of 17 December 1982, 38/103 of 16 December
1983 and 39/117 of 14 December 1984 and Commission
on Human Rights resolutions 30 (XXXVI) of 11 March
1980, 2s 29 (XXXVII) of 11 March 1981, 26 1982/32 of 11
March 1982, 27 1983/35 of8 March 1983 28 and 1985/40 of
13 March 1985, 3º
l. We/comes the steps taken so far by the United
Nations to examine the problem of massive outflows of
refugees and displaced persons in ali its aspects, including
its root causes;
2. Invites Governments and international organizations to intensify their co-operation and assistance in
world-wide efforts to address the serious problem of mass
exoduscs of refugees and displaced persons;
3. Welcomes the special interest which the SecretaryGeneral has taken in this question, and reiterates its
204 A/38/538.

request to him to follow closely developments in the field
of human rights and mass exoduses;
4. Encourages the Secretary-General in his efforts to
enable the United Nations to anticípate and react more
adequately and speedily to cases requiring humanitarian
assistance, as mentioned in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the Organization submitted to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session; 205
5. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to keep
the question of human rights and mass exoduses under
review with the objective of making appropriate recommendations conceming the further measures to be taken in
this field;
6. Decides to review the question of human rights and
mass exoduses at its forty-first session.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985
205 Otlicia/ Records ofthe General Assembiy. Thlrly-ninth Seuion. Supp/ement Ño. 1 (A/39/ I ).
