United Nations

S/PV.6270

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6270th meeting
Friday, 12 February 2010, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Transition and exit strategies
Letter dated 3 February 2010 from the Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/67)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-23786 (E)

*1023786*

S/PV.6270

The meeting was called to order at 9.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

António, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, acting head of the European Union delegation
to the United Nations.
It is so decided.

United Nations peacekeeping operations
Transition and exit strategies
Letter dated 3 February 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2010/67)
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bangladesh, Egypt, India, Italy,
Jordan, Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines,
Rwanda and Uruguay, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support; Mr. Alan Doss, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Mission in Liberia;
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone; Mr. Hans Peter Wittig, Chairperson of
the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Germany; His Excellency Mr. Téte

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/67, which contains the text of a letter
dated 3 February 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to
take the floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
should like to thank France for having taken the
initiative to focus our attention on the crucial question
of the transition and exit strategies of peacekeeping
operations.
In the broadest sense, our objective should be
very clear. The Blue Helmets should themselves strive
tirelessly to bring their own work to an end, but of
course there is a great deal of time between the
beginning and the end of an operation and many phases
to go through. The road to follow is strewn with
difficulties, dangers, setbacks and problems.
(spoke in English)
Over the years, we have learned many valuable
lessons about how best to ensure the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and, ultimately, to
societies that can function and maintain stability on
their own. Considerable work is under way to
strengthen our response to conflict. Last year, the
Security Council held a series of valuable debates on
mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Member
States, the United Nations system and our partners
have gained a common understanding of the challenges
involved.
I welcome today’s debate as a further step in
making the best possible use of all our tools and assets.
The United Nations must be ready to help national
authorities to implement peace agreements, re-establish

10-23786

S/PV.6270

core Government functions, restore the rule of law and
achieve at least a minimum level of sustainable
security throughout their territory. We must promote
reconciliation and inclusive political processes, and
help to provide basic services and to generate
employment and economic activity. All of this is
essential to addressing the roots of crises, sustaining
peace and achieving a viable exit strategy for United
Nations peacekeeping missions.
The United Nations engagement in a country
emerging from conflict will closely track the path that
country takes. We are usually present well before a
peacekeeping operation is deployed. We will usually
remain well after the exit of our Blue Helmets. The
post-peacekeeping United Nations presence might be a
special political mission, a peacebuilding office or
some other configuration. It might be large and
multidimensional, or small and specialized. Whatever
the case, peacekeeping activities must pave the way for
what comes next.
For peace to be sustained, there must be an
overarching strategy that unites the efforts of all United
Nations actors and the international community, and
that strengthens national capacity. The past decade has
seen a continuous surge in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. No one can predict the
future, but in the years ahead we are likely to focus not
so much on new missions, but on ensuring that current
missions and their successor presences can help to
consolidate peace and support lasting stability so that
they can withdraw.
To achieve this, a peacekeeping mission requires
a good entrance. This was emphasized in the 2001
report to the Security Council entitled “No exit without
strategy” (S/2001/394). Allow me to recall that one of
the authors of that report, Andrew Grene, was among
those who perished in the earthquake in Haiti. His
legacy lives on in a report whose recommendations
remain valid today.
A good entrance means that the very mandate of
an operation addresses the root causes of a conflict. It
means charting a path out of violence through a solid
and sustainable peace process. It means articulating a
clear goal that can be jointly owned by national
stakeholders and the international community. And it
means the timely allocation of enough human and
material resources — including, if necessary, the rapid

10-23786

deployment of standing police and other civilian
capacities.
Exits must be equally well considered from the
very outset of a mission. In assessing whether and
when a peacekeeping operation should be drawn down,
we must look at the strength of national governance
structures, including for security and the rule of law.
We must consider the prospects for socio-economic
recovery. We must examine the risk that a country
could backslide into conflict, and ask whether the
security
guarantee
provided
by
uniformed
peacekeepers is still needed. We must look at how to
reconfigure our presence. Drawing down in one area,
such as security, might require temporary strengthening
in another.
Peacekeeping missions should not stay longer
than necessary, but we should also be wary of
withdrawing prematurely only to have to return
because of renewed violence. A key lesson of the 1990s
was the need for some type of follow-on presence to
protect gains and continue the process of building
durable peace. In several recent cases, the transition
has been made to a United Nations peacebuilding
office, but other models, such as regional offices, could
also be considered. Such presences may have smaller
footprints, but still have complex and demanding
mandates. They require resources and the support of
the Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission
and the wider international community.
This year’s review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture is thus very timely. We
should discuss the transition from the core security
components of a peacekeeping mission to longer-term
peacebuilding, and we should also reflect on how the
Peacebuilding Commission can engage early.
The engagement of United Nations country teams
is critical throughout all phases of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, but the United Nations is only one of
many international actors in peacebuilding. Regional
institutions, bilateral partners and international financial
institutions are also engaged. We need all these partners
to be working coherently, with a shared sense of
purpose. If stakeholders pursue competing individual
agendas, all our efforts will suffer. We must guard
against this risk. Our collective results will determine
when and how a peacekeeping operation can exit. I urge
that we explore how to ensure that the Security Council
has the necessary benchmarks and information —

3

S/PV.6270

including the advice of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the input of host Governments — to measure
progress.
(spoke in French)
Three of my Special Representatives are with us
today to give us the benefit of their great experience of
and their thinking on transition and exit strategies. The
countries whose missions they head illustrate the
different phases in which United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding initiatives can find themselves, as
well as the different models that exist and the different
problems that they have to deal with. The activities of
these three missions are invaluable, for they allow us to
establish and build peace and give hope to millions of
men and women.
I hope that we will be able to learn the right
lessons and extract the full benefit of what there is to
be learned from all who will speak today.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Our discussion on
transition and exit strategies comes at the right time. It
is true that in the last few years we have focused
mostly on mission start-up and deployment. In the
years to come, I expect that we will turn more of our
attention to consolidating the progress made and to
making a smooth transition as we reduce the size of
our missions. That is a prognosis that I think will come
to pass.
Today’s debate is part of a broader discussion on
peacebuilding. The Secretary-General has just recalled
the key links between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The New Horizon document describes the
peacebuilding efforts that the United Nations peace
missions have launched since the beginning of such
operations.
Our missions, as we all know, provide a basic
level of security that is essential for peace in the future.
Such efforts include, in particular, the protection of
civilians, the rule of law, the demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, security sector
reform and anti-mining activity. The missions are also
charged with supporting political processes and peace
agreements, and thus with supporting electoral

4

processes, constitutional reform and national and local
reconciliation.
Beyond that, peacekeeping operations are
frequently required to support the restoration of
essential government functions such as police, justice
and correctional systems. Those operations present an
integrated framework for all the efforts of the United
Nations. They support other activities essential to
peacebuilding, such as the restoration of basic services
and the revitalization of the economy.
It is crucial that we arrive at a common
understanding, a consensus concerning the link
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. That will
allow clear foundations on which to plan transitions in
a coherent fashion. Based on such clear foundations,
and capitalizing on the comparative advantages and
areas of expertise of the various players, the United
Nations system can join effectively with other actors to
more effectively help countries emerge from conflict.
As the Council knows, the links between peacebuilding
and peacekeeping are important issues and are being
examined by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations.
Once our personnel have achieved initial
stabilization on the ground, we have to make sure that
the collective rebuilding effort continues, so that
peacekeeping operations can hand off the job and
eventually withdraw. The question is, how do we
identify this tipping point? How do we know when the
security or stabilization that a peacekeeping mission
brings is no longer required? Is there a tendency to
overstay?
The long duration of some traditional
peacekeeping missions — such as the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization and the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus — is not
an indication of failure. Those operations show, rather,
that a peacekeeping mission cannot be a substitute for a
political process or for the will of the parties
concerned. They challenge all of us to define a more
creative and constructive political engagement.
Is there a tendency to leave too soon? In his
statement the Secretary-General emphasized the risks
inherent in leaving before peace has been consolidated.
As the Council knows, there was the experience in
Timor-Leste and Haiti, of leaving perhaps too early.
There have also been instances where consent to

10-23786

S/PV.6270

United Nations peacekeeping operations has been
abruptly withdrawn, as in the case of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea and the United
Nations Operation in Burundi.
There are, of course, examples such as Sierra
Leone, where the national authorities and the Security
Council have worked together to continually adjust the
United Nations presence according to the evolution of
conditions on the ground. The United Nations thus
concluded a peacekeeping operation and created, first,
an integrated mission and then a peacebuilding office.
Mr. von der Schulenberg will of course provide details.
In every case, progress is never linear.
Peacebuilding inevitably encounters obstacles. And in
every case it is essential, as Ms. Malcorra will tell you,
to align operational and support functions.
(spoke in English)
The debate on staying too late versus leaving too
soon is only one dimension. Getting a mission’s
mandate and structure right from the outset is also
critical for a successful transition and eventual exit. We
need the right tools to address the quickly evolving
dynamics and adjust accordingly.
For example, more formed police units, rather
than troops, were needed in Haiti to manage public
order and to address the challenge of gangs and
policing. But when the challenge is the institutional
transformation of national police institutions, formed
police units are not the right tool. Instead, institutional
transformation requires a combination of individual
police officers and civilian capacities that can support
and advise the national police and authorities and assist
in strategic planning.
We need reliable capacities and capabilities in a
range of sectors, including rapidly deployable civilian
capacities accompanied by adequate resources. In this
area, we are seeking to expand the Standing Police
Capacity, complemented by small justice and
corrections expertise. Making sure we have the right
tools from the beginning requires continuous and
constructive dialogue between the Secretariat, the
Council and the troop- and police-contributing
countries.
The early initiation of peacebuilding efforts may
enable an earlier exit for peacekeeping. But we must be
clear that the exit of a peacekeeping operation should
be part of a coherent strategy to support a country

10-23786

emerging from conflict, and not an end in itself. To use
a medical analogy, we need to be sure it is safe to leave
the emergency room — that is, peacekeeping — before
leaving others to ramp up longer-term recovery. That of
course entails a partnership and shared vision among
many actors, including regional and bilateral players. It
is a heavy burden on national Governments as well as
on the Special Representatives and their leadership
teams. And it is a challenge for the Security Council
and other Member States bodies.
A durable peace requires progress on many fronts —
a reasonably stable security environment that protects
the rule of law, a legitimate political order that can
mediate differences and avoid renewed violence,
improved governance and strengthened institutionbuilding, the resumption of basic services and the start
of socio-economic recovery. A number of those areas
will not be directly mandated tasks of peacekeeping
operations, but they could nonetheless be referenced as
conditions for a safe drawdown and exit.
Ultimately, the defining factor for the drawdown
of a peacekeeping operation is progress in the peace
process and in the capacity of national institutions,
including civil society. However, the strengthening of
national capabilities cannot be enforced or imposed.
States already made fragile by conflict are nonetheless
asked to achieve radical and deep reforms across their
entire governance systems in a matter of a few years.
Expectations must be realistic. Building capacity
is not simply a numbers game. Strengthening civil
society is not about holding a set number of
workshops. Training hundreds of police becomes
meaningless if there is no effective interior ministry to
plan and support their work, or no legal and judicial
structure for them to operate within. The absorption
capacity of national authorities can vary across
different sectors and geographic areas. Timing and
sequencing need to be carefully considered,
particularly with regard to the security sector. The
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example, is
challenged by the need to plan for and respond to
different degrees of peace consolidation across a vast
country.
We need to be able to maintain flexibility to
respond to changing circumstances and capacities on
the ground, while providing timely information to the
Security Council and contributors. This allows us to

5

S/PV.6270

respond to shifting obstacles
opportunities as they arise.

and

to maximize

We need to ensure that critical gaps in
peacebuilding are reflected in reports to the Security
Council. But as the Secretary-General noted, there also
needs to be new thinking on how best to measure
actual progress on the ground, given the importance of
subjective aspects such as legitimacy, expectations and
authority. As we know, not everything that counts can
be counted and not everything that can be counted
counts. Capturing the ebbs and flows of a peace
process needs to go beyond benchmarking, and
strategic guidance from the Security Council needs to
be based on as comprehensive a picture as possible.
National authorities must play a pivotal role in
the actual planning for the exit of a peacekeeping
operation. Transitions may be a sign of successful
peace consolidation, but they are also a very sensitive
period. National authorities may have concerns that the
exit of a peacekeeping mission may have unintended
impacts or coincide with a huge drop in political
support or even donor attention. The country may need
a security guarantor, as was the case with Sierra Leone.
We need to listen to and understand the expectations
and perceptions of national authorities and civil society
alike. Of course, the Peacebuilding Commission can
also play a key role in that respect.
Peacebuilding activities also need to be continued
beyond the lifespan of a peacekeeping operation; if
they are not, there is a risk that gains made in peace
consolidation could be lost. One continuing challenge
is the mismatch between the assessed budget and the
voluntary funds available to peacebuilding, which can
limit the capacities of other actors to step in or increase
activities as a peacekeeping mission draws down.
I would like to conclude by setting out some of
the initiatives under way in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations aimed at strengthening
transition strategies. We are working to initiate
transition planning earlier. We are conducting a study
on approaches to transitions in peacekeeping settings
which considers the cases of Liberia and Timor-Leste.
It also examines the experiences of Haiti, as the study
was initiated before the devastating earthquake, which
as the Council knows, one month ago took the lives of
so many of our colleagues and Haitians. As Council
members are aware, considerable progress was made in
Haiti in terms of peace consolidation through the

6

United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and
under the leadership of Mr. Hédi Annabi and Mr. Luiz
Carlos da Costa. Their contributions to the peace and
security agenda were invaluable, and their insights and
wisdom will be sorely missed.
In Haiti, as elsewhere, we are continuing our
work to build stronger partnerships with critical United
Nations actors, Member States and external partners
such as the European Union, the World Bank, the
African Union and others so that we can contribute to
efforts to build coherent strategies in peacebuilding.
We believe that strategic discussions with the World
Bank, as called for in the Secretary-General's reports
on peacebuilding, could be a useful tool for enhancing
transition planning. We are also looking carefully at the
experiences of past and ongoing missions and countries
that have managed transitions so that we can draw on
good practices and better articulate how peacekeeping
can contribute to longer-term peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Le
Roy for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Susana Malcorra,
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support.
Ms. Malcorra: It gives me great pleasure to be
here today to participate in this very important debate
concerning transitions and exit strategies. This follows
on naturally from several debates held in this Chamber
last year on post-conflict peacebuilding and United
Nations peacekeeping.
I offer a different perspective from the other
speakers, to be sure, in terms of the challenges that we
in the Secretariat face in our engagement with
countries emerging from conflict. My department, the
Department of Field Support (DFS) — the youngest
department in the United Nations — was created in
2007 with the relatively narrow mandate to provide
logistics and administrative support for the
Secretariat's field operations, whether they are largescale peacekeeping operations, small political
presences or anything in between.
Many of the requirements of a large-scale,
multifunctional peacekeeping operation with thousands
of troops, military observers, police and civilian staff
are, of course, quite different from the needs of the
smaller presences, which are mostly composed of
functional experts in the areas of governance, rule of
law and security institutions, to name a few.

10-23786

S/PV.6270

DFS is working hard to calibrate the services it
provides according to the mandated objectives of each
mission. At the same time, we recognize that there is a
high degree of commonality in the support component
for each field presence. The support needs to alter over
time as the mission goes through its life cycle — startup and surge, maturity, maintenance, reconfiguration,
drawdown and exit — and has to change according to
political developments on the ground and the mandates
emanating from this Council. As a consequence, we
need to be responsive, agile and flexible.
I have mentioned before in this Chamber the
particular support challenges we face based on the
existing regulatory framework and procedures, which
do not always easily provide for such agility. But I
assure the Council that my Department is working in
close collaboration with other United Nations
departments and, of course, with Member States on
ways to improve the framework for the support we
provide.
In this connection, we have just completed a
document outlining our global field support strategy,
which will be discussed in the General Assembly later
in the year. The proposed strategy is very much
intended to enable us to deliver our services better and
faster. It would allow us to adapt to the requirements of
each field operation as they evolve over time, from
start-up until closure and in all transitions in between.
Specifically, our proposal to service more than one
operation from a regional service centre would
facilitate the transformation from one type of mission
to another and support that evolution in a much
smoother manner.
Since the creation of DFS, we have seen the
United Nations presence in several countries go
through different configurations that have tested our
ability to adapt ourselves within the limitations of the
existing framework. The Secretariat's presence in
Sierra Leone has transitioned from a fully fledged
peacekeeping mission to a small integrated
peacebuilding office. Mr. Von der Schulenburg is here
today and will describe, I am sure, his effort to make
that transition a success and the problems surmounted
along the way.
I acknowledge that the path of that particular
change was not always smooth from the mission
support perspective, but we have learned many lessons
that we are now applying successfully in Burundi and

10-23786

also, as I speak, in Guinea-Bissau and the Central
African Republic, where two more changes to the
United Nations configuration in-country are well under
way. These include better succession planning and
targeted staffing of the follow-on presences, which
address the requirements of personnel profiles and
skill, which are quite different.
We have also supported three transitions in which
a long-serving mission either closed or reconfigured
itself into a much smaller operation. Last year we
supported the liquidation of two quite different
missions — the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea and the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia — within a very short time span. The two
missions, however, had some similar support
requirements, such as contingent repatriation, asset
disposal and the retrenchment of civilian staff, which
required us to move quickly. At the same time, we had
to conclude a number of sensitive issues with respect to
the host countries.
In Kosovo, we supported the reconfiguration of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. From a support perspective, this involved the
progressive retrenchment of over 1,000 civilian staff,
who were either separated or reappointed to other
missions where their skills and experience were
needed. It also involved the disposal of a vast quantity
of physical assets, either through redeployment to other
missions or through sale or transfer to the European
Union.
In addition, we need to be aware of the potential
impact of mission drawdown on the local economy
and, in particular, on the local labour market of a host
country as procurement and staffing needs decrease as
the size and geographical configuration of the United
Nations footprint change. Among other efforts,
partnerships with other international organizations and
the local private sector can help our national staff to
move on to other employment opportunities.
Each of these cases has reinforced in my mind the
need to reconsider how the Organization generates the
required civilian capacities, as well as how it finances
its field operations. It goes without saying that when
the Council decides to adopt a peacekeeping or
peacebuilding mandate, it does so in the expectation
that the Secretary-General will implement the mandate
through an integrated approach maximizing the civilian
capacities of the United Nations, the United Nations

7

S/PV.6270

country team and their implementing partners. I am
sorry to say that we have not always been able to meet
the Council’s expectations in this regard. At the risk of
oversimplifying, I should like to say that this is due in
large part to diverse staffing practices among
organizations, agencies, funds and programmes. We are
working together with the Department of Management
and other partners to resolve these issues or, until we
have done so, to mitigate their effects on our ability to
support the Organization in its response to post-conflict
situations.
Finally, I should like to touch on another issue
that impacts our ability to deliver — the question of
financing. Council members are all aware that
peacekeeping operations have a special scale of
assessments. When an operation shifts to become a
special political mission or peacebuilding office, it is
then paid for from the regular budget of the United
Nations and is thus financed by and assessed on all
Member States accordingly, without the adjustments
particular to the peacekeeping scale. The United
Nations regular budget, as I am sure Council members
know, comes under intense scrutiny and has only a
small margin for growth during each biennium.
Integrated United Nations offices and country team
presences are financed from a separate set of funding
streams, often relying on voluntary contributions and
earmarked trust funds. An ongoing, predictable source
of funding is required if a United Nations presence is
to evolve smoothly with all the necessary capacities in
place.
I do not offer any solutions to this problem today,
and I recognize that resolving it goes beyond the
purview of this body, but I would be remiss if I did not
signal it as a very real challenge for us in how we think
about support to peacekeeping transition and exit
strategies. The constructive engagement of the full
General Assembly membership will be required to
address these issues.
We in DFS stand ready to address the challenges I
have laid out with respect to countries in transition and
countries emerging from conflict, where our collective
efforts to nurture and consolidate peace are so critical.
My Department will work closely with our partners
within the Secretariat and the broader United Nations
common system to ensure that support flows smoothly
and reliably throughout the lifecycle of the United
Nation presence in these countries.

8

We have a great deal of work before us to
streamline business practices, establish common
services and reconcile funding schemes. Unless we
address these back-office challenges properly, it will be
hard to really service these transitions as required
because we will not always have the right tools.
The President (spoke in French): I thank UnderSecretary-General Malcorra for her statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Alan Doss, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Doss: Thank you, Mr. President, for having
invited me to speak at this meeting. As a graduate of
four peacekeeping operations, I come labelled as a
practitioner — a term which, in the hierarchy of
intellectual achievement, is ranked only marginally
above the sobriquet of diplomat. Nevertheless, I have a
few frank and perhaps unorthodox thoughts to share
with the Council this morning on the issues that have
been outlined in the concept paper (S/2010/67).
First, I shall say a word on the way in which
mandates are drafted and the degree to which there is
clear integration of transition and exit strategies.
Rarely, if ever, do we plan the exit strategy at the
outset of a mission. If we did, I suspect that we might
not want to mount a mission in the first place. The
collective mindset of the international community finds
it hard to accept that some problems are not amenable
to quick, time-bound solutions. Moreover, the United
Nations is often pressed to intervene with haste in
conflict-affected areas and countries, especially when
there is daily media coverage filled with graphic
images of human suffering. Yes, ideally our entry
strategy would define our exit strategy and set out the
benchmarks to guide that process, but reality usually
reveals that, in failed or failing States, the
predictability of progress is highly tenuous.
Perhaps we need to accept this complexity and
uncertainty and recognize that we will often struggle to
find the right approach and that persistence and
perseverance are indispensable tools in the
peacekeeping tool box. Perhaps we need to accept as
well that most conflicts are not resolved through single
solutions and certainly not in conformity with the
timetable ordained by the international community.

10-23786

S/PV.6270

We must also acknowledge that peace agreements
do not always make peace. In the four countries where
I have served in peacekeeping missions, numerous
accords were brokered, signed and then discarded. Not
unsurprisingly, therefore, peacekeeping missions
established in support of peace agreements can quickly
become hostages to fortune. In such circumstances,
planning for transition and exit can only be an iterative
process subject to the vagaries of shifting political and
military realities on the ground.
This leads me to say that transition and exit
strategies should not be conceived as a linear exercise
with one step leading inexorably to another. Progress is
neither inevitable nor predestined. Sadly, it is just as
possible to go backwards as it is to go forwards. On the
other hand, it is possible to move ahead with recovery,
State-building and even economic development while
there is still active conflict somewhere in a country.
Transition strategies therefore have to be flexible and
opportunistic.
The next topic is planning with reference to the
end state, key tasks and the phased completion of the
mission. In my view, planning in United Nations
missions today — or at least peacekeeping missions —
is largely geared to the reporting requirements of the
budget and mandate cycle. In my experience, we do not
sit down and think very far ahead. Inevitably, we are
pulled into the immediate — the urgent displaces the
important. The planning process as it is now practiced
is not the best way to think about the future. We tend to
get immersed in the details of mandate implementation
and fail to see the broader strategic picture.
Planning should ideally start with the assessment
of future risk and probability. On that basis, we can
plan for a variety of outcomes, not just one. In
peacekeeping, we will always be faced with
uncertainty, but we should try to look around corners
and get a better fix on possible alternative end states
and not only the end of the State.
I hope that the development of integrated
strategic frameworks will help us move in that
direction, bringing together the analytical and
operational capacities of the peacekeeping operation
and the United Nations country team in a consultative
process with national partners and other actors. This is
what we are currently doing in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

10-23786

Now, if I may, allow me to make a couple of
comments on capacities and resources. Resource
constraints are a perennial problem of all peacekeeping
missions. I doubt that we will ever have adequate
resources. We therefore have to frame mandates that
are manageable, and then ensure that missions make
the best of whatever resources are available to them.
As the concept paper points out, missions vary
enormously in size and complexity. There is no
obvious correlation between surface area, population
size and the magnitude of a mission. While we should
probably avoid a standard formula for determining
mission size, we should try to ensure a reasonable fit
between mandate and means.
That is especially important when a mission is
mandated to protect civilians, as we are in the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC). When the Council
gives a mission a protection mandate, it must make
sure that this is a feasible proposition that can be
achieved with the resources and capabilities available
to that mission. Sometimes, I must say, there is a
disconnect between the two, with the result that we
create expectations that cannot be fulfilled.
But there will always be constraints, physical as
well as financial. We must therefore also look for
capacity multipliers. In MONUC, for example, we have
introduced the concept of smart protection, recognizing
that we cannot be everywhere all of the time. We are
trying out a variety of innovations to better direct our
resources to where they can be most effectively used to
protect people most at risk.
To do that, however, our operational policies and
procedures have to be adapted to get better value out of
the resources that are available. Memorandums of
understanding with troop- and police-contributing
countries need to be more flexible to allow for quicker
redeployment as operational situations develop. That
also goes for our operational procedures. The way we
manage our air operations, for example, is a case in
point. Most important, out failure to equip missions
with adequate tactical intelligence capabilities
seriously reduces our operational effectiveness in
conflict situations.
The coordination of international efforts in the
field has also been listed as one of the issues for
discussion. I am tempted to say that coordination is the
holy grail of the international community — much

9

S/PV.6270

sought after, but never found. As peacekeeping
missions have assumed a wider range of mandated
tasks, the complexity of coordination has also
increased within missions themselves, among United
Nations partners, with Member States, donor partners
and, of course, the Governments themselves. A great
deal of energy is expended in the name of coordination,
and not always with positive results. Coordination
should be more than just information sharing.
From personal experience, I would recommend
the creation of light but systematic consultation
structures. In Kinshasa, we have the so-called Security
Council-plus format, which meets at least every two
weeks and where we brief and discuss military and
political developments and explore and exchange ideas
on emerging issues of strategic importance, such as
elections, security sector reform and upcoming reports
of the Secretary-General to the Council.
A broader coordination mechanism has been
established for donors, in which the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund participate. There is
also a mechanism for humanitarian coordination. I am
not sure, however, that all those initiatives tie up as
neatly as we might wish. That is especially of concern
in the area of macroeconomic policy, where the impact
of economic measures can have a very direct effect on
security and stability.
Coordination within the international community
needs to be matched by a parallel relationship with
national authorities, especially in the area of national
security. That is especially important when
contemplating drawdown. In Sierra Leone, we met
regularly with the National Security Council to make
district-by-district security assessments as the basis for
decision-making on troop drawdown. Similar
assessments were done in Liberia, and perhaps my
colleague will speak to that. We will also be doing the
same in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as we
move forward on contemplating a drawdown.
You have also asked us, Mr. President, to
comment on political support for the peace process
within the Council and beyond. Creating and sustaining
political support for a peace process is a vital but
sometimes elusive undertaking. Restoring peace and
peacebuilding is an incremental process that rarely
follows a straight and narrow path. That produces
frequent frustration and occasional despondency.

10

Most of us in the international community will be
associated with a given peace process only for a
limited time before we move on, and so we are
impatient for success. But often we lack a full
appreciation of the historical, cultural and economic
factors that created the conflict in the first place. We do
not always understand the complex personal
relationships that may exacerbate underlying problems.
Our institutional memories can be quite short, while
the cast of characters is very large.
The Council and its faithful servants, the special
representatives of the Secretary-General, therefore
have to find middle ground between empathy and
firmness as we seek to move a peace process forward.
Most important, the messages sent by the Council
through its resolutions and statements, and echoed by
special representatives, must show a high degree of
consistency and political resolve. Frequent changes in
tone or intent encourage intransigence, leading spoilers
to believe that the Council will quickly back off in the
face of adversity or opposition. In mid-2000, when the
Revolutionary United Front attacked the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, the Council’s
unanimous and speedy reaction helped to turn the tide.
More recently, the Council’s determination to
persevere with our efforts to put an end to armed
violence in the Kivus has made a very significant
difference.
Let me add that the alignment of political forces
behind a peace process must extend to regional actors.
In each of the four countries in which I have been
involved with peace operations, neighbouring States
have either been part of the problem or part of the
solution. They must therefore be engaged, in one form
or another, from the outset.
Finally, allow me to conclude with a couple of
comments on processes, including benchmarks and the
modalities for reporting to the Council on progress
towards the achievement of the end state. Measuring
and evaluating a peace process and the transition to an
end state is not an exact science. Benchmarks,
indicators and outcomes are all useful as tools for
assessing progress, but they must be kept simple and
relatively easy to monitor. They should be accessible
and comprehensible to our national partners. Ideally,
they should incorporate goals and targets already
adopted by the Government concerned and its partners.
They need to be consistent and applicable across a
variety of sectors. They should serve essentially as a

10-23786

S/PV.6270

set of traffic lights that are clearly visible and easily
understood.
They should also draw a distinction between core
and contextual concerns. Core concerns relate to the
security and political mandates of a mission — the
goals that must be achieved before a drawdown can be
initiated or withdrawal completed. Contextual
benchmarks encompass a broader set of goals, such as
poverty reduction, that may not be achieved within the
lifetime of a mission, highly desirable though they may
be.
Albert Einstein once remarked that all knowledge
was experience. So I hope that my limited experience,
which I have shared with the Council this morning,
will serve to expand, if only marginally, our common
knowledge about transition and exit strategies.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Doss for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
Ms. Løj: I thank the Security Council for inviting
me to participate in this important debate about United
Nations peacekeeping. The debate on this issue over
the past 12 months in the Security Council and in the
General Assembly, as well as internally in the
Secretariat, has been not only timely but also necessary
to ensure common understanding on how to tackle
future peacekeeping challenges. Let me add that, in
thinking about these issues, it is not always necessary
to develop fresh ideas. Sometimes, it is also useful to
revisit long-standing proposals and evaluate them
against today’s and tomorrow’s challenges.
Today’s debate has a special focus on how to end
peacekeeping operations and how to transition into
longer-term conflict-prevention activities. Based on my
experience from two years as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Liberia, I would like to focus
my remarks on three issues: mandates, implementation
and tools.
At the outset, however, let me underline that for
all three of those elements, there is no one-size-fits-all
solution. Each and every conflict and peacekeeping
challenge has to be reviewed and the solutions adjusted
to the specific challenges characterizing the country or
the conflict. There is no recipe that can be applied
across the board. Country-specific challenges and

10-23786

capacities have to be taken into account from the
outset, and measures need to be decided and applied
accordingly.
First, a few words about mandates. In his report
in April 2001 (S/2001/394, para. 6), the then-SecretaryGeneral states “A good exit or transition strategy
depends on a good entrance strategy” — with the
entrance strategy, of course being embodied in the
mandate of the mission. It is therefore paramount that a
mission’s initial mandate be clear in its priorities, be
realistic and leave no room for ambiguity.
In Liberia, some of the day-to-day challenges we
face are related to the interpretation of our mandate —
with regard to the protection of civilians, for instance.
How should “imminent threat of physical danger” and
“within its capabilities” be interpreted? These are weak
phrases that can be taken as all-encompassing or as
nothing at all. Furthermore, in Liberia incidents of mob
violence are common and often involve attacks not
only on the Liberian National Police but also on
civilians. How are such incidents meant to be treated in
a peacekeeping mission? How is a mission to deal with
an imminent threat when the threat comes from
civilians? Such questions need to be well thought
through when mandates are formulated.
We need implementable mandates rather than
politically correct ones, which I have often more
informally called “Christmas trees”. Each mandate
should be adjusted to the specific context on the
ground. What works in one place may be impossible to
implement in another. Furthermore, it is important that
the Council exercise great care when changing a
mission’s mandate. If new tasks are being continuously
added, the context surrounding the original ones,
including the provision of a security umbrella, and the
conditions for its transition and exit will become
increasingly difficult. If the goal post keeps changing,
so to speak, there will be consequences as to when the
desired end state can be reached.
Secondly, I would like to make a few comments
on the challenges and constraints we face when
implementing mandates, especially in integrated
missions. Integrated missions are generally tasked not
only with keeping the peace but also with assisting to
build national capacities to sustain the peace — in
other words, peacebuilding. For those missions,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are not two separate
sequential processes; they are two sides of the same

11

S/PV.6270

coin, are closely interlinked and must be pursued
simultaneously.
There appears to be conceptual agreement across
the United Nations system and among Member States
concerning the integrated approach to keep, to build
and to sustain the peace, for instance in a country like
Liberia. The challenges we face, however, concern how
to implement that approach in practice. That is further
accentuated by the institutional framework we have
established, both in terms of governing bodies and the
generation of resources, especially assessed versus
voluntary contributions. Let me provide a few concrete
examples of these implementation challenges.
While Liberia is not yet a self-starter, delivering
as one country — although I expect it to become one
soon — the level of integration between the country
team and the Mission is very good. It includes
innovated approaches such as joint programmes, joint
offices and joint use of United Nations assets — but
also a general willingness to find pragmatic solutions
to common challenges. We are, as we say, working
together and trying hard to deliver as one.
Keeping in mind that an exit strategy should form
part of every entrance strategy, that integration should
be institutionalized early on in the life of a mission.
However, due to different governing bodies, budget
cycles and even procurement rules and regulations,
achieving true integration and delivering as one can be
extremely challenging. My plea would be that the
various governing bodies and the Member States
consider that issue.
Another point has to do with assessed versus
voluntary contributions. In my mind, there is no doubt
that for peacebuilding activities to succeed, funds other
than, and in addition to, assessed funds — whether
through the agencies and programmes working with a
mission or through bilateral partners — must be
available. Security sector reform is more than plans
and policies. It is also implementation. If voluntary
funds to sustain implementation do not materialize,
that creates significant gaps on the ground.
Let me illustrate with the case of the Liberian
National Police. The Mission’s mandate is primarily
focused on training and mentoring. But even the best
trained police officer needs the means to function —
equipment, transport, etc. Unless the voluntary funds
are forthcoming, the police force will not have the
desired impact.

12

A third set of challenges relates to ensuring
national ownership — the overarching prerequisite for
any transition or exit. Transforming a mission from
doers to mentors is the key to sustainability and is
probably the hardest task for any mission. Yet without
national ownership, no peace can be sustained. The
United Nations in Liberia was able to plan its
intervention based on clear national leadership and in
alignment with national planning frameworks fairly
early on.
I wish to conclude with a few words on the tools
available to facilitate transitions and exits. First of all,
as I have said, exit strategies should be incorporated
from the early days of the mission, even if they are not
fully formulated. Otherwise, the mission will act like a
ship without a clear destination. The development of
benchmarks to monitor the consolidation, draw-down
and withdrawal of a mission is important and is a vital
tool to guide transition.
In Liberia — thanks to my colleague on my left —
we have been working with benchmarks since 2006
and have learned how important it is to define clearly
what we are measuring. Are we assessing the
achievements of the Mission against its mandate, or
against overall progress in the country? I strongly
believe it should be the latter. If it is, we need to
measure not only the impact of the Mission’s activities,
but also the impact of those being conducted by the
entire United Nations family, the Government and
other partners.
Finally, Member States and the Council have
much focused on reporting from missions. While that is
understandable, let me reiterate that nothing beats
experiencing the challenges at first hand, in the field.
We always welcome visits to Liberia from the Security
Council and other Member States at different levels,
especially since so many Members are not represented
in Monrovia.
Mr. President, thank you once again for inviting
me to participate in this debate. Merci beaucoup.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Løj
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.

10-23786

S/PV.6270

Mr. Von der Schulenburg: First of all, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for inviting me to this very
important discussion. It will have a great impact not
only on Member States but also on how we in the
field — your field commanders, so to speak — will
work. I am therefore glad that the Council has taken
this laudable initiative to listen to what we have to say.
As I am the last speaker here, I thought I would
only make one clarification and three suggestions. First
is the clarification.
Sierra Leone is probably the first example in the
United Nations of a full transition from a once very
large peacekeeping operation to a now small, fully
civilian, integrated peacebuilding mission. There is a
similar example in Burundi, but it is somewhat
different, so I think that we are the first example. For
this reason, I would like to limit my recommendations
on this experience.
Therefore, in the recommendations I will use the
term “peacebuilding” or “peacebuilding mission” not
in the general sense of State-building and that type of
activity, but simply as a next phase, a successor
arrangement to a peacekeeping operation. This is of
course a limited use of the term, but I think it is useful
for this purpose.
Let me now come to the suggestions I have to
make. The first point is that, if we can prove that
integrated peacebuilding missions work, that may
facilitate the decision to withdraw peacekeepers earlier.
I am very much aware that this is a very touchy
suggestion. I am also fully aware that the Council’s
decision to exit or close a peacekeeping mission will
depend on many other factors. I nonetheless would like
to maintain that knowing that one have a less risky and
less abrupt exit strategy through an integrated
peacebuilding mission would make that decision much
easier. From my point of view, a peacebuilding mission
is basically an interim arrangement between a
peacekeeping operation and the normal system of
resident coordinators.
If one compares our mandate to the resident
coordinator system, the great advantage we have is that
we still have a political mandate, and that allows us to
make political interventions and promote conflict
prevention measures. That is not the case with resident
coordinators. I would suggest that, for instance, the
way we handled the conflict we had in March of last
year would not have been possible had we not had a

10-23786

political mandate. In a situation where there are no
more peacekeepers, having a political mandate allows
one to act.
If that is possible, such a thing would have
considerable financial benefits for Member States.
Here again, I want to use the example of Sierra Leone.
At the peacekeeping mission’s peak, in 2004, we still
had about 20,000 staff, of which 17,500 were
peacekeepers. The total cost at the time was well over
$600 million. Four years later, with the new integrated
peacebuilding mission — and of course there is a slow
transition with these things — we had only 77 staff
members, of which half were actually national staff.
The total costs had sunk to $15 million in 2009, a mere
2.5 per cent of the previous cost.
That means that we can prove, with functioning
integrated peacebuilding missions, that if the Council
makes a decision even six months earlier — and I am
not saying that this is the core of the whole thing — we
could ensure considerable savings for Member States.
We could, basically, for the cost of six months of
operations, run 20 years of an integrated peacebuilding
mission. However, I am not suggesting that we stay
20 years.
In Sierra Leone there is also another aspect
related to early withdrawal. I think Sierra Leone is
probably one of the countries where we decided very
quickly to draw down — and that might be for
completely different reasons, of course. I think that the
conditions I see when I go through the country today
and the very positive image we still have in Sierra
Leone, despite having been engaged there since 1991,
have to a very large extent to do with the fact that we
did not keep soldiers for a longer time than they were
absolutely needed. We all know that large contingents
of soldiers also have negative effects, and those
negative effects were largely prevented in Sierra
Leone. So I think there is an additional advantage in
peacebuilding missions. They are less intrusive and
less visible and hence more acceptable to the
population in host countries.
Let me come to the next point, which I think is
even more important. If we have integrated
peacebuilding missions, we must not see them as
simply smaller peacekeeping missions without
peacekeepers. They must develop their own character.
That is exactly what we have tried to do in Sierra
Leone. We are only one example and are not

13

S/PV.6270

necessarily the model case, but there are a number of
points I want to raise here.
The first issue one has to raise, once all the
soldiers have gone, is where is an Assistant SecretaryGeneral getting his political weight from? Suddenly all
the trappings of power that come with large
peacekeeping operations are gone. The many soldiers,
the helicopters, the cars and the huge chunk of
resources that go all around the country — where have
they gone? How does one maintain one’s influence?
I have come to some conclusions about how we
should build an integrated mission. I want to mention
here some of the most important aspects of it.
We have to realize that the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding is a change in focus
from peace and security to peace and development. The
shift is really therefore from security to development.
That is not to say that we do not have peacebuilding
operations already under peacekeeping operations, but
the focus has to change, and that change in focus is
fundamental for understanding the other points.
Peacebuilding missions will be successful only if
they are based on a national agenda. That is why I have
always been opposed to the peacebuilding frameworks
drawn up by the Peacebuilding Commission. It has to
be a national agenda. We cannot come from outside
and develop another agenda. In the case of Sierra
Leone, it is the Government’s Agenda for Change. I
think it is something that will work. What we have
done is to build our strategy on top of that one, saying
how the United Nations system as a whole can support
it. That is what we call the Joint United Nations Vision.
Peacebuilding requires the full integration of the
political mandate of the mission with the various
development mandates. I do not want to dwell too
much on those, but the Council is aware that in Sierra
Leone we have agreed for quite some time now, and
with the help of the Peacebuilding Commission, that
we will only have one strategy, that is the joint United
Nations strategy. There is not a separate one for the
political mission, a separate one for the development
agencies and so forth. We have all agreed on this one.
It is a very simple strategy, only seven pages, so
everybody can read it, and 18 agencies have signed on
to it.
This is a very important thing. We are no longer
talking about negotiating conflicts; we are talking

14

about State-building. There is always a political and a
development aspect to this, and they are so intertwined
that we cannot separate them.
We have tried from the very beginning to
encompass all development partners in peacebuilding.
Peacebuilding is not an issue only for the United
Nations missions. For that reason, we have taken the
lead in donor coordination. It is also equally important
that we provide considerable logistics and other
services for Member States in order to make their work
in the field much easier. Our regional field offices, the
use of the helicopter, the use of our communication
infrastructure, the medical clinic and many other things
will help all the other countries in their work in Sierra
Leone. We are therefore really acting as a Member
States organization, on behalf of Member States.
Another point that I would like to make is that an
integrated peacebuilding mission, if it is properly
designed, makes an exit strategy actually relatively
easy. In fact, the exit strategy in Sierra Leone is the
Joint Vision. The Joint Vision is so geared towards
development that a gradual transition into the
development agenda, slowly leaving the political
arena, will almost go unnoticed. The transition from a
peacebuilding mission to the normal resident
coordinator system is therefore much easier than it is
when there are large military forces and a very visible
change must be made.
This is the conclusion I would like to make here:
that when you talk about exit strategies, it would
probably be better to always talk about transition
strategies. It is a transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding — if you want to put things in boxes —
and from peacebuilding to the resident coordinator
system. That would probably make some of the
Council’s decisions much easier.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Von der Schulenburg for his statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

10-23786

S/PV.6270

I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Sir, for instigating this important debate
today. I also thank the Secretary-General, the UnderSecretaries-General and the Special Representatives for
their important remarks and for bringing their expertise
to the Council.
We have been looking at peacekeeping issues in a
more systematic way for over a year now, and we have
made some progress in this Council, but today’s
speakers have identified an issue that goes to the heart
of the Council’s role in peacekeeping, which is how the
United Nations presence should evolve to support a
country’s progress from conflict through post-conflict
to peace consolidation. We have heard today about how
this is an essential challenge to three important United
Nations mission — in Sierra Leone, where a series of
successful transitions have taken us from a
peacekeeping operation to an integrated peacebuilding
mission; in Liberia, which has begun the process of
drawdown and transition; and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where the forthcoming
strategic review will be an important opportunity to set
a new course for peace consolidation.
I have one strategic point and five practical
suggestions to make.
The strategic point is that transition — as Ms. Løj
explained — is not about a linear progression from one
kind of activity — peacekeeping — to another —
peacebuilding. Peacebuilding is the objective at the
outset, and a peacekeeping operation is often important
but only a part of achieving that objective. Thus,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding must form part of a
single, comprehensive and integrated plan. And that
plan should have a political settlement at its heart. As
all three Special Representatives have stated, it should
unite the efforts of all United Nations actors and the
broad international community, and it should
strengthen national capacity.
All actors must understand the overall objective
and their role in contributing to it. Ms. Løj has worked
hard to ensure that we have such a strategy in Liberia
under the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the staff of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) have
created such a plan in the first integrated strategic

10-23786

framework. In Sierra Leone, we have the join vision
drawn up by Mr. Von der Schulenburg. Without these
overall strategies, peacekeeping efforts can lack
coordination and risk duplicating effort in support of
some priorities, while neglecting others.
In our view, to make this work in practice, we
need five things. First, we need a clear understanding
from the outset of the outcome we seek from the
peacekeeping operation. The overall objective should
be to help create the conditions for a peace process to
prosper. The Council needs to get better at defining
what that success will look like in each individual
case. As Mr. Doss said, sometimes we concentrate too
much on the urgent at the expense of the important,
and we need to ensure that the Council has enough
time to discuss and monitor at a strategic level what a
United Nations operation is trying to achieve.
Secondly, we need a clear and prioritized set of
tasks that fall to the peacekeeping operation and a way
to measure their progress. I think that we are getting
better at this, including through the use of
benchmarking, but we still have a long way to go in
developing flexible but effective ways of evaluating
success.
Thirdly, we need to be clear about what
peacekeepers can do and cannot do. There is much that
peacekeepers can do to support peacebuilding, as the
Secretary-General set out in his report. This can
include providing a minimum level of sustainable
security or helping to restore core Government
functions, but peacekeepers cannot deliver an entire
peacebuilding strategy.
Fourthly, the Security Council needs to focus its
attention on the critical obstacles to achieving the
strategic objectives. Sometimes we will need tougher
political messages; sometimes we will need to
reconfigure the mission, as we have done in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We spend too
much time talking about what is happening now and
not enough about what is required to get to sustainable
peace.
Lastly, I think we need to make better use of the
Peacebuilding Commission. At its conception in 2005,
we wanted the Commission to help the Council manage
the drawdown and transition of successful
peacekeeping operations, and it has done a lot of
admirable work. But like the Secretary-General, we
would like to see an even sharper focus on what

15

S/PV.6270

concrete action needs to be taken by the Council, by
peacekeepers and by the rest of the United Nations
system to achieve that strategic objective. There is a
broader point here. We need to draw in advice more
regularly from across the range of military, police,
development and other expertise available.
We should celebrate the many successes of
United Nations peacekeeping. It has been a remarkable
institution, but we often ask too much of it and expect
it to deliver what only national authorities can deliver:
security and prosperity. We should give the
peacekeepers clear and achievable goals, and recognize
when their work is done and it is time for others to take
up the burden. That will often involve a degree of risk,
and we must be realistic about that risk. But the
alternative is overstretch and failure to achieve the
unachievable. And that, in our view, is the biggest
threat to United Nations peacekeeping.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the United Kingdom for his concision
and the good example he has set for the Security
Council as a whole.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in French): I will
set another good example today by speaking in French.
Our delegation welcomes your initiative, Sir, to
convene this important thematic debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his participation today, and
express our deep appreciation to the Assistant
Secretaries-General, the Under-Secretaries-General and
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
for their valuable contributions.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of Morocco on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
My delegation has closely followed the Security
Council’s efforts over the past 15 months
simultaneously to promote the maintenance and
building of peace. Lebanon is convinced that
successful United Nations peacekeeping operations and
their transition and exit strategies require partnership
between the Security Council, the Secretariat, the
troop-contributing countries and host countries, as has
often been noted.
As you note, Sir, in your concept paper
(S/2010/67), peacekeeping missions have reached an
all-time high in recent years, with over 96,000 men and
women in uniform deployed in 15 missions and a

16

budget of about $7.8 billion. These figures are
unprecedented. We therefore need to ensure adequate
resources, which are presently disproportionate to the
complexity of activities of the peacekeeping
operations. It is also vital that the objectives of the
operations be well defined; they must clearly help to
resolve conflicts and to establish lasting peace through
a successful exit strategy.
In the Middle East, the Israeli occupation of
Palestinian, Lebanese and Syrian territories is at the
heart of the conflict and must be resolved if we are to
achieve a comprehensive settlement of the conflict in
the region and the successful drawdown of the United
Nations missions there.
It is mostly through a comprehensive and
inclusive political process that peacekeeping
operations are able to help protect civilians and achieve
sustainable peace. A successful transition also depends
on defining clear and achievable mandates and on
adequate financing. In the southern part of my country,
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
is an example of how the clarity of objectives has been
translated into close cooperation and coordinated
action between the Lebanese Army and the mission.
The scope and complexity of peacekeeping
operations are currently incompatible with existing
capabilities. We must therefore set realistic goals and
ensure that missions enjoy adequate financing and
appropriate logistical support that will facilitate
successful transition and exit strategies. Lebanon
stresses the close link between the maintenance and
building of peace. Indeed, recovery and peacebuilding
activities are essential from the earliest phases of
peacekeeping. They must be undertaken in
coordination with host Governments and through
development programmes, as well as by strengthening
national institutions and the rule of law. In this regard,
we very much appreciate the role that UNIFIL is
playing and call on international partners to assist in
building the capacities of the Lebanese armed forces.
We also stress the importance of the consulting
role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and call
for regular coordination with the Commission. Indeed,
peacebuilding efforts made right from the start of
peacekeeping will help to ensure stability, especially in
the area of economic recovery, which will help
strengthen security and build trust in peacekeepers and
their mission. In this regard, a post-conflict country’s

10-23786

S/PV.6270

initiative to prioritize its peacebuilding needs is
essential to constructive dialogue and effective
partnership with the international community. The
involvement of the PBC in Burundi and Sierra Leone
has facilitated the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, largely through the support of
integrated peacebuilding strategies defined and
implemented by national Governments.
In Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic, the involvement of the PBC has resulted in a
new generation of integrated United Nations offices.
Lebanon welcomes the PBC’s review exercise, which
will open a unique opportunity to strengthen its role in
the countries where it is operating.
Finally, we note yet again that the success of
peacekeeping missions and their transition and exit
strategies require genuine partnership among all
stakeholders. We also draw the Council’s attention to
the key role played by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations in developing political plans,
and the role of the General Assembly’s Fifth
Committee in providing adequate financing.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): My first words must be to
thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative in
organizing this thematic debate. The concept paper
accompanying the discussion (S/2010/67) has also
proved invaluable in crystallizing perspectives for the
debate. I welcome the presence of the SecretaryGeneral and thank him for his useful statement. I
would also like to thank the Under-Secretaries-General
and Special Representatives for their invaluable
contribution to the debate.
My intervention will focus on six key elements.
First, with respect to mandates, I believe that we could
be more precise in the drafting of mandates to include
clear transition and exit strategies. Such clarity should
cover mission objectives, mandates and strategies. The
Council should be clear and firm on the need to link
exit and transition strategies to the achievement of
stated objectives. Mandates should be realistic and
achievable, allowing for flexibility in their
interpretation, and we should not overlook the moral
imperatives that impel peacekeeping operations in the
first place. Exit for its own sake would be
counterproductive, if not prejudicial, to peacekeeping
missions. We want neither to see a repeat of the
mistakes in Rwanda and Srebrenica nor to relive the
painful memory of their tragic consequences.

10-23786

Secondly, planning must be comprehensive and
provide for an integrated approach that allows
peacekeeping operations to dovetail with peacebuilding
and peacemaking. Lessons should be drawn from the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), especially during
its forthcoming review, to guide future planning. We
support a broad and integrated approach, with a phased
completion of peacekeeping missions. We believe that
there should be wider consultations with relevant
stakeholders,
particularly
troopand
policecontributing countries, on the planning and deployment
of missions.
Thirdly, we believe that capacities and resources
must be adequate and predictable. Our experience has
affirmed the point well articulated in this Chamber
today that resources for peacekeeping operations are
often disproportionately allocated, resulting in an
abundance of resources where there is the least need
and a shortage where the need is greater. Liberia and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo are cases in
point.
On the other hand, the strengthening of national
capacities on which a successful exit strategy will
depend does not receive sufficient and sustained
support. It is therefore necessary for the Council and,
indeed, for Member States to attach greater importance
to building and strengthening capacities, and to
allocate adequate and predictable resources to promote
quick-impact programmes and, ultimately, sustainable
development in its integrated economic, social and
environmental dimensions.
Fourthly, the challenge of coordination is
manifested not only in security sector reform, but in all
phases of United Nations operational activities,
especially at the country level. The capacity of the
United Nations to lead international efforts in
peacekeeping should be strengthened. Accordingly, the
Council should intensify its promotion of coordination
and synergy among the various actors and
stakeholders.
The United Nations goal of acting and delivering
as one will be tested on its ability to coordinate
effectively. More importantly, the United Nations must
give practical expression to the notion of national
ownership of development priorities and needs. Our
support must be sequenced to take into account such
identified priorities and needs, with a view to

17

S/PV.6270

promoting coherence in the actions of international
actors.

later in this meeting, but let me make the following
additional points.

Fifthly, sustained political support for peace
processes is essential if peacekeeping operations are to
succeed and, indeed, pave the way for an orderly and
honourable exit. The discordance and lack of
consistency in the political support given to different
conflict situations call for profound rethinking. Here,
consideration should be given to other mechanisms,
notably preventive diplomacy, as soon as the signs are
clear that conflict is imminent. The capacity to
respond, especially at the regional and subregional
levels, should be built and, indeed, strengthened. The
growing cooperation between the United Nations, the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States could provide useful lessons to draw on
in designing operational models and frameworks.

The draft presidential statement before the
Council rightly underlines that the overarching
objective of successful United Nations peacekeeping
operations should be the creation of conditions for
sustainable peace on the ground, ultimately allowing
for a mission’s reconfiguration and withdrawal. For a
successful transition from peacekeeping to continued
peacebuilding or other forms of United Nations
presence, it is necessary that effective national
capacities for the provision of security, basic services,
rule of law and long-term development be put in place
in an integrated manner by national authorities, in
close cooperation with international stakeholders.
Mr. von der Schulenburg has underlined the key role of
the
national
contribution.
Peacebuilding
and
peacekeeping efforts need to go hand in hand from an
early stage, based on a common and integrated
strategy.

Sixthly, all this will depend on the processes we
put in place with regard to measurable performance
benchmarks, reporting systems and evolution of
results. Mandatory reporting to the Security Council
and review of results will be necessary if members of
the Council and, indeed, the international community
are to have a better appreciation of the exit and
transition targets that will be established. We would
warn against a precipitate exit and transition strategy
that does not take into account the significant
achievement of the set objectives of peacekeeping
missions. The Council should also resist the temptation
to exit simply because a mandate requires an exit by a
set period or an exit motivated by other extraneous
factors. The United Nations should endeavour to go in
early and stay long enough, if need be, to give hope to
the hopeless and succour to the millions of helpless,
distressed and displaced victims of conflict.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): We welcome your
initiative, Sir, in organizing today’s debate on
transition and exit strategies. We thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Under-Secretaries-General and the Special
Representatives present here today for their important
and thought-provoking contributions to this discussion.
We are convinced that this meeting can also serve as an
important opportunity for troop- and policecontributing countries to share their highly relevant
experience with Council members and the Secretariat.
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union

18

That approach should also guide future
mandating of United Nations missions. Clear, credible
and achievable mandates must be oriented towards a
desired outcome or, as Mr. Doss has suggested, at least
towards alternative outcomes. We also need clear
benchmarks and a clear prioritization of tasks. I must
say that I sympathize with the criticism expressed by
Ms. Løj, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, regarding the Council’s calls that missions
should fulfil protection mandates within their
capabilities. The Council must ensure – at least, this is
our opinion — that mandates are matched with the
resources required for their full implementation from
the very start.
In order to avoid premature closure of operations,
however, both benchmarks and objectives must be
field-driven and shared by all parties. Moreover, those
tools for monitoring progress must be reviewed
regularly and aligned with the needs on the ground.
Against the background of increasing, and
increasingly complex, operations, cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations and other
international actors, in particular in a transition
context, will become ever more important. The Council
has already discussed this. But to give one example
from one of the cases being discussed today, the
European Union has for several years actively
supported the transition process in the Democratic

10-23786

S/PV.6270

Republic of the Congo under the framework of the
security sector reform launched by that country’s
Government.

And let me say that my delegation is very supportive of
the work of Under-Secretary-General Malcorra in this
field.

More often than not, the active involvement of
regional and subregional organizations is essential for
ensuring the sustainability of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities undertaken by the United
Nations. There is therefore a need to ensure close
coherence among peacebuilding plans and programmes
launched by those organizations, Member States and
the financial institutions, as well as the United Nations
presence on the ground.

Over the past years, several peacekeeping
operations have been closed and followed by other
forms of United Nations engagement, in many cases by
integrated peacebuilding offices. We agree that the
time has come to draw lessons learned from those
examples. Therefore we welcome the decision of the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations to address in the coming months key
lessons learned from past and current missions
regarding the successful implementation of transition
strategies. We believe that continued dialogue between
the Working Group and troop- and police-contributing
countries will contribute to this exercise.

In line with Security Council resolution 1894
(2009), the protection of civilians must be duly taken
into account throughout the life cycle of peacekeeping
operations, including in the transition phase. That is a
very important angle of our discussion here today. The
ability and willingness of a State to protect its own
civilian population is a precondition for sustainable
peace and thus for the withdrawal of a peacekeeping
operation.
Creating a favourable protection environment
goes beyond protecting civilians from physical
violence and must be complemented by activities in the
fields of security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, rule of law,
transitional justice, human rights and empowerment of
local society. Early coordination of these activities and
a common strategy among all actors involved will be
crucial for success. Let me also emphasize that the full
participation of women in all processes has to be
ensured, in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000).
Liberia, for instance, is clearly a model case in that
regard.
We welcome the clear link made in the draft
presidential
statement
between
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and sustainable development, an
interconnection Mr. Von der Schulenburg pointed out
very eloquently in the model case — and it is truly a
model case — of Sierra Leone. This interrelationship
must also be taken into account in the ongoing
Peacebuilding Commission review process. Early
economic recovery and the delivery of a peace
dividend are crucial incentives for societies to invest in
peace and stability. In this context, let me also point
out the significant contribution peacekeeping missions
can make to socio-economic development in their areas
of deployment, not least through local procurement.

10-23786

Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate. I
would like to thank the Secretary-General, the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and the
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support for their
useful statements, as well as the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General who have
given us their field experiences and advice.
This debate on transition and exit strategies
comes at an opportune moment. We have had extensive
deliberations on how peacekeeping can be made more
effective, including through strengthening strategic
partnerships with regional organizations and troop- and
police-contributing countries. The United Nations and
the wider international community have sustained
efforts to resolve conflicts by peaceful means.
However, those endeavours are being put to the test by
new threats to global peace and security such as
terrorism, piracy, drug trafficking and organized crime.
The situation is further complicated by the increasing
activities of non-State actors and dire humanitarian
consequences for innocent civilian populations,
including women and children.
Peacekeeping is an essential and indispensable
tool available to the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is therefore
important to ensure that peacekeeping operations are
carried out in an effective manner, with built-in
transition and exit strategies. Their primary and key
objective should be to create conditions for sustainable
peace on the ground so that the reconfiguration or

19

S/PV.6270

withdrawal of United Nations peacekeeping missions
can be carried out with minimal or no risk of relapse
into conflict.
We are convinced that to be successful, any
transition or exit strategy must be underpinned by five
essential considerations.
First, there must be careful planning that entails a
thorough understanding of the causes of the conflict
and how existing local or internal structures can be
utilized in the search for a solution. Secondly, clear and
situation-specific peacekeeping mandates should be
developed, kept under review by the Security Council
and varied as may be necessary, based on the dynamics
of the situation on the ground.
Thirdly, a programme with timelines and
benchmarks
for
priority
activities,
including
reconciliation, stabilization and consolidation of the
peace, should be developed and owned by the national
authorities. It should focus on key priorities such as
support for building the capacity of national
institutions, including security sector reform.
Fourthly, some peacebuilding activities should be
planned and implemented at the earliest stages of
peacekeeping. It is important to ensure that people
afflicted by conflict receive tangible peace dividends
through provision of basic services such as health care,
education, shelter and improvement of their standards
of living. To this end, more resources need to be
allocated to programmes and activities that improve the
welfare of the people.
Fifthly, we reiterate the need for the United
Nations system to ensure greater coherence in
peacekeeping, peacemaking, peacebuilding and
development activities. In our view, it is time that the
United Nations system and the broader international
community commit more resources to peacebuilding
activities. The Peacebuilding Fund is an important
instrument for the provision of flexible funding to
countries on the Peacebuilding Commission agenda
and other countries in need. However, its total financial
resources are limited to about $350 million, and yet the
budgets of some peacekeeping missions amount to
$500 million or even $1 billion per year.
In conclusion, Uganda reiterates the need to
further strengthen the partnership between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
This is critical if we are to optimize their contributions

20

to conflict prevention, conflict mediation, conflict
resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I should
like to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for having organized this important debate. I should
also like to thank the Secretary-General and UnderSecretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra for their
valuable insights, and Mr. Doss, Ms. Løj and Mr. Von
der Schulenburg for having provided their unique
perspectives from the field.
Over the past year, the Council has devoted
considerable attention to ways to strengthen United
Nations peacekeeping. Today’s debate on transition and
exit strategies will enhance this effort.
In numerous debates, the Council has noted that,
with the growth in volume and complexity of
peacekeeping operations, United Nations peacekeeping
is under severe strain. We have also noted that we are
placing multiple demands on a finite supply of wellequipped and trained troops and police. We must keep
these factors in mind before renewing peacekeeping
mandates or establishing new operations, especially
where conditions on the ground are ill-suited to
successful peacekeeping.
But we must not forget why the Security Council
establishes peacekeeping operations in the first place.
United Nations peacekeeping saves lives and delivers
real results. Many countries are far more stable today
because of past and current United Nations
peacekeeping efforts. Sierra Leone and Burundi are
both consolidating hard-won peace; Liberia is on a
promising track. But we must stay the course.
But we have also seen what can happen when we
are too swift to terminate a mission, as in Timor-Leste.
We must resist the temptation to withdraw
peacekeepers prematurely or to downsize or terminate
missions on the basis of arbitrary timelines and false
readings of progress. Hard-won progress can unravel
swiftly if peacekeepers depart precipitously without
leaving behind the foundations for a sustainable peace.
In its presidential statement of August 2009
(S/PRST/2009/24), the Security Council recommitted
itself to improving the overall performance of United
Nations peacekeeping and to addressing the challenges
it faces today. The measures outlined in that statement
and those in the draft statement before us today provide
us with tools to strengthen peacekeeping in the interest

10-23786

S/PV.6270

of helping countries make a swift transition to a
durable peace. I should like to comment on a few of
these measures today.
Firstly, as other speakers have noted, at the outset
we must develop credible and achievable mandates for
peacekeeping operations. Mandates and means must be
better aligned, and we must be realistic about what we
can achieve. We are improving our ability to measure
progress through the use of benchmarks that are
tailored to the circumstances of each conflict and
reviewed periodically for their viability. But we can do
better.
Secondly, it is important to work together to
breathe new life into faltering peace processes in
countries where peacekeeping operations are deployed.
Peacekeeping must be accompanied by vigorous
peacemaking efforts; it is not a substitute for them.
International leverage may at times be needed to revive
stalled negotiations, and we may wish to consider
whether informal mechanisms, such as the Core Group
for Timor-Leste, have practices that can be helpfully
applied to other situations.
Thirdly, we need to help expand the pool of
capable and willing military and police forces.
Therefore, bilateral programmes that train and equip
potential contributors are essential. The increased
communication among troop- and police-contributors,
the Council and the Secretariat has been helpful, but
we should do better if we are to make informed
decisions regarding future mandates and eventual
drawdown.
Finally, it is critical that we do more to build up
host Governments’ security sectors and rule of law
institutions. The United Nations Security Sector
Reform Team can play a useful role in serving as a
focal point for technical support in this area. Other
relevant peacebuilding activities should also be an
essential element of any new mandate. Earlier and
enhanced cooperation with the Peacebuilding
Commission is also needed.
As Ms. Løj stated, one size does not fit all, and
our peacebuilding strategies, just like our overall
peacekeeping strategies, should be tailored to the needs
of the country in question. As we consider revising
mandates or downsizing some missions, we will have
to augment others, as we just did in Haiti. A few
months ago, we had hoped that the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) would

10-23786

soon be in the position to begin successfully
downsizing. Instead, MINUSTAH is now important
than ever, serving as a critical lifeline to millions of
Haitians in desperate need.
I should like to underscore the continued support
of the United State for United Nations peacekeeping
and express our gratitude for the contribution that
United Nations peacekeepers make around the world.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the delegation of France for having
organized today’s meeting on the timely theme of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We welcome
the participation of the Secretary-General, the UnderSecretaries-General and the leaders of three important
United Nations missions. We listened carefully to their
assessments.
Russia attaches the highest importance to the role
of United Nations peacekeeping in maintaining
international peace and security, and seeks to build up
its capabilities for peacekeeping operations. United
Nations peacekeeping is now more necessary than ever,
and it is quite possible that the demand for
peacekeepers will only grow.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are
undergoing not only quantitative but also qualitative
changes with the growing complexity of peacekeeping
mandates. Many peacekeeping operations are given a
whole range of varied duties, such as helping to
advance political settlements, monitoring compliance
with peace agreements and identifying tasks to
strengthen national capacities. In addition to military
and political stabilization in zones of conflict,
peacekeepers also provide support to security sector
reform, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
the building of durable governing institutions and the
completion of other complex tasks of State-building.
The challenge before us is how to further improve
the work of United Nations peacekeeping. Addressing
that challenge will require our collective efforts and
productive cooperation among the Security Council,
General Assembly and Secretariat. A major line of
action should be aimed at increasing the effectiveness
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. They
should be undertaken in strict conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations, with unfailing respect
for the Security Council’s primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. That is

21

S/PV.6270

the political guarantee of the successful conduct of
peacekeeping operations.
The lack of financial, logistical and technical
resources dictates the need to enhance the quality of
management of peacekeeping operations and to make
optimal use of existing potential in that respect. A
relevant issue is the need to ensure the effective
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
functions for the purpose of consolidating stabilization
achievements.
It is important to clearly delineate between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities, which
should be clearly defined in mandates. United Nations
peacekeepers should be given only initial recovery
duties, while, for peacebuilding processes and
interventions of a purely socio-economic nature, we
should more actively involve United Nations
specialized agencies, regional and subregional
organizations and the donor community.
In developing and adopting peacebuilding
decisions, we need to consider the interests of all
parties, respect the sovereignty of States and encourage
national responsibility for implementing relevant
programmes. Such programmes must be implemented
solely with the consent and in coordination with
national Governments.
The problem of ensuring the required level of
military expertise in the Council’s peacekeeping
decisions deserves particular attention. We believe that,
along with related initiatives, it remains relevant to
consider the Russian proposal on reinvigorating the
work of the Military Staff Committee, with a full
complement of 15 Council members and the flexible
involvement of leading troop-contributing countries.
The assessments of the Committee with regard to the
situation in countries where peacekeeping operations
exist, its recommendations on operational aspects of
peacekeeping and its participation in and cooperation
with the Secretariat in missions and in defining the
preparedness of contingents and the infrastructure of
peacekeeping operations would provide the Council
with reliable and timely information and build up the
military expertise of United Nations peacekeeping.
The scope of the challenges to contemporary
peacekeeping requires effective interaction between the
United Nations and regional organizations. Experience
has shown that more active use of the potential of
regional organizations and subregional mechanisms is

22

justified so long as they operate in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and their relations with the Organization, and
with the Security Council in particular, are governed
by the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter.
Good opportunities for establishing cooperation
with the United Nations in the area of peacekeeping are
emerging as a result of the establishment of the
peacekeeping capabilities of the Collective Security
Treaty Organizations (CSTO). The upcoming adoption,
on the initiative of Russia and other CSTO members,
of a General Assembly resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the CSTO will provide
further impetus in that regard.
Of particular significance is the development of
strategies for the drawdown of peacekeeping
operations once their Security Council mandates have
been implemented. We believe that a discussion on the
exit of operations and a transition from peacekeeping
operations to other types of United Nations presences
will help us to address this challenge.
We were interested to acquaint ourselves with our
partner’s concept paper (S/2010/67) on the theme
“United Nations peacekeeping operations: Transition
and exit strategies”. We believe that a wide range of its
ideas and concepts could serve as a reasonable basis
for further discussion aimed at achieving concrete
results. Of course, the major criterion in planning such
strategies must be to ensure that peacekeepers create
favourable conditions for advancing the process of
political settlement.
We thank the delegation of France for preparing
the draft presidential statement to be adopted today. We
also appreciate the flexibility and constructiveness
shown by colleagues in discussing the draft statement,
which is a substantive and useful document.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in French): I shall
follow the example of the representative of Lebanon by
speaking in French.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement. We very much
appreciate the briefings by Mr. Le Roy and
Ms. Malcorra, as well as the valuable contributions by
Mr. Doss, Ms. Løj and Mr. Von der Schulenburg.
In discussing transition and exit strategies for
peacekeeping operations, we must not lose sight of the

10-23786

S/PV.6270

fundamental objective of such operations. Their
ultimate goal is to contribute to the consolidation of
sustainable peace. Transition and exit strategies are
therefore always a means to an end, and never an end
in themselves. That distinction is not academic; it is
political. That means that such strategies should
respond to political dynamics on the ground.
The
transition
from
peacekeeping
to
peacebuilding should be an undertaking for the entire
United Nations system. Peacekeeping exit and
transition strategies must be coordinated with the wider
United Nations presence on the ground in a coherent
manner. That requires system-wide coordination from
the earliest stages of peacekeeping. We therefore need
to work on three main areas: intensifying the Council’s
political support for peace processes, improving United
Nations structures for dealing with those situations,
and securing the necessary human and material
resources.
A minimal level of political stability is the sine
qua non condition for an exit strategy. We must
continue to gather lessons learned and improve our
efforts in such areas as capacity- and institutionbuilding, improving the ability of States to provide
basic services, protecting civilians, revitalizing the
economy and creating jobs. Local actors must be
constructively engaged in peace, reconciliation and
reconstruction processes. The crucial task of
peacekeeping is to help them to embark upon and
proceed along that path.
Re-establishing peace should be a priority for the
Council as it sets mandates and reacts to developments
on the ground. To that end, the Security Council should
improve its ability to monitor peace processes. The
establishment of benchmarks in several missions is a
positive innovation. I should like to thank Mr. Doss for
the clarity he has brought to our discussion in that
regard.
The transition from peacekeeping is a systemic
undertaking that requires the Council’s cooperation
with other relevant parties. The General Assembly, in
particular its Fifth Committee and Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34), is a crucial
stakeholder in that regard. The Council should take
advantage of the breadth of membership and level of
expertise of those bodies in order to make
peacekeeping more effective and transparent.

10-23786

The relationship between Security Council
decisions and the work of the Organization’s
development
bodies
needs
further
attention.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding should not be
considered sequential stages of the United Nations
presence in a given country. Whenever possible,
development-related entities should be active on the
ground from the beginning of the post-conflict phase
so that, once peacekeepers leave, the socio-economic
conditions for peace are firmly in place.
The Peacebuilding Commission is another
potentially important actor. The latest report of the
C-34 (A/63/19) recognizes the value of the
Commission’s advice on the peacebuilding aspects of
peacekeeping mandates. The roles and responsibilities
of the Commission vis-à-vis the Security Council
should be further clarified. The Commission’s review
is an opportunity to strengthen its capacity to dispense
such advice.
The Secretariat must also have at its disposal the
structures and expertise required to allow it to
adequately address peacebuilding elements of
peacekeeping. In that regard, social and economic
aspects of peacebuilding must receive greater attention.
There have been positive developments recently
with regard to human and material resources for
peacekeeping as such. Little progress, however, has
been made in securing resources to help implement
sustainable transition and exit strategies. The
well-known problems that undermine the effectiveness
of international aid are the same that must the
overcome when it comes to official development
assistance to post-conflict countries. Donors,
international financial institutions and the United
Nations itself must work more vigorously to free up
significant funds — from the outset of and throughout
the entire process — in a predictable, flexible and
coherent way. Coordination and programmatic
coherence could both contribute to reducing
duplication and filling existing gaps, thereby enhancing
the effectiveness of funds invested.
We must also strengthen the ability of
peacekeeping operations to liaise with United Nations
country teams on the ground and to mainstream
peacebuilding concerns in their day-to-day operations,
especially when transition and exit strategies are being
implemented. The special representatives of the

23

S/PV.6270

Secretary-General and resident coordinators have a key
role to play in this regard.
In conclusion, we should see transitions as a step
on the road towards helping countries achieve
sustainable peace and inclusive socio-economic
development. In so doing, we will be strengthening
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I think the
whole Council will agree that the statement made by
the representative of Brazil was exceptionally clear in
nature, an attribute that she shares with the
representative of Lebanon, and that I am sure she will
also share with the representative of Gabon.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Bosnia
and Herzegovina would like to thank France for putting
this important debate on the Security Council’s agenda.
We would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, and Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le Roy
and Susana Malcorra. We would also like to thank
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj, Mr. Alan Doss and
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg for their clear
briefings.
Bosnia and Herzegovina wishes to align itself
with the statement to be made by the acting head of the
European Union delegation to the United Nations,
Mr. Pedro Serrano.
We would finally like to reiterate our gratitude to
the personnel of United Nations missions for their
dedicated work and daily commitment to advancing
peace and security.
As a police- and troop-contributing country — a
country, moreover, with critical experience of United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts —
Bosnia and Herzegovina is particularly cognizant of
the vital importance of this debate. Allow me to make a
few brief remarks.
It is a long road from an initial peace agreement
to sustainable peace. Travelling this road to the
endpoint requires clear and adequate mandates,
strategic planning and coherent implementation, as
well as the commitment of the host country. Only
through all this can the transition to peacebuilding
succeed.
This process begins with mandate design. To
achieve a successful transition, it is vital for mandates

24

to be clear, appropriate and sufficient to addressing
both immediate and long-term needs. A key part of that
mandate design is the definition of a desired outcome
that, as the draft presidential statement recognizes,
reflects the need to create conditions favourable to
sustainable peace. Appropriate and sufficient mandates
allow the United Nations mission to take full
advantage of the narrow window of opportunity to
effect rapid change in the immediate post-conflict
environment.
Furthermore, mandate renewal should not be
automatic, but rather sensitive to and conditioned upon
the evolution of in-country circumstances. This
presupposes a sustained focus by the United Nations on
cognitive capacity, that is, the ability to collate,
examine and interpret all the necessary data to assess
the mission’s impact. The Security Council would
benefit from the availability of clear and precise
recommendations from the Secretariat, as referred to in
the draft presidential statement, at least one month
prior to mandate renewal.
At the same time, Bosnia and Herzegovina
attaches the utmost importance to defining exit
strategies for United Nations peacebuilding missions. A
clear exit strategy must be founded on a thorough
evaluation of the situation on the ground and an
accurate assessment of whether peacebuilding
processes have reached a lasting, irreversible stage. We
should not allow inaccurate assessments to prevail and
lead to the premature termination of missions.
Mandates must be matched from the start by
sufficient resources. It is widely recognized — and the
trials of our own experience bear this out — that early
investments are effective investments. Bosnia and
Herzegovina consequently endorses the precedents
relating to resources and achievable goals expressed in
the presidential statement of 5 August 2009
(S/PRST/2009/24) and the Secretary-General’s report
of 20 April 2001 (S/2001/394).
Bosnia and Herzegovina stresses the significance
of including, wherever possible, integrated strategic
planning and benchmarks. Clear and carefully
calibrated benchmarks can help improve the Security
Council’s strategic oversight of a mission’s progress
towards sustainable peace. Such benchmarks will be
meaningful in direct proportion to the cognitive
capacity of the United Nations. We endorse the further
development of existing benchmarks for the United

10-23786

S/PV.6270

Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the creation of a strategic
integrated plan for the United Nations Mission in
Liberia.
To achieve a successful transition, coordination
among various actors and the coherence of complex,
integrated missions are of vital importance. Bosnia and
Herzegovina shares the common belief that regional
organizations, such as the European Union and the
African Union, can play a constructive role in
transitions. Most peacekeeping and peacebuilding
environments will involve an extensive array of
stakeholders. Drawing upon their best abilities is
essential to the success of the peacebuilding missions.
The peacebuilding initiatives that worked in Bosnia
and Herzegovina were marked by synergy between
multiple actors and, most important, between civilian
and military endeavours.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the belief that the
quality of dialogue among stakeholders can be further
improved. The Security Council, its Working Group of
the Whole on Peacekeeping Operations, the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the police- and troop-contributing
countries are all salient in planning and implementing
United Nations missions. In particular, the Security
Council could rely more upon the advice of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Finally, it has been exactly 18 years since the
United Nations Protection Force was deployed at the
very outset of the post-cold war period of
peacekeeping. Since that disastrous beginning, the
United Nations has notably improved the effectiveness
of its peacekeeping. It has entered into a new phase of
peacebuilding operations, which has had greater
success in achieving objectives, such as the sustained
peace in El Salvador.
Facing the challenges of an unprecedented degree
of global deployment of United Nations missions will
require further improvements, with particular reference
to mandate design, strategic planning, cognitive
capacity and coherence. The task will continue to
demand the political will of host countries and Member
States alike as an ineluctable prerequisite for
successful transitions and exit strategies. Bosnia and
Herzegovina stands ready to share its experiences and

10-23786

looks forward to contributing fully to post-conflict
peacebuilding processes.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
would like to join previous speakers in thanking you,
Mr. President, for having convened this informative
debate on peacekeeping operations. Their role,
although crucial — as attested by their proliferation —
is increasingly being questioned today as a result of the
difficulties that they face in achieving their objectives
and the limited capacities of the United Nations.
The main point of holding this debate on our
quest for a pragmatic approach to the transition from
peacekeeping operations to peacebuilding is, we all
agree, to enable the United Nations to deepen its
consideration of the ways and means to make
peacekeeping operations more effective, of shorter
duration and more predictable in terms of their end
date. In so doing, as was rightly underscored by the
Secretary-General, our Organization should be able to
usefully reduce its presence in the security sector and
increase it in other, more decisive areas of
peacebuilding.
Indeed, it is not the length of a peacekeeping
operation that guarantees its success. In fact, a great
many peacekeeping operations of egregious duration
have not achieved significant progress. The reasons for
this failure — or paradox — were underscored by
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
Alain Le Roy. Establishing a good mandate for a good
exit from a crisis requires more constructive political
commitment at the outset and, of course, a more
forward-looking approach in laying the foundations for
a country to emerge from crisis.
It is obvious that the key to a good exit strategy
lies in the mandates of peacekeeping operations. It thus
seems to be important, as the Brahimi report (see
S/2000/809) recommends, to rethink them in an
objective way in order to have a clear idea about the
changes that are needed in their design and structure.
It is true that for a few years now, the United
Nations has significantly improved the design, conduct
and implementation of peacekeeping operations. It is
also true that these developments have essentially led
the United Nations to into account the need to clearly
define clear, credible and achievable mandates that can
guarantee the success of peacekeeping operations.

25

S/PV.6270

Rethinking peacekeeping mandates involves
revisiting both the philosophy and the process of their
implementation. As many speakers have stressed, a
good mandate must take the causes of a conflict into
account, and its implementation should be underpinned
by robust planning of its various phases and sequences,
and by the identification of criteria that define the
appropriate moment for exit. It is clear that mandate
implementation should be marked by realistic stages,
accompanied by anticipated achievements, quantifiable
benchmarks and well-defined priorities to prevent the
United Nations from being bogged down and resources
from being wasted that would be more useful in other
sectors.
Mandates should also include mechanisms for
cooperation with neighbouring States to prevent
possible incursions by destabilizing forces. Let us not
forget that the crises we face too often have regional
implications, which of course can be managed only
through an approach that takes this aspect into account.
I note that this crucial phase in the drafting of a
mandate should be subordinated to the dispatch to the
field of multisectoral and multidisciplinary scouting
teams to identify precisely the optimal conditions for
the conduct of the mission. It would be equally useful
to systematize the establishment of a technical
evaluation mission to determine a peacekeeping
mission’s exit strategy.
The end of a peacekeeping operation increasingly
requires, on the one hand, that security conditions be
satisfactory and, on the other, the restoration of a
modicum of a functional State, characterized by the
resumption of basic systems of governance, such as
judicial institutions, police forces, penitentiary
services, civil administration and public services.
Elections are often considered to be the conclusion of
post-conflict transition. However, they can lead to the
withdrawal of the United Nations presence only if the
prior conditions are fulfilled. We must therefore ensure
that a country’s stability is irreversible and that the
restoration of Government has been concluded.
We must also ensure that peace agreements
concluded between the parties concerned have been
applied and implemented in good faith to the
satisfaction of the parties, and that the immediate
causes of the conflict have been addressed. It is clear
that the progressive reduction and drawdown of a
peacekeeping operation and its transition to the
consolidation and peacebuilding phase depend to a

26

large extent on evaluation of progress achieved in
relation to the objectives laid out in the mandate.
We believe that, in order to better take these
stages of a mission into account, any peacekeeping
mandate should provide for a civil component that
would, in cooperation with local Government, assess
progress achieved by the mission pursuant to fixed
objectives, and that would propose a transition towards
peacebuilding. During the transition, the capacitybuilding of security and defence forces should be
accelerated to ensure that national forces are in a
position to assume responsibility for the mechanism
deployed by the peacekeeping operation.
We believe that the success of a peacekeeping
operation also requires additional coordination efforts
within the United Nations to strengthen peacekeeping
partnerships. The Secretariat, the members of the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the troopcontributing countries, donors and other partners
within and outside the United Nations system are all
called on to play a critical role in that respect.
Similarly, the United Nations should strive to
strengthen partnerships between the Government in a
crisis situation and international actors.
These, in our view, are the elements necessary to
the establishment of effective transition and exit
strategies for peacekeeping operations leading to the
peacebuilding phase. In conclusion, I express our
support for the draft presidential statement presented
by France.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
express my deep appreciation to the Secretary-General,
the two Under-Secretaries-General and the three heads
of very important missions for their informative
briefings and lessons learned.
I also pay tribute to France for its very important
initiative. United Nations peacekeeping operations are
sent to monitor ceasefires and assist national efforts to
restore security and stability. Our primary focus,
therefore, should be on how effectively peacekeeping
operations can achieve the objectives mandated by the
Security Council rather than on discussing how soon to
exit. Such an approach is in fact more effective in
achieving transition.
Peacekeeping operations are one of the most
valuable and indispensable tools available to the
Security Council for peace and security. I would like to

10-23786

S/PV.6270

stress the importance of considering the role of a
peacekeeping mission in the much broader context of a
continuum from the end of conflict to social and
economic stability.
In launching a new mission, the Security Council
needs to exercise self-restraint in the wording of
mandates. It is important for the Council to set clear,
concrete and achievable goals from the outset, which
will help in planning a smooth transition. For instance,
complex mandates such as the protection of civilians
need to be defined more clearly for implementable,
specific tasks in mission planning. There should also
be a clear priority among a set of mandates. We also
need to set benchmarks against which progress is
monitored and adjustment made in a timely manner,
taking into account the changing situation on the
ground. Such an approach would contribute to
enhancing
the
effectiveness
of
peacekeeping
operations, thereby achieving a smooth transition.
The main challenge that many operations face is
the lack of capacity of the host country to provide for
basic security and to deal with urgent issues in the
post-conflict situation. To address this challenge, it is
essential to promote the institution-building of the host
country and the training of its nationals.
The instability of the security situation and a lack
of productive economic activity are two major
impediments to transition. Transition — in other
words, the completion of the main task of
peacekeeping operations to ensure a stable security
situation — depends on the extent of the progress made
in security sector reform and the establishment of the
rule of law.
An equally serious challenge to transition is the
absence of a peace dividend and a lack of social and
economic stability after the end of a conflict. A
prerequisite for durable peace is to secure basic
services, including electricity, to every household and
to facilitate the reintegration of people affected by the
conflict and reconciliation and coexistence in isolated
communities. Above all, the reintegration of former
combatants into normal civilian life and the creation of
job opportunities for younger people are vitally
important to ending the vicious cycle of conflict and
poverty. Thus, we need to establish a comprehensive
and integrated strategy of peacebuilding towards
transition.

10-23786

Peacekeeping operations are expected to maintain
peace and security in the host country to create an
environment
for
peacebuilding
activities.
In
considering transition, there are three types of
relationships between peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding activity. In the first type, the mandate of
a peacekeeping operation itself contains some elements
of peacebuilding activity, such as in East Timor. The
second is the type in which a peacekeeping operation
does not include a mandate for peacebuilding
activities, while other United Nations entities carry out
peacebuilding activities in the country of operation.
The third is the type in which peacebuilding activities
are carried out after a peacekeeping mission completes
its mandate. This type applies to countries taken up by
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), such as Burundi
and Sierra Leone.
We should be more sensitive to these different
types of relationship. We should consider what type of
peacebuilding activity could be implemented within the
mandate of a peacekeeping operation in the future, and
how such operations can support peacebuilding activity
when another organization is in charge of that aspect.
We believe that such considerations will help to make
transition strategies more effective.
Up to now, the PBC has been in charge mostly of
the third category of mission. We should be mindful
that peacebuilding as a whole is a broad concept
involving large-scale activities in various post-conflict
or fragile situations, and it is totally unrealistic to
expect that the PBC can be responsible for and
engaged in every peacebuilding need in the world.
However, we might consider the possibility that the
PBC should give advice on peacebuilding to the
Security Council in cases of the first type, and also of
the second type, in which peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are implemented simultaneously. At the
same time, we must all be very clear as to the kind of
advice and added value that the PBC may be able to
provide in those cases.
One can hardly overemphasize the importance of
formulating strategic goals for peacebuilding at an
early stage. The opportunity to take advantage of the
golden hour immediately after a ceasefire is very
frequently lost and never comes back. We need to
promote activities to achieve strategic goals along a
road map with a clear timeline, as well as to identify
the stakeholders responsible for each goal. An

27

S/PV.6270

integrated and coordinated approach is therefore key to
success.
For instance, the successful implementation of
security sector reform and the rule of law are critical to
stability and transition. Security sector reform cannot
be completed merely by strengthening the institutional
capacity of the national police or by downsizing,
disarming and demobilizing the military. It must be
accompanied by support for security personnel, the
reintegration of former combatants and the creation of
economic opportunity for young people.
Peacebuilding activities require more varied
expertise and civilian specialists than peacekeeping
operations. They are tied to diverse programmes with
differing implementation procedures and funding
sources. The United Nations may not necessarily be the
strongest player on the ground. It is therefore essential
to strengthen coordination mechanisms according to an
integrated plan and to ensure active interaction among
all stakeholders, including, of course, the Security
Council, the PBC, the host country, donor countries,
troop- and police-contributing countries, international
financial institutions and the private sector.
The Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
which Japan chairs, has agreed to discuss, first, key
gaps in capabilities, resources and training; and
secondly, key lessons learned from completed and
current missions about the successful implementation
of transition strategies. I would like to conclude by
reaffirming Japan’s very strong interest in developing
effective transition strategies.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would first like to thank
you, Sir, for organizing this debate. I also wish to thank
the Secretary-General and his Under-SecretariesGeneral, as well as his Special Representatives, for
their thought-provoking briefings.
The views expressed so far reflect the common
will and determination of this Council to improve, in
consultation with partners, its response to the needs of
United Nations peacekeeping. Turkey is certainly
committed to contributing to this endeavour. Over
time, we have already accumulated a wealth of lessons
learned on how we can further enhance the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping. It is
now the right time to analyse those lessons and to
develop a clear strategy that will help us chart a viable
road map to peace in conflict situations.

28

Much of what I want to say has already been said
by the previous speakers, particularly the briefers, so I
will not repeat them. Moreover, the draft presidential
statement that we are going to adopt today also
contains all the right elements, allowing me to be
rather brief.
The only point I wish to stress further is the need
for an integrated political strategy that will merge
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding tools
into a single framework. Undoubtedly, such a strategy
can succeed only if all partners are willing to back it. It
must therefore reflect the shared vision of all
stakeholders and address all phases of a peace mission:
the entry and, perhaps even more important, the postconflict recovery phases, including, of course,
transition and exit.
As Under-Secretary-General Le Roy said,
peacekeeping can be seen as the emergency room of a
hospital, where the patient should continue to be
treated in the aftermath of a recovery phase. But there
is no doubt that transition and exit strategies should be
part and parcel of this overall strategy. Unless we
determine at the beginning what we want to achieve in
the end, we can neither properly set the course of the
mission in terms of mandates and task prioritization,
nor answer the question of how we are going to
achieve it.
In the development of an integrated strategy, it is
important that we should first agree on the end state
that we want to achieve through peacekeeping
missions, as well as their role and place within the
bigger picture of sustaining peace. Only then, and in
consultation with troop- and police-contributing
countries, can we develop clear and credible mandates
providing a sound political directive to our troops. In
this critical process, the input of regional organizations
should also be given the utmost attention. The Security
Council’s cooperation with the African Union is a good
example of such a relationship.
We should also agree on a shared vision of what
constitutes success. Indeed, one of the perennial
questions facing us is how the Council can assess when
a political and security situation has stabilized
sufficiently to warrant a significant transition. To this
end, we can make better use of benchmarks to measure
progress in achieving tasks and as a tool for reviewing
mandates.

10-23786

S/PV.6270

Yet we should also be careful to avoid creating
benchmarks that are solely Council-driven, which
could result in a lack of local ownership. This is also
important in setting priorities, which ought to reflect
the unique conditions and needs of a country. It is in
this frame of mind that we look forward to the review
in the coming months of the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Indeed, given the evolution of
the situation in that country, this is going to be an
important challenge for the Council, and we need to
get it right this time.
In conclusion, I once again reiterate the vital
importance of an integrated approach to conflict
situations. Indeed, the coherence and coordination of
broader international efforts in an area of conflict is
key to helping countries succeed in their efforts to
sustain peace. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
in particular could play an earlier and enhanced role in
that respect. In that regard, we look forward to the
comprehensive review of the PBC and express our
commitment to contributing actively to that process.
Moreover, for better coordination among Member
States and other partners, we can also make use of the
clearinghouse type of mechanisms to promote synergy
and complementarity in our peacebuilding activities. I
agree with Mr. Doss as to the difficulties of
coordination and the need to streamline our existing
arrangements.
Last but not least, I would like to emphasize that
the real challenge lies in the creation of a suitable
foundation on which the transition from the phase of
the strategic use of security to that of the strategic use
of development can take place, because the exit or
withdrawal of United Nations troops cannot be an end
in itself. We have to think beyond the lifecycle of a
peacekeeping mission, as security is not the only
element of peace and stability.
In this regard, there is no linear relationship
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and thus the
early integration of peacebuilding elements into our
peacekeeping strategies becomes crucial. After all, the
inextricable link between development and security
compels us to do so. As the Secretary-General pointed
out on an earlier occasion, there can be no security
without development, and vice versa. So our efforts on
both accounts should go hand in hand from the very
outset. Turkey commits itself to further advancing the
implementation of such an integrated approach.

10-23786

Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks the French delegation
for organizing today’s thematic debate. I welcome
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and thank him for his
statement. I also welcome the presence of the
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General
Michael von der Schulenburg, Under-SecretariesGeneral Le Roy and Malcorra, and Special
Representatives Doss and Løj and thank them for their
briefings.
After more than six years of continuing
development, peacekeeping operations have become
the most important of United Nations measures for
maintaining international peace and security. In recent
years, rapidly changing situations have raised the bar
to success for peacekeeping operations and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) has
faced severe challenges. Tensions between scale and
efficiency, resources and demand, and mandates and
capacities have hindered the development of
peacekeeping operations, and there is a widening gap
between peacekeeping operations and the expectations
of Member States. It is imperative that experiences be
comprehensively assessed in order to overcome
shortcomings and improve peacekeeping operations.
In these circumstances, it is urgent and necessary
for the Security Council to discuss peacekeeping
reform, addressing transition and exit strategies as a
starting point. Transition and exit strategies not only
involve improved management of peacekeeping
operations, but are also important for the overall
coordination of peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Therefore, when devising transition and
exit strategies, the Council must work from the
perspective of a peacekeeping strategy.
I would like to focus on the following points.
First, coordination between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding must be strengthened. Important as they
are, peacekeeping operations are not a panacea. The
Security Council should attach equal importance to the
political settlement of armed conflicts and the
deployment of peacekeeping operations. We can
eliminate post-conflict destabilizing elements only by
strengthening the promotion of political dialogue and
reconciliation processes, thus establishing a peace to
keep and laying the foundation for transition and exit
strategies. In addition, the Security Council must bring
into full play the good offices of the Secretary-General
and his special envoys, and support the peace

29

S/PV.6270

initiatives
of the
regional
organizations concerned.

and

subregional

Secondly, the division of labour between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding must be further
improved, and coordination and cooperation between
the two strengthened to ensure implementation of the
transition and exit strategies. In order to smoothly and
successfully transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, the Security Council should consider
peacebuilding issues when it takes decisions on
peacekeeping operations, and at the same time clarify
the division of labour. In the transitional stage,
peacekeeping operations should create conditions
conducive
to
peacebuilding
and
facilitate
implementation of exit strategies, without duplicating
the work of either peacekeeping or peacebuilding.
The parties concerned should take the
opportunity of the upcoming comprehensive review of
the work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to
further consider the role of the PBC; mobilize the
participation of all United Nations operational
departments, the international financial institutions and
the relevant regional organizations; and strengthen
exchange and interaction between the PBC and the
Security Council in order to fundamentally assist the
countries concerned to end conflicts and establish
lasting peace and stability.
Thirdly, the Security Council and the Secretariat
should strengthen cooperation at the mandate,
deployment, planning and administrative levels of
peacekeeping operations. In deploying peacekeeping
operations, the Security Council must comprehensively
consider the host country’s situation and the available
peacekeeping resources, formulate a clear and targeted
mandate, identify priorities and set goals for the
various stages.
The Security Council should closely monitor and
follow up implementation of the mandate and
formulate an exit strategy in a timely manner. In the
implementation of a mandate, attention should be paid
to capacity-building of the host country so as to avoid
the overdependence on the peacekeeping operations
that could make implementation of the exit strategy
impossible.
Fourthly, strong partnerships must be established
to ensure the participation and cooperation of all
parties concerned.

30

Continued adherence to the Hammarskjöld
principles of peacekeeping is an important foundation
for the success of United Nations peacekeeping
operations at the deployment, transition and exit
stages. The host country’s opinion must be accorded
important consideration, while fully taking into
account the active participation of the countries
concerned. The support and cooperation of troopcontributing countries, donor States and regional
organizations are also very important, and their roles
must be fully integrated to strengthen coordination and
cooperation and to pool their strengths in order to
ensure the success of the peacekeeping operation.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Brahimi report (see S/2000/809) and the fifth
anniversary of the founding of the PBC. The Security
Council, the Secretariat, the major troop-contributing
countries and all of the other parties have quite high
expectations for the reform of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. China is willing to join
efforts with all parties concerned in engaging in indepth consultations to seek consensus on the question
of the reform of peacekeeping operations and to
promote the improved organization and efficiency of
peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the presentations of the Secretary-General,
Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le Roy and Susana
Malcorra, Special Representatives Alan Doss and Ellen
Margrethe Løj. We are also grateful to have Executive
Representative Michael Von der Schulenburg in the
Council today. Mexico welcomes the initiative of
France to pursue the analysis and discussion of the
various ways in which peacekeeping operations can be
improved, as well as how to design transition and exit
strategies — an issue that undoubtedly represents one
of the main challenges to the Security Council in
fulfilling its fundamental role of maintaining
international peace and security.
In the light of lessons learned in recent years, it
has been recognized that peacekeeping operations must
incorporate a number of essential elements if they are
to meet their main objective of attaining sustainable
peace. Among the most important of these elements is
the drafting of clear, credible and achievable mandates
supported by the material resources, troops, police and
civilian capacities required to fulfil their functions. The
unequivocal commitment of the parties to achieving a
negotiated solution to the conflict is also necessary.

10-23786

S/PV.6270

Other essential elements are the existence of a general
peace agreement that also addresses the underlying
causes of the conflict, and an understanding on the part
of the parties to the conflict and the population in
general of the benefits of achieving the mission
objectives, which they should also perceive as their
own.
Likewise, with respect to these elements, there is
consensus that objectives should be established with
defined timeframes at every stage, including a
transition and exit strategy, and that peacekeeping
missions should adopt an integrated approach that
takes peacebuilding considerations into account from
an early stage. To achieve this, it is imperative for the
Security Council to establish an efficient planning and
coordination
mechanism
involving
special
representatives of the Secretary-General and those
responsible for the coordination and direction of the
military, civil, financial and humanitarian components
of missions.
Within the framework of the United Nations, we
reaffirm the importance for the Security Council to
continue to promote ongoing and substantive dialogue
among the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Fifth Committee of the General
Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission, troopcontributing countries and major financial donors to
peacekeeping operations, especially given the current
international economic climate. The aim of such
dialogue would be to afford these actors greater input
in the process or drafting, adopting and revising
mandates.
In this regard, we recognize that there has been
positive progress in the dialogue among these actors.
However, greater coordination can still be achieved.
That is why we stress the importance of following up
on resolution 1353 (2001), and commend the work of
the Working Group of the Whole on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations to offer recommendations
with a view to improving cooperation and coordination
mechanisms throughout the entire lifecycle of a
peacekeeping operation.
Moreover, we encourage the Security Council, in
drawing up peacebuilding strategies, to cooperate with
regional organizations and such informal mechanisms
as the groups of friends of the Secretary-General, in
recognition of their broad experience, knowledge of the

10-23786

specifics of a conflict and interest in guaranteeing the
transition to stability for the country and the region.
It is essential for a host country to cooperate with
a peacekeeping operation throughout the entire length
of its deployment, on which the successful transition to
a peacebuilding process depends. A peacekeeping
operation cannot be perceived as having been imposed
by the international community alone. The
reconfiguration of a United Nations presence should
also be accompanied by a high degree of coordination
between the United Nations system and other
international actors, including financial institutions and
civil society organizations on the ground.
It is also important to explore mechanisms for
strengthening cooperation between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission in order to
ensure coherence in mandates between peacemaking,
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding
and
development
activities so as to establish conditions conducive to
peacekeeping transition strategies. Consideration of
this issue could help to strengthen the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in the context of its review
later this year.
We cannot ignore the fact that no two operations
are the same. We have to take into account not only the
nature of the conflict, but also and above all the
institutional structure present in the host country of the
peacekeeping operation. Let us not forget that we
frequently face situations in which there is an
institutional vacuum or extreme fragility that calls for
the United Nations to perform a support role that goes
beyond simply ending the military aspect of the
conflict. Where there is no State, the international
community must take on the responsibilities of a State
in support of and consultation with national authorities.
What rule of law can we speak of when there are no
sustainable national institutions?
The Security Council should closely monitor the
situation at all stages of a peacekeeping operation. That
would help to ensure that the transition from one stage
to another occurs in the most effective way possible
and to incorporate timely modifications into the
mandate, including in terms of logistical and
operational capacities, always with the aim of adapting
to events on the ground.
In this context, we support the use by the Security
Council of follow-up mechanisms, such as
benchmarks, which help to improve the relationship

31

S/PV.6270

between peacekeeping operation mandates and their
due implementation, underscore the achievement of
objectives, and help to more clearly define the lifecycle
of each operation.
Finally, we reaffirm the importance of the
Secretariat and the Security Council pursuing periodic
consideration of ways to improve peacekeeping
operations, and we encourage the relevant Working
Group to continue its consideration of transition
strategies and to make recommendations in that area.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I wish to thank all the participants in today’s
debate. My thanks go, of course, to those who have
travelled a great distance — in particular, the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, who came to
share their experience with us. My thanks go, too, to
those without whom the various phases of
peacekeeping operations would not be possible: the
contributors of the troops and police who carry out
activities on the ground; the Peacebuilding
Commission, which is called upon to play an
increasingly important role; the international
organizations that contribute directly to the
implementation of mandates; and, of course and
perhaps above all, the men and women who serve,
often in difficult conditions, in all United Nations
operations.
Why have we organized this debate? Our
fundamental aim, which is quite evident, is to make
operations successful. Today, we are, however,
confronted by two contradictory trends.
First of all, the operations that have been
established in recent years have relied entirely on a
Secretariat whose resources we know to be modest, not
to say limited. In addition, in recent months prospects
have emerged for reductions in several operations. We
should therefore be prepared to succeed in such
transitions.
We must succeed, because we are talking about
the condition for lasting peace on the ground following
the departure of our forces. And we must succeed in a
complex, progressive transition towards a situation in
which the host country fully carries out all the
functions normally performed by a sovereign State,
without a foreign presence on its territory. Several

32

operations have already served as the stage for overall
successful transitions, including Cambodia and Sierra
Leone, to which Mr. Von der Schulenburg has referred.
In the concept paper that we distributed prior to
this meeting (see S/2010/67), we identified the factors
that seem to us to explain the difficulties we sometimes
encounter in trying to carry out successful transitions.
In that regard, we think that there are numerous
elements that are crucial for success, and we should
consider them.
First — and I am far from being the first to
mention it — there is the issue of the quality of
mandates. How can we ascertain if United Nations
efforts have achieved their goals and must now
gradually be brought to an end while benefiting the
host country, if the desired objectives and end state are
not clear? It goes back to a mandate that is clear and
concise. It was Ms. Løj who referred to the real
“Christmas tree” that our resolutions often are. I recall
the resolution on the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
41 missions.
It is then up to the Secretariat, on the basis of its
mandates, to carry out careful planning and to report in
a way that makes it possible to clearly understand
where a mission stands with regard to the completion
of its mandate.
It is very important to maintain an ongoing
exchange between missions and the Council.
Clearly, the availability of resources is a crucial
element. We all know that resources are limited in
several key areas — including in security sector
reform, which is undoubtedly essential in a transition.
Anything that can contribute to increasing resources is
to be welcomed.
Lastly, many times the Secretariat rightly reminds
us of the need to strengthen peace processes.
On the basis of those common-sense
considerations, the Council has arrived at an agreement
on a draft presidential statement that sets out our desire
to improve our efforts in the area of transition by, as
we say in French, getting our own house in order. In
particular, we will endeavour to better define the
expected outcome in our mandates, set out tasks
hierarchically and strengthen dialogue between the
Council and the Secretariat by improving the reciprocal
provision of information and better utilizing such tools

10-23786

S/PV.6270

as strategic frameworks and plans that make it possible
to measure progress in carrying out a mission. As a
consequence, the Secretariat will be able to plan for the
various stages of a mission and develop timetables. In
order to better take post-conflict reconstruction into
account at earlier stages of a mandate, the Council will,
among other things, turn to the Peacebuilding
Commission. Lastly, the Council will make every effort
to support peace processes.
With those commitments we are not going to
change either the essentially political character of the
situations brought before the Council, or the long
period of time required for peace and reconciliation
processes. But we do hope to contribute to a process
that is more thought-out and more responsible, both in
the Council itself and in our dialogue with the
Secretariat.
I believe that the decisions that we are prepared
to take are both simple and make good sense. We have
agreed to carry out an assessment of these efforts at the
end of 2010. As members of the Council are aware, my
country is committed to maintaining the reform
momentum and to tirelessly work to strengthen the
valuable partnership that links us to the Secretariat and
the main peacekeeping stakeholders.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Peter
Wittig, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Permanent Representative of Germany.
Mr. Wittig (Germany) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for inviting me to
address the Security Council in my capacity as
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission. Allow
me to thank you in particular for your initiative to
bring us together to discuss peacekeeping and
peacebuilding in the Security Council.
(spoke in English)
May I recall that a core mandate of the
Peacebuilding Commission is to promote coherence
among all relevant actors. That is all the more
important for peacekeeping and peacebuilding actors
on the ground in order to ensure an integrated,
sustainable and consistent approach to the post-conflict
response.

10-23786

Ideally,
therefore,
the
linkage
between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding should not be
approached as an issue of reducing the mounting costs
of peacekeeping operations. Rather, we should take an
approach aimed at protecting the enormous
investments in peacekeeping by introducing a
peacebuilding perspective early on. Investment in
peacekeeping will be optimized by securing sustainable
and long-term engagement by the United Nations and
other international, regional and subregional actors
through an early peacebuilding perspective.
As noted by Special Adviser Brahimi in his
landmark report on peace operations,
“Although
multi-dimensional
United
Nations peacekeeping operations may be required
to initiate a limited number of critical
peacebuilding activities, they are neither designed
nor equipped to engage in longer-term institution
and capacity-building efforts.”
In other words, while peacekeepers are early
peacebuilders, they are not long-term peacebuilders.
That is why it is so important that the Security Council
draws on the experience of, and works closely with, the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Let me briefly highlight the objectives of
peacebuilding and the role of peacekeepers therein.
In his report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict, the Secretary-General underlined
that
“The immediate post-conflict period offers
a window of opportunity to provide basic
security, deliver peace dividends, shore up and
build confidence in the political process, and
strengthen core national capacity to lead
peacebuilding efforts.” (S/2009/304, para. 3)
The Secretary-General’s report specifically
identified five peacebuilding priority areas in the
immediate aftermath of conflict, namely, support for
basic safety and security, support for the political
process, support for the provision of basic services,
support for restoring core Government functions and,
finally,
support
for
economic
revitalization.
Peacekeeping can assist in laying the foundations for
socio-economic recovery and long-term development
through work in the first two of those priorities.
Indeed, it is through their work in supporting those

33

S/PV.6270

priorities that peacekeepers lay the foundation for
stability and development.
From the perspective of the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, the key challenges in
transition lie in searching for the right timing and
sequencing among the many other priorities in postconflict situations. Prioritization needs to take place
within the framework of a coherent strategy. Timing
and sequencing are also closely linked to setting
indicators and benchmarks for transition to longer-term
peacebuilding engagement.
While peacekeepers contribute to peacebuilding,
their transition and exit strategy should be conceived in
terms of peacebuilding’s core function of stabilization,
including overseeing the implementation of peace
agreements. The drawdown and withdrawal of
peacekeeping missions should not be conceived as a
sign of dissipating international attention and
engagement but rather as a transition to longer-term
peacebuilding that should indeed upscale the
international and United Nations engagement.
Finally, let me point out the opportunities and
potential for a role for the Peacebuilding Commission
in a transition situation and period. The period before
the drawdown and withdrawal of a peacekeeping
operation should be the ideal moment for
peacebuilding engagement with the Commission and
the country. Especially at that time, the Commission
can offer an inclusive and flexible platform for
engaging all relevant actors and advising the Council
on approaches to secure a coherent and integrated
approach in this critical transition in United Nations
engagement. For the same reason, the Commission’s
advisory role can be crucial throughout the life of a
peacekeeping mission.
Concretely, the Peacebuilding Commission could
potentially play an early and critical role in four major
areas. First, the Commission could provide early
peacebuilding perspectives in the design and review of,
or transition from, peacekeeping mandates. Secondly,
the Commission should be able to identify and promote
country-specific sustainability factors. That is
particularly critical in jumpstarting early efforts for
institution-building and national capacity development
in the areas of security, governance and economic
generation.
Thirdly, the Commission should be able to
catalyze early partnerships with the international

34

financial institutions and regional and bilateral political
and economic actors. Finally, the Commission may
benchmark for and monitor the progression from
stabilization to transition and consolidation, which is
essential for a well-informed exit strategy for
peacekeeping operations.
All this suggests that the Peacebuildinq
Commission would report periodically to the Security
Council on progress in peacebuilding in countries
where peacekeeping operations are also deployed.
Let me conclude by saying that the early and
consistent
engagement
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission in the design, review and drawdown of
peacekeeping mandates would increase the chances of
sustaining our collective attention and our engagement
with countries emerging from conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Witting for his statement.
After the statement of Mr. Serrano, we shall
suspend the meeting for lunch — the Council does
understand that a French president requires a hearty
lunch — and will resume the meeting at 3 p.m.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Tete
Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations.
Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): Mr. President, I
would like first to thank you for pronouncing my name
correctly. I wish to express my great satisfaction at
participating in this debate and to congratulate the
French presidency of the Council for having chosen a
topic so important to the African continent, one which
constitutes one of the challenges that we must meet but
whose recipes for success remain to be clearly
determined.
I also wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to all speakers who preceded me for proposals that will
enrich the experience that the African Union is
working to develop.
As far as we are concerned, one could not have
chosen a better time to debate a topic so vital to
thousands of Africans who daily endure the
consequences of armed conflict. The African Union has
just concluded its summit at Addis Ababa. It has
thought a great deal about issues of peace and security
in Africa and declared 2010 the year of peace and
security in Africa. Indeed, for the African Union this

10-23786

S/PV.6270

debate constitutes a substantial contribution to that
objective, which is aimed at seeking lasting solutions
to the conflicts in the African continent. It is a
continent where thousands of men and women are
deployed as part of United Nations political and
peacekeeping operations and where the Peacebuilding
Commission is sparing no effort to ensure that peace
becomes a lasting reality in Burundi, Sierra Leone,
Guinea Bissau and the Central African Republic.
As African heads of State indicated in the Tripoli
Declaration, Africa is determined to put a definitive
end to the scourge of conflicts and violence, aware of
its shortcomings and its errors but motivated by the
will to mobilize all means and human resources
necessary and to seize every opportunity to promote
and advance the agenda for conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, as well as for postconflict reconstruction.
Therefore we cannot but seize the opportunity
afforded us by today’s exercise to share the varied
experiences that can enrich the action of the African
Union, which has itself gone through a number of
important stages in its efforts to meet, in a
comprehensive and global way, the challenges of the
prevention, management and settlement of conflicts in
Africa. Efforts include the setting up the Peace and
Security Council, the development of the necessary
normative and institutional frameworks, including the
continental peace and security architecture, and the
adoption of numerous instruments on human rights,
governance, the rule of law, democracy, elections,
disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation,
terrorism, and policies of good-neighbourliness.
Those instruments constitute a consolidated
whole of norms and principles, respect for which will
significantly reduce the risk of conflicts and violence
and will contribute to peacebuilding. We believe that a
number of elements of that consolidated whole,
developed by the African Union, are also necessary for
the successful transition for countries emerging from
conflict.
As this Council well knows, the African Union is
present in Darfur, alongside the United Nations,
through the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The African Union
has also deployed a force in Somalia, which is
currently 5,500 men strong, to protect the institutions
of that country — the only country in the world that

10-23786

has had no State, no institutions for close to 20 years
and has been abandoned by almost everybody. It is
therefore natural that our organization should be
interested in today’s debate and in exit and transition
strategies.
In Darfur, the report drawn up by the panel led by
the former South African President, Thabo Mbeki,
which was presented to the Security Council
(S/2009/599, annex I), contains important elements for
an integrated approach for crisis exit and transition
management.
A question that is often raised here in this
Chamber is that of how to reduce the boundaries
between peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding. A
number of ideas have been raised here today
concerning the forecasting, from the initial phase of
peacekeeping operations, actions for peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction. It would be useful to reenforce the idea of a hybrid formula, by which
peacekeeping operations would be bolstered by
significant
peacebuilding
actions
aimed
at
strengthening national capacities, including the
creation of conditions conducive to establishing strong
State institutions. It has been demonstrated in a number
of cases that deterioration of the State usually leads to
degradation of other components of the economic and
political apparatus, and even of the social fabric of the
country.
We also need to reflect on an increased role of
civilian personnel during this phase, as underscored by
the delegation of Gabon, including recourse to the
diaspora of the States concerned, in cooperation with
local authorities.
In addition, at a time when there are signs of
impatience to see Blue Helmets leave certain countries,
including African countries, there is a need for us to
address the issues of timelines, without questioning the
achievements in the field of peace and stability in those
countries.
The implementation of exit and transition
strategies must start, as indicated in the concept paper
that the French delegation has so kindly shared with us
(S/2010/67), by defining a clear and credible mandate
in order to preserve the prestige of the mission in the
eyes of the public it serves. Our approach to
peacekeeping, including through the Peacebuilding
Commission, is silent on this matter, and it is high time
that these bodies, whether it be the peacekeeping

35

S/PV.6270

operations or the Peacebuilding Commission, address
it.
We also believe, along with Brazil, that we must
strengthen the concept of development and lay the
foundation for development during the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding phases. Indeed, peacebuilding
requires timely assistance to meet immediate needs.
However, there are often difficulties in moving from
emergency to substantial development assistance.
Introducing such innovative elements will contribute to
a successful exit and transition strategy, as it will
enable peacekeeping operations and the Peacebuilding
Commission to leave behind a solid basis for stable
peace in countries emerging from crisis.
The African Union has included the concept of
development into its approach to post-conflict
reconstruction. In that context, in decision 228 (VII) of
the Executive Council, the Commission was asked to
develop the African Union Policy Framework on PostConflict Reconstruction and Development, based on
the relevant provisions of the Protocol Establishing the
Peace and Security Council and on experiences
accumulated on the continent. As a result, the African
Union Commission has undertaken a number of
initiatives that led to the adoption of the decision
endorsing the African Union Policy Framework.
The African Union is also working on the
development of guidelines on policy revisions at the
national and regional level, as well as on the creation
of a database for African experts on post-conflict
reconstruction and development, which will be made
available to member States emerging from conflict.
The African Union is also working on mobilizing
resources to that end and on capacity-building,
including through the use of volunteers.
In conclusion, I would again like to thank the
French presidency of the Security Council for this
initiative and express the hope that our deliberations
today will lead to recommendations that will advance
our collective peacebuilding efforts in countries
emerging from crisis situations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Pedro Serrano, acting head of the
European Union delegation to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano (spoke in French): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having invited the
European Union to this timely and important debate. In

36

accordance with your instructions, in order to expedite
the Council’s work I will make an abridged statement.
The full text of the European Union statement will be
distributed in the Chamber.
(spoke in English)
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries
of the Stabilisation and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.
Peacebuilding provides the vital bridge that helps
create the conditions for peacekeeping missions to be
drawn down, laying the foundations for longer-term
efforts to consolidate stability and achieve sustainable
development. At the heart of this process are efforts to
strengthen national capacities to manage conflict and
early investments in economic recovery, basic services
and national institutions. The sooner such efforts start,
the quicker they can contribute to building long-term
stability and reduce the risk of a relapse into war.
The peacebuilding tasks in peacekeeping
missions — such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, security sector reform, rule of law, good
governance and human rights — have a critical role to
play and should feed into the broader peacebuilding
efforts. In pursuing these tasks, attention must be
placed on strengthening local capacities and civil
society, encouraging the participation of women in
peace processes and peacebuilding, and promoting
dialogue among stakeholders. Special efforts should be
undertaken in assisting national authorities in the
protection of civilians from acts of violence.
We have listened today to statements from some
of the most highly qualified professionals and experts
on these issues, starting with the Secretary-General. I
would like on my part to share some views based on
the experience of the European Union (EU) in the
field.
First, the success of peacekeeping efforts requires
a comprehensive, holistic and inclusive approach. To
this end, early and comprehensive planning to integrate
peacekeeping and peacebuilding is essential. The
integrated mission planning process and the
development of integrated strategic frameworks are, in
the EU’s view, essential tools for the coordination and

10-23786

S/PV.6270

prioritization of the security, political, development
and humanitarian activities undertaken by the United
Nations.
Secondly, peacebuilding tasks need to be taken
into consideration in mandates from the outset. At the
same time, The Security Council has to make sure, in
cooperation with contributing countries, that missions
are mandated and equipped with the adequate
capabilities to carry out these tasks. Where relevant,
peacekeeping missions should be requested to include
information on progress in peacebuilding in their
regular assessments of mandated tasks in order to
identify and draw attention collectively to critical gaps
and to harmonize future steps. In this context,
peacebuilding actors, including the Peacebuilding
Support Office, should be involved from the earliest
stages of a peacekeeping mission.
Thirdly, effective peacebuilding needs strong
coordination. The United Nations could play an even
more important role in this regard, including through
the Peacebuilding Commission, which could help to
generate a more coherent and coordinated approach,
including beyond the United Nations system, and to
maintain a framework of mutual accountability
between the host Government and its partners. The
European Union hopes that the forthcoming session of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
and the Peacebuilding Commission review process will
provide opportunities to elaborate and enhance those
linkages.
Fourthly, to ensure that the peacebuilding agenda
bears fruit on the ground, it is essential that personnel
responsible for peacekeeping be aware of the
importance of this supportive work. An efficient incountry coordination mechanism must be in place to
facilitate close communication between these agents
and peacekeeping personnel. Equally, peacekeepers
have to play their part in supporting confidencebuilding in the political process and delivering initial
peace dividends.
Fifthly, a critical element required for a
sustainable exit from conflict is economic recovery.
The European Union has seen this clearly in theatres

10-23786

ranging from Aceh to Guinea-Bissau. Peacekeepers
play a critical role in helping to stabilize the situation.
They can also play a small but significant role through
the implementation of quick-impact projects, such as
undertaking interim repairs of infrastructure. They also
play a key role in the disarmament and demobilization
of ex-combatants and initial support for their
reinsertion into civilian life. In this regard, the EU
underlines the importance of improving the pace at
which and the way in which we approach the
reintegration of ex-combatants, including the
rehabilitation of former child soldiers and the specific
needs of girls, which is a major issue in many of
today’s conflicts, in particular in Africa.
Lastly and fundamentally, the European Union
believes that local and national ownership of the
peacebuilding process is the single most important
element in bringing about a successful transition from
conflict. Responsibility for building a peaceful and
stable society rests first and foremost with
communities themselves. From the outset of a
peacekeeping mission, the international community
should focus on supporting this responsibility. That
requires the development of an operational strategy to
assess needs and identify local capabilities and
partnerships, including with neighbouring countries.
We dissect the crisis management and
peacebuilding processes into their security, political and
development dimensions in order to structure the work
and ensure coordination of the different international
actors involved. But it is only when such projects are
joined under one goal capable of uniting a society — a
project for living together, in the words of the Spanish
philosopher Ortega y Gasset — that they acquire their
full meaning. The European Union is ready to continue
working with the United Nations, other crisismanagement actors and the countries affected by
conflict in pursuit of this comprehensive approach.
The President (spoke in French): There are a
number of speakers remaining on my list. I therefore
propose, with the consent of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

37
