United Nations

S/PV.6453

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6453rd meeting
Thursday, 16 December 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Nishida
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Morgan Sotomayor
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Karev
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009) (S/2010/604)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-69655 (E)

*1069655*

S/PV.6453

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008)
and 1888 (2009) (S/2010/604)
The President: I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Belgium, Benin, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kenya, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste and Ukraine, in which they
request to participate in this meeting. I propose to
invite those representatives to participate in this
meeting without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: On behalf of the Security Council,
I extend invitations under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Margot Wallström,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye, Military Adviser of
the Office of Military Affairs in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
It is so decided.
I have received a letter from His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting Head of the Delegation of

2

the European Union to the United Nations, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Thank you very much,
Madam President, for convening this important
meeting. I appreciate your personal attention to the
problem of sexual violence, which is a top priority for
me and the United Nations system.
I thank all members of the Security Council for
the draft resolution to be adopted during the course of
this meeting. The Council will thereby put in place a
vital building block for holding perpetrators
accountable. It will also send out a resounding message
to those who would violate both women’s bodies and
the law that impunity will not be tolerated.
But let us remember that even as we take this step
here, catastrophe is unfolding for communities caught
in the chaos of conflicts. Armed elements are targeting
civilians, raping women and men and terrorizing entire
populations. Premeditated campaigns are being waged
with the most sinister goals: to silence women leaders,
empty areas that are filled with rich minerals but poor
people, recruit others and perpetuate the cycle of abuse.
Sexual violence shatters lives, devastates
countries and destroys hope. Victims who might have
contributed to development are shunned. Girls who
might have grown into great leaders cannot even attend
school. In many places, the threat is so pervasive that
women cannot cultivate land, collect water or get the
fuel they need to cook and feed their families — for
fear that they will be attacked in the process. Often,
perpetrators seem to reserve particular cruelty for
children, intentionally traumatizing boys and girls by
forcing them to watch as their mothers are attacked or
by attacking the children themselves.
Earlier this year, this horrific reality played out in
Walikale, in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Hundreds of women were
raped, as were girls, boys and men. One young girl,
just five years-old, suffered such severe physical
injuries that she may never fully recover. We can only
imagine the psychological trauma she now endures.

10-69655

S/PV.6453

Victims may survive such attacks only to be
subjected to another form of abuse. Sexual violence is
one of the only crimes where the victims — and not the
perpetrators — are left with stigma. This is true not
only in the Democratic Republic of the Congo but in
other countries around the world. Victims are shamed
and marginalized. Their husbands reject them. Men and
boys who are sexually attacked often suffer isolation
and discrimination. Just when these individuals need
support from their communities, it falls away.
Silencing the victims only benefits the
perpetrators. It feeds impunity, which erodes faith in
the justice system. Make no mistake: this is intentional
and part of the very design of the violence. Attacks on
women are attacks on peace itself. That is why we must
do more to fight stigma, protect women’s security and
help the victims. They need services and they deserve
comprehensive reparations. This is critical to recovery
for individuals and justice for society.
The United Nations and the international
community can support national efforts, but we cannot
supplant them. I call on leaders to join me in declaring
that enough is enough. We cannot permit the sexual
violence that is used as a tactic of war to become a way
of life. The United Nations is working in conflict areas
and troubled areas around the world to protect
populations and combat impunity. We have seen that
determined and concerted action can yield positive
results.
In Walikale, peacekeepers of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), in a joint
operation with Congolese forces, arrested “Lieutenant
Colonel” Mayele, who was allegedly responsible for
commanding the mass rapes. But many perpetrators are
still at large. MONUSCO and the United Nations
system are helping the Democratic Republic of the
Congo authorities to investigate the crimes, protect
witnesses and bring perpetrators to justice. MONUSCO
has also launched a targeted operation to better protect
civilians in the affected areas. As a result, a number of
suspected human rights abusers have been arrested and
many internally displaced people able to return to their
homes.
Important steps have also been taken at the
international level, including the recent arrests of
leaders of the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda in France and Germany, and the work of the

10-69655

International Criminal Court on sexual violence
crimes.
Today’s draft resolution gives us sharper tools
and sharper teeth in the fight against sexual violence. It
gives me a mandate to list, in my reports on this
question, parties who commit such acts. It challenges
the United Nations system to provide better
information, and it reaffirms the Council’s commitment
to adopting sanctions against perpetrators. I will do
everything possible to ensure that the draft resolution
leads to real protection for populations at risk.
My Special Representative is bringing the voices
of women to the Council’s deliberations. I am grateful
that she has been invited to brief the Council today,
and hope that she has many opportunities to do so
again in the future. The Council’s sustained political
support for the deployment of the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and the protection of advisors in
affected countries will be critical as we move ahead.
The entire United Nations system is mobilized
under my campaign “UNiTE to End Violence against
Women”. We are working to change attitudes across
the world. Together, the United Nations, national
Governments and the international community can
eliminate this menace and secure a better future for all
people.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Margot Wallström,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Ms. Wallström: I am grateful for the opportunity
to address the Council on this important occasion.
Although it is my fourth briefing as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, today’s meeting is in many ways
a first. It is not merely a reiteration or renewal of
commitments; rather, it is a decisive step towards a
comprehensive
monitoring
and
accountability
architecture, aimed at shattering the vicious cycle of
impunity for wartime sexual violence.
Allow me to start by expressing my appreciation
for the leadership of the United States, all Council
members for their support of today’s resolution, and
the more than 60 Member States that have cosponsored this landmark text and are participating in
today’s debate. I would also like to particularly thank

3

S/PV.6453

the Secretary-General for his strong personal
engagement on this issue. My remarks this afternoon
will outline what the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/604) and the resulting resolution mean for the
United Nations system in general, and my mandate in
particular.
When I accepted this mandate, I consulted an
array of United Nations, governmental and nongovernmental experts on one critical question: What
should be our measure of success? Over the past
decade,
successive
Council
resolutions
have
recognized that international peace and security is
indivisible from women’s peace and security. And yet,
I began my mandate in the knowledge that today, as
throughout history, wartime sexual violence is never
adequately recognized, reported or remedied. Rape
persists in contexts of conflict and unrest across the
globe because, without the credible threat of
consequences, there is no deterrent. The impact on the
ground in other areas of Council practice, such as the
protection of children in armed conflict and the work
of sanctions committees, is real and proven.
Thus, our measure of success must be the
implementation of a system whereby timely and
reliable information on sexual violence flows from the
country to the global level, where it provides a basis
for accountability and action. Under the long shadow
cast by the mass rapes in Walikale, the United Nations
can do no less than bring all of its accountability tools
to bear. This must apply equally whether the victim is
an eight-year-old girl or an 80-year-old grandmother.
Today, we are poised to make that system a reality.
The report currently before the Council outlines
such a system, structured around four pillars: first,
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements in
relevant countries; secondly, a mandate to list parties to
conflicts on the Council’s agenda that are credibly
suspected of committing patterns of sexual violence;
thirdly, to use this list as a platform for engaging those
parties in a structured dialogue to obtain protection
commitments; and finally, tracking measures to prevent
and punish sexual violence that can result in either
de-listing or, in the case of persistent violators, referral
to sanctions committees.
In 10 years of the women, peace and security
agenda, there has never been an accountability
system that directly engages armed groups in
protection and prevention. This is despite the fact that

4

sexual violence — which devastates the lives and
livelihoods of countless women — has been recognized
as a grave breach of international humanitarian law
since the early 1990s. The new structure will help to
ensure that mass rape is never again met with mass
impunity. Instead of serving as a cheap and silent tactic
of war, sexual violence will be a liability for armed
groups. It will expose their superiors to increased
international scrutiny and pressure, seal off the
corridors of power and close all exits to those who
commit, command or condone such acts. This will
reinforce the line between a commander and a
criminal.
A reliable monitoring and accountability system
must be built on a common conceptual foundation. To
this end, the Secretary-General’s report defines for the
first time the concept of conflict-related sexual
violence. This frame of reference will shed light not
only on the profile of the perpetrators, but the factors
that facilitate or restrain perpetration. It is, after all,
impossible to prevent what we do not fully understand.
When my Office reviewed the data being
collected from the field, it became evident that sexual
violence as a tactic or consequence of war was not
captured under existing categories. For instance, the
rubric “violence against women” does not reflect cases
against men and boys; the label “harmful traditional
practices” mischaracterizes sexual violence as cultural
or traditional; and the term “gender-based violence”
does not reflect the fact that gender discrimination is
not the only rationale for sexual violence as a method
of ethnic cleansing or a tactic of terror. As a number of
field colleagues have noted, the issue warrants specific
consideration.
It is also significant that this report also appears
under the General Assembly agenda item entitled
“Prevention of conflict”. That is an appropriate —
albeit untraditional — lens, as rape increases the spiral
of violence, prolongs conflict and exacerbates its
impact on civilians. This approach helps to refute the
myth that sexual violence is opportunistic or inevitable
by illustrating causal links with security factors and
actors. It also counters the stereotype that women are
inherently vulnerable by highlighting how they are —
intentionally, or through lax command and control
structures — placed at risk.
Because sexual violence has traditionally been
viewed as the random acts of a few renegades or part

10-69655

S/PV.6453

of the spoils of war, it has been ignored in peace talks,
reparations schemes and funding frameworks for
recovery. Sexual violence is absent even from peace
agreements that followed wars where it was a major
feature of the fighting, such as in Bosnia, Sierra Leone
and Liberia. It has rarely been included in ceasefire
agreements, which only call for an end to acts
considered as part of the conflict. Historically, sexual
violence by soldiers was prosecuted with a view to
restoring military discipline, rather than upholding
women’s rights. The perspective of the victim and the
question of reparations barely featured. In all of those
respects, the new analytical framework will have an
impact. Though we may never have all the answers, we
can ask more focused questions.
Indeed, after resolution 1820 (2008), the question
is no longer whether sexual violence is a peace and
security matter for the Security Council, but when. The
Secretary-General’s report provides a number of
examples. They include sexual violence linked with
forced displacement, to control coveted territory and
lucrative natural resources, by spoilers to destabilize a
peace process, in the context of elections, to extract
information during detention or disarmament, and
sexual violence that has become normalized in
communities that have seen it go unpunished during
years of war as well as in countries that have integrated
known abusers into national forces. Such violence
cannot be separated from the broader security
challenges confronting the Council.
This understanding is borne out by what I have
seen in the field and heard from the survivors. The
words of one woman I met negate the traditional
hierarchy of wartime horrors that has trivialized rape
relative to murder and torture. She said: “They have
taken my life without killing me”.
When I was in Bosnia and Herzegovina last
month, I was reminded that this hierarchy is also a
logic on which the perpetrators often rely. For instance,
at the start of the well-known Foca trial before the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, the three men charged with sexual slavery
could barely understand why they were being tried for
what was “only” rape, stating by way of defense: “But
I could have killed them.”
The estimated 50,000 rapes that occurred during
the conflict in Bosnia have resulted in just 12
convictions in national courts. The process has been

10-69655

painfully slow. Women describe being treated in the
courtroom as just another exhibit from which evidence
can be extracted, saying: “It is better to be a criminal
than a victim in this system”. Most women who
endured unspeakable brutality now endure the
indignity of seeing their former assailant in the street,
the bank or the supermarket, flaunting their impunity. I
met with women who, 15 years after the peace
agreement, still shake, sigh and weep, and one
described how the soldiers led her to the entrance of a
rape camp, which she remembers as the door to hell.
Rape victims are the only casualties of war that a
nation dishonours rather than honours. Their war
wounds represent not sacrifice, but shame. When I was
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I learned
that not a single victim or community has received
reparations for sexual violence, not even the
approximately 2,000 survivors who have managed to
obtain a judgment in their favour. In Liberia, despite 14
years of civil war in which rape was rampant, and
despite the reintegration of ex-combatants into society
with no psychological counselling, the explanation I
heard most frequently for why rape remains the
number-one reported crime was “the way women
dress”. The idea that women are deserving of this
violence, or used to it, or that it is their culture, makes
a mockery of the notion of universal human rights.
Women across the Kivus did not tell me “if only this
were not our culture”; they said “if only it were not for
the war”.
Our current understanding of conflict-related
sexual violence is a credit to the Bosnian women who
broke the silence about rape as a crime of war. It is a
credit to the women of the Congo who continue to
work and build networks even in the face of terror. And
it is a credit to the human rights defenders on the front
lines.
But our monitoring and reporting must become
more systematic, timely and complete. Ultimately,
sexual violence is not just a tragedy we must redress,
but a threat we must prevent. My Office, in partnership
with UN Women and others, will develop an earlywarning matrix of risk factors to draw attention to the
red flags that may signal a spike in sexual violence.
Women’s protection advisers will have an important
role to play in the new monitoring system.
Looking forward, significant challenges and
opportunities remain in implementing the mandate I

5

S/PV.6453

have been given by this Council. From the outset, I
have made ending impunity my top priority. I remain
convinced that in many ways, prosecution is
prevention.
I recently attended the opening of the Bemba trial
at the International Criminal Court, the first
international investigation in which alleged rapes far
outnumber alleged killings. This sends a powerful
signal that no military or political leader is above the
law and no woman is below it. Beyond prosecution,
there is a need for recognition and reparation. The aim
is to bring the perpetrators to justice, but also to bring
justice to the victims.
My Office will continue to support the capacity
of Governments affected by armed conflict to address
sexual violence. Specifically, the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law will help Governments to enhance
accountability. I am delighted to have the newly
appointed Team Leader with me today in this Chamber.
I also add my voice to that of the Council in
encouraging troop-contributing countries to invite the
mobile support team on sexual violence to present
training scenarios to their troops prior to deployment.
While the resolution to be adopted by the Council
today is a welcome development, like any New Year’s
resolution, what matters most is the resolve to uphold it
every day of the year. To that end, I urge the Council to
give sexual violence continuous consideration.
Long after the guns fall silent, the consequences
of rape remain. For women and girls who walk to
marketplaces, water collection points or schools on
roads still controlled by armed groups and return home
to communities teeming with ex-combatants, the war is
not over. Sexual violence has been called a war within
a war, but often it continues as a war within the peace.
War lives on in the children born of rape and orphaned
by violence, who line the roads in gangs, begging for
money and food, aspiring to be soldiers. By attacking
shared values, sexual violence destroys not only
people, but their sense of being a people.
We cannot bring justice to every victim
throughout the history of war. But what we are here to
do today, and from this moment on, is to ensure that
conflict-related sexual violence no longer goes
unreported, unaddressed or unpunished. That will be
our collective measure of success.

6

The President: I thank Ms. Wallström for her
statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): I too thank the
Council presidency for having taken the initiative to
organize this important debate. This is an opportunity
for us to review the efforts of peacekeeping missions
against sexual violence in times of conflict. This
question remains one of the major challenges
confronting us. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the Department of Field
Support (DFS) are deeply concerned by ongoing sexual
violence against civilians, in particular women and
children, in conflict zones in spite of repeated
condemnations by the international community.
In 2010, DPKO and DFS launched various
targeted initiatives to improve the implementation of
our protection mandates. We have concentrated our
efforts on the prevention of protection incidents by
missions and on strengthening their capacities to
support national authorities in the implementation of
their responsibilities to protect civilians in their
territories.
It is vital to recognize that peacekeeping missions
are but one protection actor among others, beginning,
of course, with the Government of the host country,
and that they cannot guarantee absolute protection. We
have always said that we expect each mission
component to do its utmost to prevent any occurrence
of sexual violence.
After developing the operational concepts earlier
this year, we centred our actions around five key pillars
in order to improve the planning and implementation of
our protection mandates. These are: first, the
development of a strategic reference framework to
guide the development of missions’ protection
strategies; second, training modules on the protection
of civilians for pre- and post-deployment courses,
which include practical exercises and address all
components of peacekeeping missions; third, an
assessment of resources and capacities necessary for
the implementation of our civilian protection
mandates; fourth, an in-depth study of planning
processes for the protection of civilians pre- and postdeployment; and finally, capacity-building initiatives.
We are working on a definition of standard capacities
for our military personnel in order to better define our

10-69655

S/PV.6453

expectations for performance in civilian protection, and
for our other mandated duties.
We have also undertaken specific initiatives to
combat sexual violence, which are clearly at the centre
of our efforts to protect civilians.
(spoke in English)
Addressing impunity, for example through the
establishment of the rule of law and accountability, is
another key plank of our ongoing efforts to address
conflict-related sexual violence. DPKO, together with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the United Nations Development
Programme, developed the conceptual framework for a
rapidly deployable team of experts on sexual violence
in armed conflict, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1888 (2009). Members of the team, including
a DPKO judicial officer, are currently in the process of
being recruited, as just mentioned by Ms. Wallström.
A number of illustrative examples from the field
include the case of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), where the military legal
adviser in Goma is currently providing technical
support to Congolese military justice authorities in the
conduct of the Walikale investigation. MONUSCO is
carrying out an ongoing procedural efficiency and
fairness project, which provides training to military
and civilian judges and prosecutors, with a particular
focus on conflict-related sexual violence. The Mission
is also in the process of establishing prosecution
support cells to assist the military justice authorities of
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) in prosecuting persons arrested by the
FARDC.
The United Nations Mission in the Sudan
provides technical support to the Government of
Southern Sudan to review, amend and enact legislation
that ensures protection from sexual and gender-based
violence. In the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), there is a project currently under way to
train prosecution and investigation teams specifically
on sexual and gender-based violence issues. In 2009,
the Liberian judiciary launched, with the support of
UNMIL, a dedicated court for sexual and gender-based
violence cases that pays special attention to victim and
witness protection.

10-69655

We are addressing the question of the training of
DPKO personnel to address conflict-related sexual
violence in a comprehensive manner. I would like to
highlight that DPKO and DFS are building the capacity
of United Nations police officers to protect women and
children from sexual violence through the development
of a standardized training curriculum for United
Nations police on investigating and preventing sexual
and gender-based violence.
Capacity-building continues on the ground
through the establishment of specialized police units
and training curricula for investigators. These have
proven effective in several peacekeeping missions. The
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste, for
example, has conducted training for the Timor-Leste
national
police
on
gender-based
violence
investigations. It has also produced a manual on the
topic for community police and elements of the
Vulnerable Persons Units.
DPKO and DFS are also planning to launch a
United Nations police standardized best practices
toolkit on gender and policing in peacekeeping
operations in 2011, the aim of which is to ensure that
such practices are shared among peacekeeping
missions and implemented.
On the question of preparing peacekeeping
personnel to implement their mandate to protect and to
respond to conflict-related sexual violence, we are
developing a training curriculum on gender
mainstreaming for military components, based on the
DPKO/DFS gender guidelines for United Nations
military in peacekeeping operations, which will help
military components to mainstream gender and
protection from conflict-related sexual violence at the
strategic, operational and tactical levels. General Gaye
is in charge of that.
In addition, in partnership with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and UN Women, scenariobased training materials developed on the basis of
Addressing Conflict-Related Sexual Violence: An
Analytical Inventory of Peacekeeping Practice are also
under development for military components. The
DPKO/DFS operational guidance to assist civilian,
military and police components of peacekeeping
missions to implement resolutions 1820 (2008) and
1888 (2009) is in its final stages and will support the

7

S/PV.6453

overall implementation
peacekeeping missions.

of

those

resolutions

in

African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur.

Also in collaboration with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
we have taken steps to act on the request by this
Council to appoint women’s protection advisers in
peacekeeping missions. We are currently undertaking
consultations with our missions concerning the role
and the responsibilities of women’s protection advisers.
Our preliminary discussions thus far indicate that the
recruitment of advisers will need to be assessed on a
case-by-case basis, owing to the differing architecture
and challenges of each peacekeeping operation. We are
striving to ensure that the way forward supports an
integrated response that reinforces existing capacities
on the ground, thus avoiding fragmentation and
duplication of responsibilities.

In closing, I would like to stress that the
economic, social and political empowerment of women
within societies affected by armed conflict is
fundamental to eradicate sexual and gender-based
violence. Women must participate in reforming and
building the institutions that will provide for their
protection and indeed, for the protection of all
civilians.

As the Council is well aware, there remain a
number of systemic challenges that prevent us from
providing effective protection from conflict-related
sexual violence. The insufficient number of female
uniformed personnel is one of those challenges. In the
absence of sufficient female personnel, the missions
are often unable to effectively reach out to those we are
mandated to protect, the majority of whom are women
and children.
In spite of these constraints, our missions are
endeavouring to do their best with the limited
capacities they possess. For example, we have seen
that the recruitment of national community liaison
assistants has provided the necessary link between
troops and local communities in the Kivus and is
contributing towards enhanced protection of the
civilian population. It is critical that this important
outreach capacity be supported by a sufficient number
of female Community liaison assistants, who will be
able to communicate effectively with the women in the
local communities we endeavour to protect. It should
be noted, however, that there are sometimes cultural
constraints involved with the use of female assistants.
On a more systemic level, the results of the
Police Division’s global effort have allowed us to
increase the proportion of female police officers in our
missions from 7.8 per cent to nearly 10 per cent now in
one year. It is of note, for example, that women
account for 24 per cent of the police personnel in the

8

The President: I thank Mr. Le Roy for his
statement.
I now give the floor to Lieutenant General Gaye.
Lieutenant General Gaye: It is an honour to
stand before the Council and to share my experience in
addressing conflict-related sexual violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On 4 April 2005, I took up my functions as Force
Commander of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), and on 8 April I travelled to Walungu in
South Kivu on an initial visit to the company deployed
there. During the Commander’s briefing, I was
informed of raids by the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda on villages where women were
kidnapped, turned into sex slaves and released only
when they became pregnant. That was later confirmed
to me in a letter from the Ninja group chief, which I
have kept religiously. It was in this way that, within a
few days of stepping onto Congolese soil, I was made
aware of the gravity and magnitude of the sexual
violence that was prevalent in that country.
It is with that in mind that I wish to pay tribute to
Ms. Wallström and to you, Madame President, for your
contributions to the fight against sexual violence and
for the protection of civilians. As a former Force
Commander in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
I would like to emphasize that commitment to
preventing sexual violence is a key part of the broader
effort to protect civilians. It was therefore an integral
and
specific
component
of
the
Mission’s
implementation strategy for the protection of civilians
and in support of the national authorities, with a view
to ensuring the sustainability of efforts to build local
ownership in addressing protection priorities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

10-69655

S/PV.6453

MONUC worked diligently in coordination with
protection partners to develop a Mission strategy to
address protection issues in a coherent and holistic
conceptual framework. Furthermore, we issued a
practical set of specific guidelines on sexual and
gender-based violence for tactical-level military and
field-level troops to improve preventive and responsive
actions by offering a checklist of activities to be
undertaken by military components in response to
sexual violence against civilians.
From my experience in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, addressing sexual violence requires the
following: first of all, clear commitment from the
leadership all the way from the top down; translating
that commitment into operational orders and directives
for the Mission; awareness of what constitutes a
security threat, taking into account the perspectives of
the local community, including women’s organizations,
with adequate flexibility and capacity to adapt military
operations, including deployment tactics, patterns and
frequency of patrols, information analysis, and
response and adaptation to protection needs;
strengthening civilian-military relationships, including
specific outreach to community women so they can
give information about patterns of attack and so that
peacekeepers can also build confidence; improving
understanding of local, political, social and protection
dynamics; enhancing the capacity to address
emergency situations; and acting as a catalyst to build
confidence at all levels within the local community.
Secondly, the strategy elaborated by the
leadership must be implemented on the ground. As a
Force Commander and a member of the senior
management of the integrated peacekeeping mission, I
ensured that my force directives, concept of operations,
rules of engagement — approved by the UnderSecretary-General — and standard operating
procedures reflected the task of protecting civilians,
including women and children, from sexual violence.
Our military leaders, from my Deputy Force
Commander to battalion and company commanders,
understood this mandated responsibility, which they
translated into practical operations aimed at protecting
civilians from physical violence and facilitating the
establishment of a protective environment. Some of
those operations and key considerations included
identifying high-risk areas and vulnerabilities;
improving military liaison with local populations
through community liaison interpreters; taking

10-69655

mitigation measures and employing crisis response;
and coordinating with humanitarian partners, United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations.
Lastly, strategies to counter sexual violence
should take account of lessons learned to identify
weaknesses within the system and to assess the
efficiency of the mechanisms in place in order to make
necessary adjustments.
In view of this, experience and lessons learned
reaffirm that responding to sexual violence inflicted on
women and children by armed elements in our areas of
operation is an integral part of peacekeepers’
responsibility to deliver better protection of civilians.
In this connection, and as Mr. Le Roy stated, the
Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and Field
Support have developed a number of guidelines,
including the operational concept, the strategic
framework for drafting protection of civilian strategies
in peacekeeping operations, and the inventory of
peacekeeping practices, intended to address conflictrelated sexual violence.
In my current capacity as Military Adviser in
Peacekeeping Operations, I will endeavour to ensure
that military planning processes integrate protection
priorities and that our force generation efforts respond
to the skill set and capabilities required to carry out
protection of civilians tasks. In addition, I am
considering issuing specific guidelines for heads of
military components on the protection of civilians,
including against sexual violence, as a priority in the
Office of Military Affairs. Last but not least, I will also
continue to engage Member States to deploy female
military personnel, as Mr. Le Roy urged.
The success and sustainability of our efforts to
prevent sexual violence in conflict situations require
the engagement of all partners and an integrated
approach to promoting women’s rights and security.
The President: I thank Lieutenant General Gaye
for his briefing.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/641, containing the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,

9

S/PV.6453

Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Portugal,
Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United
States of America.
Members also have before them document
S/2010/604, containing the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009).
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1960 (2010).
I remind all speakers to limit their statements to
no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the text in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Madame, for convening this open debate.
Unfortunately, the issue of sexual violence is all too
relevant to the work of the Security Council, as we
have heard when discussing many different conflict
situations this year. I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for the personal interest that he has shown in
this important dossier and I thank him, Under-

10

Secretary-General Le Roy and Lieutenant General
Gaye for their briefings.
I would also like to pay special tribute to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Margot
Wallström. In less than a year, she has had a great
impact. Her global advocacy role has given this issue
prominence in public debate, pushing for an end to
impunity, including in relation to the Walikale mass
rapes. Her field visits to speak with survivors in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina and her briefings have brought the
voices of those women to the Council to inform our
deliberations.
If we are going to resolve and prevent conflict
effectively, we must help to protect women from
violence,
particularly
sexual
violence.
That
understanding is now fundamental to the way that the
Security Council approaches its responsibilities. In
October, on the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), many Member States identified
the need for concrete action to accompany the political
support that the Council has given to this important
agenda. We agree. We need to translate political
commitments into tangible lasting action on the
ground. Without such practical action, we will fail the
victims of sexual violence.
The United Kingdom has clearly set out its
commitments in its new national action plan. The plan
was launched on the International Day for the
Elimination of Violence Against Women. The
commitments include strengthening the role of women
in structures and processes within the Government of
the United Kingdom designed to address conflict;
country-specific action plans that set out the action we
will take on the ground to support women in priority
countries, starting with Afghanistan, Nepal and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; working to
strengthen the implementation of commitments by the
international community; and continuing our strong
advocacy role in multilateral and regional
organizations. The British Government has also
announced the appointment of a minister with special
responsibility for combating violence against women
overseas.
Nowhere is the need for concrete commitments
greater than in situations of armed conflict. As
resolution 1960 (2010) highlights, sexual violence
continues to be a widely used weapon of warfare. It

10-69655

S/PV.6453

stigmatizes
survivors,
divides
communities,
exacerbates and prolongs conflict, and impedes the
restoration of peace and security. Impunity for such
crimes can prevent a society from recovering from
conflict.

well as the statements of Under-Secretary-General Le
Roy and Lieutenant General Gaye. Allow me also to
express Mexico’s appreciation for the leadership that
the United States has shown in the fight against sexual
violence in armed conflict.

It is clear that the proliferation of sexual violence
against women and girls is often aimed at
marginalizing their contribution to society. It
deliberately degrades the role that they can play in
restoring the fabric of peaceful communities. So, in
addition to the appalling human cost, there is a deeply
damaging impact on societies as a whole.

During its membership of the Security Council,
Mexico has sought to promote a broad agenda of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, pursuant to
the relevant provisions of international humanitarian
law. In these past two years, significant steps have
been taken to ensure that women and children will no
longer be the principal victims of the violence to which
armed conflict give rise.

I would like to take a moment to highlight the
significant steps forward that we have taken today with
resolution 1960 (2010). First, it contains a new
provision to identify parties to armed conflict that is
credibly suspected of committing or being responsible
for acts of rape and other forms of sexual violence.
That will help our efforts to tackle impunity for crimes
of sexual violence and conflict.
Second are increased monitoring, analysis and
reporting. That will help us to develop a more
comprehensive and integrated approach. More effective
monitoring of patterns of sexual violence in situations
of armed conflict should allow the Council to identify
and mandate the action necessary to prevent it.
Thirdly, we will be able to address the arbitrary
division that has been created by a monitoring and
reporting mechanism for children in armed conflict
who are subject to patterns of sexual violence when no
such protection is afforded to those older than 18.
I thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive and ambitious report (S/2010/604). I
am pleased that the Council has welcomed the report as
a strong signal of our intention to support and assist in
the eradication of sexual violence as a tactic of
warfare. This terminology and its consideration by the
Council are relatively new, but the tragic reality is not.
We look forward to progress by the Secretary-General
on his work with parties to armed conflict to ensure
that such unacceptable abuses that threaten
international peace and security come to an end.
Mrs. Morgan Sotomayor (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and welcome the valuable briefing by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallström, as

10-69655

One aspect of particular concern is sexual
violence in armed conflict or post-conflict situations,
as that subject cannot be approached simply from a
gender perspective. The impact on society of sexual
violence used as a tactic of war is so great that
addressing it must be an integral part of any strategy
for peace and security. Sexual violence encourages the
perpetuation of conflicts, promotes the displacement of
populations and limits development opportunities.
Certain groups, such as displaced persons, refugees and
persons with disabilities, are particularly vulnerable to
such crimes and require special attention.
Mexico believes that it is not enough to recall
that crimes of sexual violence against women have
been criminalized. It is necessary to act on our support
for strengthening the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in order to prosecute the perpetrators of sexual
violence in the context of armed conflict. For that
reason, we are closely following the work of the ICC in
the case brought against Jean-Pierre Bemba, and we
reiterate our firm support for the Court.
The atrocities committed against women and
children in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and other regions of the world are permanent reminders
of the fact that existing norms are flagrantly flouted.
Ensuring respect for international law is an ongoing
challenge, for which the primary responsibility falls to
States. Mexico reiterates its call on States to fully meet
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and the norms of human rights and refugee law.
With the establishment of the mandate of the
Special Representative, an important step was taken to
address this phenomenon, and in the short time that she
has held that post Ms. Wallström has made it clear that,
while there are broad challenges, it is possible to

11

S/PV.6453

provide a comprehensive and effective response to
victims of sexual violence and to make that issue a
priority of our strategies for peace and reconciliation.
Through resolution 1960 (2010), adopted today,
the Security Council has strengthened the mechanisms
for the collection and analysis of information on the
ground. It gives the Special Representative an
additional tool by asking her to include, in the annex to
her reports, the names of parties to an armed conflict
on the agenda of the Security Council who
systematically commit rape or other forms of sexual
violence.
My delegation is particularly satisfied by the
coordination that Ms. Wallström has maintained with
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy. It seems to us
that, concerning the particularities and special focus of
each mechanism, there are clear synergies and areas of
cooperation that can further optimize the impact of the
two agendas of protection for civilians in general and
women and children in particular.
We recognize that the Security Council has taken
determined steps to eliminate the problem of sexual
violence in armed conflict. It must continue its work
pursuant to resolution 1888 (2009) based on the
following four pillars: the fight against impunity; the
prevention of new cases and protection of vulnerable
groups; security sector reform; and comprehensive care
and reparations for victims.
The
Security
Council
faces
significant
challenges. It must ensure the functioning and impact
of the monitoring system and the presentation of
reports on sexual violence in conflict, and
systematically include components on gender and on
prevention of sexual violence in the terms of reference
of its field visits and the mandates for its peacekeeping
operations.
My delegation hopes that the Security Council
will step up its efforts to combat this problem more
effectively.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): France
joins in the statement to be made on behalf of the
European Union.
I welcome the initiative of the United States
presidency of the Council to convene this open debate.
In adopting resolution 1888 (2009) last year, the
Security Council improved the regime for combating

12

sexual violence in armed conflict. My delegation
reiterates its support for the work of Ms. Wallström,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We
welcome the progress made towards strengthening the
rule of law in countries in conflict. We welcome the
firm commitment of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, led by Alain Le Roy, and the contribution
of civil society and non-governmental organizations.
Resolution 1960 (2010), adopted today, will support
that momentum. UN Women must play its full role in
those common efforts.
At the same time, the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/604) gives cause for alarm. Sexual violence
continues to be used as a weapon of war by parties to
conflicts in a number of regions worldwide. We all
recall the mass rapes committed in Walikale this past
summer, and we expect the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to inform the
Security Council about measures taken to assist the
victims and to combat impunity.
Beyond that tragic situation, no one can remain
impassive to the violence perpetrated in the Sudan,
Afghanistan, Iraq and Burma against women belonging
to minority ethnic groups, or in Côte d’Ivoire, where
recent developments have caused increased concern.
We expect that procedures carried out in Guinea
following the crimes perpetrated in the Conakry
stadium in September 2009 will be rapidly completed.
However, we welcome the development of a strategy to
combat sexual violence in Chad and the establishment
of a special tribunal in Liberia.
The United Nations has a particular responsibility
with regard to the phenomenon of sexual violence.
Indeed, peacekeeping operations must establish
strategies on sexual violence. Gender advisors,
advisors on the protection of women, and human rights
units have a vital role to play in this context. It is also
essential to engage in dialogue with parties to armed
conflict on the issue of sexual violence. Every
opportunity must be taken to educate the parties on
their obligations and to encourage them to change their
behaviour. The fight against sexual violence must be
accompanied by programmes to assist victims and
provide them with care and opportunities for
rehabilitation.
Given the scope of the challenges to be addressed
by the United Nations, France welcomes the Council’s
resolve in this area. The resolution we adopted today

10-69655

S/PV.6453

has three main areas of progress. First, it will allow the
Council to receive reliable information in real time on
which to base its actions. France therefore supports the
establishment of procedures to monitor, analyse and
communicate information on situations of concern.
The Council has set political parametres:
coherence and coordination on the ground, on the one
hand, and respect for the integrity and specificity of the
mechanism to protect children in armed conflict, on the
other. In that context, the United Nations and all its
entities must now work to establish the most effective
system possible on the ground.
The resolution then provides a way to list parties
who commit systematic sexual violence. That
represents important progress in harmonizing human
rights protection regimes established by the Council to
the benefit of women and children. Implementing these
measures will require strengthened cooperation
between Ms. Coomaraswamy and Ms. Wallström.
The resolution finally strengthens the prospects
of sanctions against the perpetrators and those
responsible for sexual violence. It is vital that the
Council systematically examine the possibility of
including sexual violence as a criteria for sanctions
during the establishment or review of the mandates of
sanctions committees. The resolution requests the
parties to make specific commitments and to
implement them on the ground. Among these, we
attach particular importance to the fight against
impunity. Allow me to reiterate here the contribution of
the International Criminal Court in cases where sexual
violence constitutes war crimes, crimes against
humanity or crimes of genocide.
In conclusion, our commitment to combating
sexual violence is inseparable from the framework of
follow-up to resolution 1325 (2000) in strengthening
the role of women in conflict prevention and settlement
and in peacebuilding.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): First, I wish to thank you,
Madame, for organizing today’s open debate. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Special Representative Wallström, Under-SecretaryGeneral Le Roy and Lieutenant General Gaye for their
comprehensive briefings.
Wartime sexual violence has been the subject of
one of history’s greatest silences for long enough.
While the Security Council has adopted landmark

10-69655

resolutions to try to combat what has been termed a
weapon of war, United Nations actors on the ground
still lack the necessary tools to fight this war crime.
Resolution 1960 (2010), adopted by the Council
today, provides them with some of these needed tools.
The Council has requested the Secretary-General to
list, in an annex to his annual report, parties that are
credibly suspected of committing or being responsible
for patterns of rape and other forms of sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict on the Security
Council’s agenda. Hence, the Council is not only
signalling to rapists in conflict zones around the world
that their acts will no longer go unchecked, but also
opening the way for more direct and constructive
United Nations engagement with those parties, upon
whom we call to make specific and time-bound
commitments to combating sexual violence.
Sexual violence is not inevitable. It is not cultural
and should not be considered as collateral damage.
When used systematically as a weapon of war, its
purpose is to break the will of people by dominating
them in humiliating and dehumanizing ways. It has
dire consequences not only on the populations against
whom it is perpetrated, but also on international peace
and security, as it poses enduring challenges to durable
stability and social cohesion. It is therefore our
collective responsibility to put an end to it.
It is my Government’s hope that today’s
resolution will establish formal monitoring, analysis
and reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence, and generate insightful analysis of trends and
patterns to better protect affected populations and
inform targeted measures. It is also important to further
reinforce trust between local communities and United
Nations peacekeeping missions on the ground and to
establish effective channels of communication that
would provide timely and accurate information in the
event of rapes.
Female peacekeepers and women protection
advisors are crucial in this sense. Where they have
been present, local populations have more readily
reported on instances of sexual violence. Today’s
resolution unequivocally supports their presence and
the need to mainstream them. Furthermore, we
welcome the development by the Secretariat of
scenario-based training materials on combating sexual
violence for peacekeepers, and we encourage Member
States to use them.

13

S/PV.6453

Although the tools we have formalized today
through resolution 1960 (2010) will undoubtedly make
a difference in our efforts to end conflicts through a
fair and lasting peace, the accompanying establishment
of functional governmental institutions and the rule of
law remain the international community’s best bet for
providing populations with the protection they deserve,
for ending impunity and for enabling victims and
communities to begin their painstaking recovery.
My country welcomes the adoption of resolution
1960 (2010) today and the clear signal it sends from
the international community to perpetrators of the
savage crimes of sexual violence around the world that
we will not stand idly by as the bodies of women are
turned into battlegrounds and that those perpetrators
will be held accountable for their acts.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): First, allow me to
express my gratitude to the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for his report (S/2010/604) and his additional
remarks here today. It is my firm belief that the work
of the Security Council will be greatly enhanced by the
report, which contextualizes our understanding of the
causes and effects of conflict-related sexual violence. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Alain Le Roy, Military Adviser Babacar Gaye and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Margot Wallström for their briefings.
As the nature of conflict evolves, not only are
civilians more frequently targeted, but we are also
witnessing a disturbing trend in the use of sexual
violence as a tactic of war. The international
community is rightly appalled by such trends, and it is
also our responsibility to take action to protect
civilians and prevent such incidents.
Conflict-related
sexual
violence
can
disenfranchize and displace entire communities. Such
outcomes are only the beginning of a spiral of social
decline triggered by armed conflict. That chain
reaction was recognized in resolutions 1820 (2008) and
1888 (2009), and our efforts to combat impunity, instil
cultures of accountability, tackle deep-rooted attitudes
and ultimately protect the vulnerable must now be
intensified.
All persons of good conscience should be appalled
by the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war, visited
upon the most vulnerable members of society. Although
only recently appointed, Ms. Wallström has already
brought sexual violence in conflict firmly into the

14

foreground of the international peace and security
landscape. The new momentum she has generated has,
we believe, contributed to the arrests of Lieutenant
Colonel Mayele and Callixte Mbarushimana in
connection with this past summer’s mass rapes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
While Special Representative Wallström’s fivepoint priority agenda recognizes the cultural and
political aspects of the problem, we share her
conclusion that sexual violence in conflict is likely to
occur where the rule of law is weak and where
adequate legal mechanisms and institutions are lacking.
Consequently, legal mechanisms to deter the use of
systematic sexual violence in conflict situations must
be put in place. It is therefore vital that the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law receive sustainable funding
to develop institutional safeguards and paths for
redress in partnership with Government actors.
Resolution 1960 (2010), which we have just
adopted, also speaks to the need for our peacekeepers
to be fully equipped and trained to carry out mandated
tasks relating to the prevention of and response to
sexual violence. In that regard, Nigeria welcomes the
Secretary-General’s development of operational tools
for the implementation of mandates for peacekeepers
with regard to the protection of civilians.
The proposed monitoring and reporting
mechanism on sexual violence in conflict is a welcome
innovation, building upon that already in place under
the children and armed conflict agenda. It is our hope
that that tool will encourage accountability and
produce timely, reliable information and trend analysis,
which the Security Council can use to carry out its
responsibility to promote the protection of civilians
from conflict-related sexual violence. We also believe
that there is scope for the Council to make greater use
of Special Representative Wallström as a resource,
given that her role brings her closer to situations on the
ground. Such realities can help ensure the effectiveness
of our decisions and actions.
The damage caused by the use of sexual violence
as a tactic of war is far reaching. It goes beyond the
immediate impact experienced by the individual. It
goes beyond the families fragmented by such acts. The
scars are deep and are borne by society as a whole.
Such acts manifest abhorrent attitudes to women,
threaten the progress made toward socioeconomic
equality and impede women’s participation in peace

10-69655

S/PV.6453

and democratic processes. An attack involving sexual
violence is indeed an attack on peace, stability and
development. If we do not arrest that trend, we risk the
normalization of sexual violence as a method of war.
Such an outcome cannot be countenanced, and Nigeria
is accordingly committed to the resolution we have just
adopted as the next step towards ending sexual
violence in conflict.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for having
organized this important debate. We appreciate the
significance that the United States attaches to the issue
at hand and commend your personal tireless efforts and
engagement. Our appreciation also goes to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, Special Representative
Wallström, Under-Secretary-General Le Roy and
Military Adviser Gaye for their comprehensive
briefings.
At the outset, allow me to express our gratitude
for the information provided by Special Representative
Wallström relating to Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
needed to hear those words. The only way to move
forward is to face the truth and deal with it. And a great
deal of institutional and individual effort has been
committed and invested to that end in Bosnia. There
are, however, a number of obstacles that are
occasionally still encountered.
The examples presented prove how difficult and
delicate the issue under discussion today is, and how
far post-conflict societies have to go to fully engage
and deal with their pasts. However, I wish to ensure
you of our firm commitment to do everything to reach
justice. We will continue that longstanding struggle and
prove that justice must be satisfied for the sake of both
the past and the future.
Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches the utmost
importance to confronting the grave issue of sexual
violence and is particularly encouraged by the
commitment of the Security Council to keep the matter
on its agenda. That commitment was unequivocally
demonstrated by the adoption of resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1894 (2009), which have
paved the way for concrete action aimed at preventing
sexual violence. The appointment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence and the creation of UN Women were
significant steps towards ensuring the coherence of
United Nations activities. We also welcome

10-69655

cooperation between the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
In addition, we must use this opportunity to
underscore the responsibilities of States and parties to
conflict to observe and uphold their international
obligations and respect international humanitarian law,
which grants special protection to women and children.
We are of the opinion that United Nations bodies and
donors should extend more support to national
Governments in building capacities and developing
gender-sensitive programmes for survivors of sexual
violence, with services ranging from access to justice
to provision of psychological care. The role of
non-governmental organizations is particularly relevant
in this process.
The United Nations and the international
community have demonstrated their firm commitment
and political will to prevent sexual violence against
women, combat impunity and enforce accountability.
On the other hand, it is equally crucial that national
authorities make every effort to ensure that perpetrators
of sexual crimes be brought to justice and not go
unpunished. In that context, international assistance is
of vital importance as post-conflict countries’ rebuild
their justice systems and prosecute the perpetrators of
sexual violence.
We reiterate the need for adequate capabilities
and clear and appropriate guidelines to enable
peacekeeping missions to carry out their mandated
tasks, including preventing and responding to sexual
violence. Recruiting women in civil, military and
police components of peacekeeping missions can
encourage local women to report incidents of sexual
violence. Deployment of a greater number of female
police and military personnel with adequate training in
gender-based violence is vital for better addressing
issues related to sexual violence on the ground. It can
also contribute to establishing better communication
with local communities.
Furthermore, we consider it crucial that the
Security Council continue the practice of including,
where applicable, designation criteria pertaining to acts
of rape and other forms of sexual violence when
adopting or renewing targeted sanctions pursuant to
resolution 1888 (2009). We also strongly encourage the
flow of information about sexual violence between

15

S/PV.6453

United Nations peacekeeping missions or other United
Nations missions or bodies and the corresponding
Security Council sanctions committees.
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
supports
the
establishment of arrangements for monitoring,
analyzing and reporting sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict. Such a mechanism is necessary for data
collection so that the use of systematic sexual violence
in conflict situations on the Council’s agenda can be
tracked. In order to halt incidents of sexual violence,
those who are credibly suspected of being responsible
for patterns of rape and other forms of sexual violence
should be listed in the annexes of the reports. Listing
and de-listing of persons responsible for those
horrendous acts must be performed according to
verifiable data and clear benchmarks.
We would also like to commend the delegation of
the United States of America for their efforts in
drafting resolution 1960 (2010), adopted today. We are
convinced that this resolution will contribute towards
more effective monitoring, reporting and analysis of
data on sexual violence in situations of armed conflict.
Finally, we would like to point out that the
international community has taken noteworthy steps,
including the adoption of relevant resolutions, to tackle
the issue of sexual violence. But, more importantly, the
time has come to start converting commitments and
promises into real actions on the ground to prevent
violence, protect individuals, punish perpetrators and
provide redress to victims. Bosnia and Herzegovina
stands ready to contribute to those efforts.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): I would like to start by
thanking the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2010/604) and briefing, which contain
valuable recommendations for addressing challenges
regarding women and peace and security. The report is
indeed most useful for understanding the conflictrelated sexual violence in many parts of the world and
assessing the progress of the implementation of the
resolutions on this topic.
I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Le Roy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Wallström and the Military Adviser,
General Gaye, for their insightful briefings. I would
like to express once again that we welcome the
appointment of Ms. Wallström as the first Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict as a concrete step in the

16

implementation of resolution 1888 (2009) and that we
fully support her efforts. Last but not least, let me
thank the United States delegation and you personally,
Madame President, for your commitment to the cause
of women around the globe and for your most
commendable efforts in once again mobilizing the
Council and enabling the adoption of another important
resolution on this issue today.
Today, with this follow-up resolution, 1960
(2010), we are sending yet another strong message to
the world that sexual violence, especially against
women and children and particularly in situations of
armed conflict, is not acceptable and that such acts will
not be tolerated. As shown in the report of the
Secretary-General, sexual violence is not a by-product
or a side issue; it is deeply interconnected with the root
causes of conflict, is used widely as a tactic of war and,
sadly, continues even after the conflict has ended.
Thus the fight against sexual violence is not only
a matter of human rights but is, and should be, at the
heart of our efforts to stop and resolve conflicts. For
that reason, we completely share the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that sexual violence should be a
priority consideration not only for humanitarian actors
but also for peacemakers, peacekeepers and
peacebuilders.
Despite some small progress achieved so far, we
cannot fail to note that much remains to be done. Many
structural and institutional impediments remain, which
we should overcome in order to meet the challenges
before us. Likewise, equally strong measures are
needed to increase the participation of women in the
work of peace, including post-conflict recovery efforts
and peace processes, since that will help overcome the
negative consequences of sexual violence, such as
shame and stigma.
We have to redouble our efforts in the fight
against impunity, and targeted measures should be
imposed against the perpetrators of sexual violence and
rape. In that regard, the most significant added value of
the resolution we have just adopted derives from its
action-oriented nature. It not only condemns those who
perpetrate acts of violence against women but also
calls for action against them. In that vein, we believe
that when it comes to tackling conflicts and promoting
peace and security, resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) should all
become a regular part of the work of this Council.

10-69655

S/PV.6453

We are also confident that the newly established
UN Women will further strengthen our work by
helping the United Nations pursue its efforts in a more
systematic and coordinated manner in areas related to
women and peace and security.
I wish to conclude by underlining that Turkey is
fully committed to exerting every effort to ensure the
effective implementation of resolution 1960 (2010), as
well as all the other resolutions on women and peace
and security.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank you, Madame
President, for organizing this important debate. I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallström, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations Alain
Le Roy and the Military Adviser, General Gaye, for
their briefings.
Uganda considers sexual violence as a serious
health, human rights and development problem. There
can be no peace, security or sustainable economic
development in societies that deny human rights,
including the human rights of women. We are
concerned that, despite the existence of regional and
international instruments on women’s human rights,
sexual violence continues to be committed at an
alarming rate, both in times of peace and during armed
conflicts, thus undermining the right of women to fulfil
their potential. Uganda abhors sexual violence and
condemns it unreservedly. The use of sexual violence
as a tactic of war has been documented in many parts
of the world that have experienced armed conflict,
including our region. Armed groups, such as the
Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda and
the Lord’s Resistance Army, have terrorized the
population, leaving mayhem, pain and death in their
wake.
Many formerly abducted women and girls still
suffer from the devastating consequences of their
period of sexual slavery, and a high number of them
have given birth to children in captivity. That has
impacted severely on the mental and physical health of
survivors, in both the short and the long term.
However, while the spotlight has focused on the
situation in the African Great Lakes region, all forms
of sexual violence have been and continue to be
documented in situations of armed conflict the world
over. Indeed, we agree with the Secretary-General, who

10-69655

has stated in his report that sexual violence is not
specific to any era, culture or continent, but traverses
all of history and geography.
At the regional level, the Great Lakes region has
taken important steps to address sexual violence. On
18 June 2008, just one day before the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1820 (2008), member
States of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region (ICGLR) committed themselves under
what became known as the Goma Declaration to
eradicate all forms of gender-based violence.
The Pact on Security, Stability and Development
in the Great Lakes Region has a specific protocol on
the prevention and suppression of sexual violence
against women and children and model legislation on
the suppression of sexual violence against women and
children.
Those instruments complement other national,
regional and global policy and legal frameworks to
which Uganda is a party. They serve to emphasize that
such sexual violence is not a new or unknown
phenomenon that has been ignored, but that the region
is determined to put an end to such cowardly acts.
The ICGLR secretariat has, in recent times and in
collaboration with the United Nations, undertaken
activities to draw the attention of member countries to
the seriousness of the problem and to come to
agreement on commitments to end violence against
women and children. We welcome and encourage that
collaborative effort.
The Government of Uganda is committed to the
implementation of United Nations Security Council
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009),
and 1889 (2009), as well as the Goma Declaration on
Eradicating Sexual Violence and Ending Impunity in
the Great Lakes Region (2008). Uganda welcomes the
progress made in rendering operational the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law to assist national
authorities to strengthen the rule of law in accordance
with resolution 1888 (2009).
We also welcome the inclusion of women in
peacekeeping missions in civil, military and police
functions. Ugandan women, and particularly those in
military and police forces, are currently engaged in
peacekeeping missions in the region and around the
world. We are convinced that, wherever they are based,
their presence has a positive influence and may

17

S/PV.6453

encourage women from local communities to report all
acts of sexual violence.
Uganda also welcomes the idea of establishing
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence, including rape in
situations of armed conflict and post-conflict, and other
situations relevant to the implementation of resolution
1888 (2009).
We are confident that that will assist the
Council’s consideration of appropriate actions,
including targeted and graduated measures levelled at
parties to armed conflict that are listed in the annexes
to the Secretary-General’s annual reports on sexual
violence in conflict.
We thank the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Margot Wallström, for her work. We encourage her
to take advantage of the existing legal and policy
frameworks, including those in our region, to
strengthen support and partnerships to put an end to the
vice of sexual violence.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that there are no
conditions that can either justify or excuse such actions
that destroy the very essence of the human spirit of the
victim and those closest to them. We should, therefore
collectively remain resolute in dealing with sexual
violence.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): This
year marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). It is highly
significant for the Council to hold this open debate on
sexual violence in armed conflict.
China condemns all acts of violence against
women in armed conflict, including sexual violence. It
urges parties to conflicts to comply with international
humanitarian and human rights law.
We call on the relevant national Governments to
investigate crimes and bring to justice the perpetrators
of crimes against women in armed conflict. We urge
the States that have not yet done so to accede to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women as soon as possible.
To protect women from sexual violence in armed
conflict, there is much that the international
community can do. In that connection, I wish to
emphasize the following four points.

18

First, the protection of women from sexual
violence needs to be tackled at its source. Only when
armed conflict is effectively prevented can there be
real protection for women and their rights and
interests. In that context, the international community
should be committed to preventive diplomacy to settle
disputes through dialogue, consultation and other
peaceful means.
Secondly, national Governments bear the primary
responsibility for combating crimes of sexual violence.
The international community should focus on
providing affected countries with assistance, seek their
understanding and cooperation, help strengthen their
capacity-building, make progress in security sector
reform and improve mechanisms in the areas of the
rule of law, judicial assistance and compensation.
Thirdly, in addressing issues relating to women
and peace and security, there is a need for various
United Nations bodies and agencies to operate with a
synergetic division of labour, in accordance with their
respective mandates.
The Council needs to pay close attention to
situations that pose threats to international peace and
security and to make full use of existing mechanisms,
such as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and UN Women, to create synergy.
Fourthly, China supports resolution 1960 (2010),
which was just adopted. We hope that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Margot
Wallström, will perform her responsibilities strictly in
line with the mandate formulated by the Council to
play a constructive role in addressing sexual violence
in armed conflict.
Ms. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to express our
appreciation to you, Madam President, for convening
this debate on such an important issue.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his remarks
and for his comprehensive and candid report on sexual
violence in armed conflict (S/2010/604).
We are grateful to Special Representative
Ms. Margot Wallström for her presentation and for her
work. Our appreciation also goes to Under-SecretaryGeneral Alain Le Roy and Military Adviser Lieutenant
General Babacar Gaye for their statements.
When the Council takes up issues such as sexual
violence, the challenge is how to address in political,

10-69655

S/PV.6453

and even operational, terms an issue that is deeply
moral in nature. In other words, the Council is called
upon to help to translate our sorrow and outrage at
such horrific violence into practical action capable of
bringing about real change. To that end, we need an
integrated approach that combines prevention,
combating impunity and providing support to victims.
Support to national awareness-raising activities
and information campaigns that seek to break taboos
and misperceptions around the issue are particularly
important to preventive efforts. For example, as the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/604) highlights, the
myth that rape is an inevitable by-product of war is
persistent and dangerously self-fulfilling. The stigma
and silence that already hamper addressing sexual
violence in peacetime can never be allowed to prevail,
especially when such violence becomes a tactic of war.
In situations where peacekeeping operations are
deployed, the United Nations role in prevention
becomes one of particular relevance, as the enhanced
resources at its disposal create higher expectations
among local populations and in international public
opinion. In order to live up to such expectations, we
must ensure that the prevention of sexual violence is
truly made a mission-wide endeavour that involves not
only troops and police but all mission components.
Recent events have shown that contacts with
local populations are critical to ensuring protection.
The role of civil affairs and public information
components is therefore key. They should have the
necessary resources — especially guidance and trained
personnel — to be able to help avoid outrageous
violence such as that witnessed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are encouraged by the
measures being taken by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to mainstream the prevention
of sexual violence in peacekeeping missions.
Impunity tends to fuel violence. Brazil
appreciates and supports the work of Ms. Wallström’s
Office to support national institutions in identifying
and prosecuting perpetrators. We also believe that the
Team of Experts established by resolution 1888 (2009)
can play an important role in helping States to
strengthen the rule of law in situations of particular
concern. The role of the International Criminal Court
becomes key when national jurisdictions are unable or
unwilling to exercise their primary responsibility.

10-69655

The adoption of resolution 1960 (2010) today,
which Brazil is pleased to have co-sponsored, sends a
clear message that the Council is ready to continue to
fight impunity by focusing on parties that engage in
conflict-related sexual violence. It has strengthened the
tools and arrangements available to the Council and to
the United Nations as a whole. It is a significant and
concrete step towards ensuring accountability, thus
contributing to a decrease in the incidence of the
problem.
As we focus on bringing perpetrators to justice or
to face opprobrium, we cannot shirk our duty to ensure
proper support to victims. While this is fundamentally
the responsibility of States, there are several ways by
which the international community can support
national efforts in that regard. Brazil recently
contributed $1 million to the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in support of
programmes to fight sexual violence and facilitate
victims’ access to justice and compensation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Dealing with sexual violence requires different
parts of the United Nations system to act on many
fronts. Today we have made progress in that direction
and concluded, on a very high note, a remarkable effort
that we began his year to provide an effective response
by the Security Council to the scourge of sexual
violence. There is certainly more to be done, but we
now have the tools and a clear road map to make
further progress in the future.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting
under your presidency Madam, devoted to sexual
violence in armed conflict. We also welcome the
participation in this debate of His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, whom we thank for
his introduction of his report (S/2010/604) on the
follow-up to the implementation of resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009). We reiterate to him Gabon’s
full support in the fight he has carried out since 2008
as part of the UNiTE to End Violence against Women
Campaign, along with the participation of all the
partners involved in this cause. We also thank
Ms. Margot Wallström, Mr. Alain Le Roy and
Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye for their respective
briefings. I would like here to reiterate to
Ms. Wallström Gabon’s strong support in her work.

19

S/PV.6453

Sexual violence against women and girls is
simultaneously a war crime, a crime against humanity
and a grave threat to peace and security. In spite of the
enormous efforts made by the international community
on the ground to bring it to an end — in
implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888
(2009) — too many women and girls continue to be
victims of rape, sexual slavery and every other sort of
sexual violence. Basing myself on the report of the
Secretary-General, I should like to refer to three
aspects, namely, improving protection for vulnerable
populations on the ground, especially women and girls;
strengthening legal provisions to better combat
impunity; and strengthening the means for preventing
outbreaks of sexual violence during conflicts.
With regard to improving protection for
vulnerable populations, Gabon would like to
underscore the importance of ensuring better protection
for women and girls in the field. In that regard, we
would like to highlight the enormous efforts made by
peacekeeping missions, which too often operate in
difficult situations and in places that severely challenge
their efforts to ensure effective protection for those at
risk.
However, the incidents of widespread systematic
rape in the Walikale region in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo illustrate both the
limits of our ability and the scope of the challenge to
overcome. This is a huge and complicated undertaking
that demands that we bolster our monitoring and
communications capabilities in order to provide better
information about reality on the ground.
In that regard, we support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation underscoring the need for better
analysis of information and reporting of sexual
violence committed during armed conflict, with a view
to better coordination in the field. We should also
improve our rapid-deployment capacity in affected
regions, as recommended in paragraph 26 of resolution
1888 (2009).
However, our efforts will not produce the desired
results without more sustained dialogue with all parties
to a conflict. Among other things, such a dialogue
come about by providing psychological support for
victims and carrying out awareness-raising efforts
among those involved. It is our belief that women
themselves could play such roles.

20

With regard to strengthening provisions to
combat impunity, my delegation believes that it is
essential to make that concern part of the system for
comprehensive protection against sexual violence in
armed conflict. In that regard, we should welcome the
progress made in international criminal law in this
area. The International Criminal Tribunals for the
Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda were the first to
announce indictments for the use of rape as a weapon
of war. Likewise the Tribunal for Sierra Leone has for
the first time issued a guilty verdict for sexual slavery.
In the same vein, we are convinced that the
Secretary-General’ proposal to annex to his reports on
this issue a list of the names of those who carry out
sexual violence should serve as a effective instrument
for deterrence. However, as we noted during the last
debate on the protection of civilians (S/PV.6427),
combating impunity is chiefly the responsibility of
States. That is why my delegation highlights the need
to help countries emerging from conflict to develop
reliable judicial structures.
The fight against sexual violence in armed
conflicts requires prevention first and foremost. From
that angle, the Member States, the United Nations,
donors and civil society must resolutely take that
approach. Raising awareness regarding the serious
danger that sexual violence can create in society should
guide their actions. Early warning mechanisms that can
detect indicator signs in due time are also essential
pillars for actions aimed at eradicating sexual violence
in armed conflicts.
It is equally vital in that exercise that a privileged
place be given to women themselves. As we have seen
from experience, their perceptions and commitment are
undeniable and unparalleled. Not to take that fact into
account would mean to deprive ourselves of an
advantage in the fight against the discrimination and
violence of which women and girls are the chief
victims. That is particularly true in the context of the
truth and reconciliation processes, which are a proven
means to help battered societies and peoples recover
from the agony of war and violence.
Resolution 1960 (2010), adopted earlier today by
the Security Council and which was co-sponsored by
my country, takes into account the chief concerns that I
have just mentioned and represents accordingly an
important step for targeted, strengthened action on the

10-69655

S/PV.6453

part of the international community with respect to that
matter.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the United States presidency for
organizing today’s meeting.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General and
Ms. Wallström, Mr. Le Roy and General Gaye for the
important information that they have provided.
Unfortunately, in spite of the existence of an
entire arsenal of international instruments on human
rights and international humanitarian law, civilian
populations continue to be subjected to violence and to
suffer in armed conflicts and in post-conflict situations.
Sexual violence is, of course, a repulsive crime that
requires
decisive
condemnation
and
severe
punishment. We are thus especially alarmed at
situations where this phenomenon is becoming
widespread and systematic. It is becoming an
instrument in armed conflict.
Recent events in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have shown how acute the problem can be. We
advocate a thorough investigation of all incidents and
punishment of the guilty. Only in this way can we put
an end to the reign of impunity that criminals enjoy, in
the overwhelming majority of cases, and thereby
eradicate that reprehensible practice.
We are, however, of the view that combating
sexual violence is one of the major components of all
of the measures that can be used for settlement and
post-conflict recovery. We are convinced that, in
concentrating efforts on combating sexual violence, we
must pay due attention to other abuses committed
during conflict. Civilian populations — most of all,
women and children — are still victims of other crimes
as well, such as premeditated attacks, including
terrorist acts, and indiscriminate or excessive use of
force. Often, the criminals escape punishment here as
well.
As we see it, the diverse nature of violence
during armed conflict requires appropriate attention to
all its categories. The issues of women and peace and
security must be based on a comprehensive approach,
which is the approach that is enshrined in resolution
1325 (2000), which is the fundamental document for
the protection of women and which ensures their rights
in conflicts. Moreover, we believe that women should
not be perceived only as victims. We must remember

10-69655

that an important precondition for overcoming violence
against women is their full-fledged participation in
peace talks and in post-conflict peacebuilding.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
thematic report for today’s meeting (S/2010/604). A
number of proposals in the document to strengthen our
fight against sexual violence have been embodied in a
practical manner in today’s resolution. We support the
recommendation of giving the Secretary-General the
right to make lists of parties suspected of sexual
violence in conflict. Such an instrument, as we have
seen in our Council experience with children’s issues,
is a very effective way of having an impact on
violators. With respect to agreements on monitoring,
analysis and accountability regarding sexual violence
in conditions of armed conflict, that mechanism is
undoubtedly extremely important. The timelines,
accuracy, objectivity and reliability of its information
will determine the effectiveness and usefulness of
Council decisions to rectify the situation.
There are many different types of conflict around
the globe. However, from the standpoint of the
Council’s purposes under the Charter, the Council’s
attention must be focused only on those conflicts
which are a threat to peace and security. Consequently,
the instruments adopted today, such as the practice of
making lists of violators and agreements on
monitoring, analysis and accountability, must also be
used in that context.
I would also like to emphasize that the efforts of
the international community will be in vain without the
consent and active participation of national
Governments, which have the major responsibility for
handling the entire range of issues to care for and
protect their people.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
conviction that today’s resolution will play an
important role in dealing with the problems of violence
against women in armed conflicts.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my gratitude to you, Madame President, for
representing the United States and for the strong
initiatives you have continued to take to combat sexual
violence in armed conflict — initiatives that have now
produced another action-oriented resolution, one which
Japan has gladly co-sponsored.

21

S/PV.6453

I thank the Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and United Nations Military
Adviser for their insightful briefings.
We are encouraged by the Secretary-General’s
clear commitment and leadership in that area. We also
commend Special Representative Wallström for her
vigorous efforts to confront sexual violence, such as
the four country visits she has made in the past eight
months, including two to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
First of all, Japan supports the recent report of the
Secretary-General
(S/2010/604),
including
its
recommendations to strengthen efforts to end impunity
with regard to sexual violence as a tactic of war and
terror. Among those recommendations, we strongly
support the establishment of monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements and the listing of perpetrators
in an annex to the Secretary-General’s annual reports,
which are essential tools that the Security Council can
use to take action, including targeted measures, against
perpetrators.
As most here know, a number of child soldiers
have been released in the five years since the
establishment of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict under
resolution 1612 (2005). Monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements to be established under today’s
resolution should build on that good practice. We
expect that the arrangements and the mechanism will
work synergistically with each other and will
strengthen the response of the entire United Nations
system to the challenge of how to protect women and
children from sexual violence in conflict.
Secondly, a comprehensive approach is key, and
it can be undertaken when the actors involved are
proactive and engage in greater cooperation with each
other. Under international law and the resolutions of
the Security Council, it is the responsibility of the
Government and army of a country in conflict to
protect their people. To that end, the rule of law should
be established by promoting security sector reform and
enhancing the capacity of the judicial system and law
enforcement.
Japan
therefore
welcomes
the
preparations being made by Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Wallström to rapidly deploy a

22

team of experts to assist national authorities in
strengthening the rule of law.
It is critical to protect women from all forms of
violence and to empower them within their society. For
this reason, Japan has decided to make a contribution
of $4.5 million to UN Women for its project in
Afghanistan. It is also vital to strengthen the
comprehensive response that is the responsibility of
United Nations peacekeeping missions. We expect
more women’s protection advisors to be designated in
the missions. And we welcome the Secretary-General’s
efforts to provide peacekeepers with clearer guidance,
in line with good practice, regarding the response to
sexual violence. In general, the Security Council needs
to further strengthen the comprehensive response of
peacekeeping missions through its country-specific
resolutions.
Thirdly, sexual violence is never a by-product of
conflict and it can be prevented. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report underlines, we need to focus not only
on collecting timely and reliable information, but also
on analysis of trends and patterns of sexual violence.
Engaging all stakeholders — including national
institutions, humanitarian actors and civil society — in
the process of such analysis would contribute to the
prevention of sexual violence.
One of the lessons learned from the mass rape in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo in July
and August this year is the need for communication
between United Nations missions and the local
community. I would like to stress that such
communication could also provide early warning of
imminent problems. The set of indicators for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) will likewise
be an important tool for providing early warning of
sexual violence, and we hope that they will be
operational at the earliest possible date. We also look
forward to seeing an early warning matrix of risk
factors
developed
by
Special
Representative
Wallström.
Finally, in the two years that Japan has served its
present term as a non-permanent member, the Security
Council has adopted more resolutions and presidential
statements on issues relating to women and children in
conflict than it had in the past. We welcome this trend
as a clear sign of the commitment of the Council to
addressing these issues. There are, however, many
challenges that must be faced in translating this

10-69655

S/PV.6453

commitment into tangible results on the ground. For its
part, Japan will continue to contribute to efforts to
promote progress on the issue of women and peace and
security from the perspective of human security.

arrangements; and monitoring the implementation of
commitments by parties to armed conflict would
significantly enhance a systematic consideration by the
Council, and thus the Council’s capacities to act.

Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first of all
thank you, Madame, and your delegation for your
outstanding work, which led to the adoption by
consensus of resolution 1960 (2010) before us today.
The resolution brings significant added value to the
fight against sexual violence in armed conflict. We
greatly appreciate the Secretary-General’s unwavering
commitment to this cause.

Let me add that my delegation will continue to
support the idea of establishing a Council working
group in order to be able to afford a similar level of
attention and response to the issue of sexual violence
as is currently and rightly granted to children in armed
conflict. This is a matter of credibility for the Security
Council.

I would like to say a special word of welcome
and thanks to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Wallström and her team for their extremely
significant contribution to the implementation of
resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009). Let me also
express our great appreciation to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, and in particular the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and the
Military Advisor, for their efforts to strengthen
protection and response in the field.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made later on by the representative of the European
Union and by the representative of Costa Rica on
behalf of the Human Security Network.
The past two years have seen progress in the fight
against sexual violence, in particular through the
appointment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. At
the same time, the levels of sexual violence in many
conflicts around the world remain alarmingly high.
Women and children continue to fall victim to sexual
violence used as a deliberate means of warfare on a
daily basis. Some groups with specific vulnerabilities,
such as persons with disabilities, have not yet received
the necessary attention.
The extremely negative effect of sexual violence
on peace processes, reconciliation and post-conflict
reconstruction clearly makes that crime a security
threat. Sexual violence is not a mere by-product of
war; it is more often than not a deliberate tactic of
warfare. The Council, alongside affected States, has a
clear responsibility to use all tools at its disposal to put
an end to this scourge. Listing parties that are credibly
suspected of committing or being responsible for
patterns of rape and other forms of sexual violence;
establishing monitoring, analysis and reporting

10-69655

We hope that the information generated through
the new system will help the Council when it considers
its reactions to widespread violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. From our point of
view, possible reactions include the imposition of
targeted measures, the establishment of commissions of
inquiry and referrals to the International Criminal
Court.
We welcome the recent arrests and extraditions of
persons responsible for sexual violence and would like
to encourage all countries concerned to take the
necessary steps to bring them to justice. Furthermore,
sanctions regimes need to include designation criteria
pertaining to acts of rape and other forms of sexual
violence, and sanctions committees need to receive
relevant information to this end, including through
exchanges with other subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council and peacekeeping operations. We encourage
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict to build on emerging practice,
brief sanctions committees and share relevant
information on individuals committing sexual violence.
No perpetrator of sexual violence should go
unpunished. Equally transitional justice mechanisms
need to document sexual violence in a comprehensive
way and provide assistance and redress to the victims.
We welcome the appointment of the leader of the
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and encourage
Member States affected by armed conflict to seek the
support of the Team.
We are concerned by the high numbers of
governmental security forces directly involved in
sexual violence. The conditionality policy of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is an important

23

S/PV.6453

step in the right direction and should be extended to all
United Nations peacekeeping missions. In light of the
incorporation of former militia members into the
national police and security structures, the
establishment of vetting procedures is a crucial element
of any integration process.
United Nations peacekeeping missions must also
strengthen their prevention and protection capacities.
We welcome efforts under way to develop scenariobased training materials, such as curricula based on the
publication entitled “Addressing Conflict-Related
Sexual Violence: An Analytical Inventory of
Peacekeeping Practice”. Also, the recruitment of more
community liaison officers, including women, will
significantly strengthen the ability of missions to
interact with the local population and ensure that the
voices of local women are better heard. We would like
to encourage the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to continue its efforts in this regard. The
Council should exert its influence to ensure that peace
agreements refer to sexual violence, and we commend
the efforts of the Secretary-General to address the
underrepresentation of women in peace processes and
negotiations and to enhance women’s participation in
all peacebuilding efforts.
Madame President, please rest assured that my
delegation will remain closely engaged in issues of
protection of civilians, among them in particular the
protection from and prevention of sexual violence,
after our membership in this body ends. We are looking
forward to continuing our work with interested
delegations and the United Nations system.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.
Let me begin by thanking the Secretary-General,
Special Representative Wallström, Under-SecretaryGeneral Le Roy and Lieutenant General Gaye for their
very powerful and insightful briefings. I also want to
thank my colleagues on the Council for their very
strong statements of support for resolution 1960
(2010), just adopted, as well as for the broad goals of
fighting sexual violence and the rape of women around
the world.
We are gathered because we all agree on the
importance of addressing an issue that cries out for the
world’s conscience, and that is sexual violence in
conflict. We agree that the challenge is urgent and
immense. The human cost is all too real. Armed

24

conflicts continue to have a devastating impact,
particularly on women and girls. Rape, sexual assault
and gender-based violence are all too often used
deliberately and cynically as weapons of war, and the
fight to end sexual violence has yet to be universally
recognized as central to securing international peace
and security.
Some still think that sexual violence is somehow
a natural accompaniment of conflict. It is not. As the
Secretary-General’s report notes,
“The myth that rape is an inevitable byproduct of war is persistent and dangerously selffulfilling” (S/2010/604, para. 7).
I hope that this meeting, in some small way, will help
put an end to that myth and channel our shared
commitment to confronting and combating sexual
violence into concrete actions that improve the fate of
women and girls.
The United States commends the United Nations,
especially United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for its leadership in finding
effective ways to address this problem. We have been
encouraged by the United Nations response and followup to the appalling August attacks in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including the additional steps it
has taken to build mission-wide strategies to better
protect civilians. The United Nations has increased
random patrols, recruited more female peacekeepers
and improved communications. It is also employing
scenario-based training for peacekeepers to help
combat sexual violence.
But obviously, more must still be done. We hope
that the United Nations will continue to identify
women’s protection advisers and put them in more
peacekeeping operations, and complete a gaps analysis
of United Nations protection strategies.
In her brief tenure so far, Special Representative
Wallström has brought leadership, passion and clarity
to efforts to end impunity for the heinous crimes of
sexual violence in conflict zones. She is playing a vital
role in the United Nations efforts to support the
response of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the horrifying mass rapes in
Walikale, which has included the arrest of one of the
perpetrators. The United States fully supports Special
Representative Wallström in her work, and we
encourage our fellow Member States to consider

10-69655

S/PV.6453

additional voluntary contributions to support her
mandate. We particularly hope that the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law will become a valuable tool in
helping Member States develop appropriate judicial
responses to sexual violence in conflict.
Data collection is also vital for non-humanitarian
activities to prevent and respond to gender-based
violence. The resolution we adopted today will
improve the collection and analysis of information
required to better understand the patterns of sexual
violence in armed conflict. Of course, better
information by itself will not halt sexual violence, but
it will inform our decisions as a Council and as
Member States, and bring us one step closer to our
ultimate goal.
We must also shine the international spotlight on
the perpetrators and use this mechanism to inform
targeted actions by the Council and by Member States.
With improved information, the United Nations will be
able to assist States in responding more robustly to
these crimes. As in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo after the Walikale rapes, we expect our actions
to spur commanding officers to turn those who commit
sexual violence over to the authorities to be brought to
justice.
Finally, we cannot separate the challenge of
sexual violence from the broader security issues facing
the Council. Resolution 1960 (2010), its predecessors
and our follow-up actions must send a clear message.
We do not just condemn sexual violence and rape as
weapons of war, but we are taking concrete steps to
end it. We are working to make clear that rape and
sexual violence are unacceptable and that perpetrators
will face consequences. Our shared responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
includes a profound responsibility to safeguard the
lives and the security of women and girls, who make
up at least half of humankind.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Allow me to first
express my thanks to you, Madame President, for
convening this debate on a topic that, as the Chair of
the Commission on the Status of Women, I am
particularly glad to see addressed.

10-69655

All the United Nations world conferences on
women have recognized the interlinkage between
gender equality, development and peace. In 1995, at
the Fourth World Conference on Women, Member
States devoted a section of the Beijing Platform for
Action to women and armed conflict, noting that
women and girls were particularly affected by armed
conflict because of their status in society and their sex.
Member States also highlighted particular forms of
violence against women in situations of armed conflict.
Fifteen years later, it is heartening to observe how
much this issue has gained in visibility and traction. It
is now taken up in various intergovernmental bodies,
including the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Peacebuilding Commission. Member States at
the national level and civil society organizations are
demonstrating their commitment to tackling this
challenge through concrete action.
I welcome the presence and contribution of Ms.
Margot Wallström, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and her focus on addressing sexual
violence in the context of the Secretary-General’s
campaign “Unite to End Violence against Women”.
The Commission on the Status of Women, too,
has contributed to advancing global policy on women,
peace and security. At its forty-eighth session in 2004,
the
Commission
considered
women’s
equal
participation in conflict prevention, management and
resolution and in post-conflict peacebuilding. In its
agreed conclusions, the Commission recognized that
women and girls were often subject to particular forms
of violence and deprivation in armed conflict, and
called for measures to prevent gender-based violence
arising from armed conflict and in post-conflict
situations, including sexual violence against women
and girls. The agreed conclusions also urged
Governments to prosecute the perpetrators of such
crimes.
In 2008, the Commission evaluated progress in
the implementation of the 2004 agreed conclusions
through an interactive dialogue. Many participants
reported on initiatives to address sexual violence in
armed conflict and to increase the participation of
women in peacekeeping and security forces. They also
highlighted the need to strengthen efforts at the
national and international levels to address sexual
violence in armed conflict as a threat to peace and
security.

25

S/PV.6453

This year, the Commission also considered the
question of violence against women as part of its
follow-up to the Beijing Platform for Action, and held
an interactive dialogue on the subject. Expert
panellists, member States, United Nations system
entities and non-governmental organizations were able
to share their experiences and the results achieved.
Despite the measures that have been taken to prevent
and address violence against women, reports by the
participants made it clear that it persists.
Efforts to address violence against women are
often not comprehensive, consistent or sustained, and
there continues to be insufficient coordination among
relevant sectors. Knowledge regarding the scope,
prevalence, impact and cost of violence against women
remains inadequate, and capacities for collecting such
data are insufficient. Greater efforts are necessary to
collect more and better-quality information and data on
violence against women to support policymakers in
undertaking effective legislative and policy reforms,
ensure the adequate provision of targeted and effective
services, monitor trends and progress in addressing and
eliminating violence against women, and assess the
impact of measures taken.
In this context, the Council’s effort to set up a
mechanism for monitoring and reporting sexual
violence against women may prove to be very useful,
not only to the Council’s work but also to other
organizations working on issues pertaining to sexual
violence against women and gender issues in general.
Such a plan should incorporate measurable goals and
timetables, monitoring and accountability measures
and provisions for impact assessments.
The Commission on the Status of Women plays a
central role in monitoring the implementation of the
Platform for Action, including with respect to women
in armed conflict. I recognize and welcome the key
role and critical efforts of the Security Council in
preventing sexual violence and combating impunity in
conflict and post-conflict situations. I encourages
continuing action by the Council, including the
development of effective measures to put an end to
sexual violence in armed conflict.
The President: I give
representative of Germany.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany aligns itself
with the statement that will be delivered by the
representative of the European Union. Germany would

26

like to thank the United States of America, in its
capacity as presidency of the Security Council, for
giving this important issue such a prominent role on
this month’s Council agenda.
The appointment of Ms. Wallström in February
this year was an important signal that increased and
focused action would be undertaken in the fight against
the scourge of sexual violence in conflict. No one can
deny that sexual violence in armed conflict is an
abhorrent crime that in some conflict areas is
systematically used to destabilize whole societies, and
thus constitutes a serious security problem requiring a
systematic response, including by the Security Council.
With the adoption of resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888
(2009), the Council gave this issue the comprehensive
and global attention it deserves. We therefore strongly
welcome the Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/604)
and its recommendations, which are reflected in the
new resolution 1960 (2010) adopted by the Security
Council today. It is a good resolution. We commend all
Security Council members for agreeing on this
important document in such a short period of time.
This underlines the urgency of the problem and shows
that the Council is sincerely committed to tackling this
issue.
As exact data is indispensable to taking timely
and concrete action to prevent and react to sexual
violence, Germany fully supports the creation of a new
mechanism that may help to collect relevant data. This
mechanism should work similarly to and in close
cooperation with the one already existing on children
and armed conflict, and also take into account the
indicators endorsed by the Security Council in October
during its open debate (see S/PV.6411) on resolution
1325 (2000).
Collecting data is not enough, but it is a muchneeded first step in the fight against impunity.
Perpetrators have to be brought to justice. Bearing in
mind the main responsibility of States to investigate
and prosecute those abominable crimes, international
cooperation and the continued leadership of the
Security Council are also of utmost importance. We
therefore support the Secretary General’s proposal to
set up a listing and de-listing mechanism, such as that
for sexual violence against children. Moreover, the
Council must make full use of all existing instruments
at its disposal, such as relevant sanctions committees,
to address sexual violence, including by referring
relevant cases to the International Criminal Court.

10-69655

S/PV.6453

Moreover, we must strive to find better ways of
guaranteeing the safety and physical integrity of
women and children during armed conflict. This
includes early warning mechanisms, as well as more
awareness-raising campaigns and pertinent training,
including the training of peacekeepers. Germany
supports several training programmes and awarenessraising campaigns on sexual violence, in close
cooperation with United Nations entities.
Finally, victims of sexual violence and abuse
need help to treat the physical and mental scars left on
them and their families and to enable them once again
to actively participate in communal life. States must
therefore provide adequate protection services and find
prompt and non-bureaucratic ways to support victims,
where appropriate with the help of the United Nations
system. Germany commends the United Nations
organizations on their valuable work in this field,
including the important activities of the Trust Fund in
Support of Actions to Eliminate Violence against
Women, which Germany has actively supported in the
past.
Allow me to conclude by stressing that we can
make progress only if all relevant entities within the
United Nations system, including the newly-created
UN Women, work together closely, while also actively
involving civil society stakeholders.
The President: I give
representative of Liechtenstein.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, and
would like to encourage her to continue her visits to
countries that experience conflict-related sexual
violence and to brief the Council on those visits in
open meetings.
Liechtenstein co-sponsored resolution 1960
(2010) because it contains numerous valuable elements
that enable the Council to address the alarming
increase in sexual violence around the world. We agree
with the analysis of the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2010/604) that gender constructs are a critical but
insufficient tool to understand the full complexity of
sexual violence. We therefore welcome the approach
detailed in the report to widen the analytical lens and
to define sexual violence in accordance with the
definitions used in international law, in particular the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.

10-69655

Earlier resolutions and resolution 1960 (2010)
emphasize the primary responsibility of all States to
put an end to impunity and to prosecute those
responsible for crimes, including acts of sexual
violence. Nevertheless, national justice systems often
lack the willingness or the capacity necessary for
effective prosecutions. We thus welcome the progress
made with regard to the establishment of a Team of
Experts that can be deployed rapidly to assist national
justice systems. This is consistent with the principle of
complementarity, which stipulates that international
criminal justice mechanisms are activated only when
States are unable or unwilling to prosecute at the
national level.
As a particularly positive element, we welcome
the inclusion in future reports of the Secretary-General
of information on parties that are credibly suspected of
being responsible for acts of sexual violence. This
should provide a basis for the Council to formulate
more focused responses, including, where necessary,
the application of targeted measures and the
consideration of accountability mechanisms.
Liechtenstein also supports the establishment of
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence as another essential
element of resolution 1960 (2010). The Council
requires timely, accurate and reliable information in
order to respond effectively to conflict-related sexual
violence.
These are important achievements and we
congratulate you, Madame President, on having forged
a consensus on this text. At the same time, we also
wish to place on record that we consider the resolution
to be a missed opportunity. The Special Representative
stated in her remarks that she has made the fight
against impunity her priority since she took office. And
indeed, this was corroborated by the substance of her
briefing.
The Council, however, chose not to reflect that in
the text adopted today. In fact, the operative part of
resolution 1960 (2010) does not include any statement
on the Council’s commitment to end impunity, let
alone on any concrete measures to that end. The
resolution is also silent on the importance of the work
carried out by the ad hoc tribunals established by the
Council itself and by the International Criminal Court,
to which the Council itself has referred a situation
where sexual violence is prevalent.

27

S/PV.6453

This seems particularly ironic at a time when the
mass rapes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have gained sad notoriety in any discussion on sexual
violence in armed conflict, and when much of the
recent work of the International Criminal Court has
been dedicated to that situation, most prominently
through the arrest of the militia leader Callixte
Mbarushimana earlier this year. I also wish to recall
that this was a situation referred to the Court by the
country affected itself.
We thank the Secretary-General and the Special
Representative for their clear reference to the
importance of the work of the International Criminal
Court with respect to combating sexual violence. We
hope that, in future deliberations, the Council will be
able to acknowledge the most concrete international
efforts to fight impunity for sexual violence, and thus
to be less disconnected from reality than the resolution
makes it appear in this respect.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Like others who
have spoken before me, Australia remains committed
to ending the scourge of conflict-related sexual
violence. Besides the outrageous breach of women’s
rights that rape and other forms of sexual violence
entail, its impact on families and communities is
particularly devastating and has consequent longlasting negative effects on peace processes.
We welcome Ms. Wallström’s appointment and
the efforts she has made since taking office to plug
some of the operational gaps in this agenda, as well as
her broader advocacy efforts.
We support the Secretary-General’s impressive
recommendations on specific steps that need to be
taken to address the remaining challenges in this field.
The proposal for the United Nations system to set up a
mechanism, on which agreement has now been
achieved, to better monitor, report and analyse data on
sexual violence and to ensure that information flows
effectively to the Security Council is particularly
important. We urge the Council’s sanctions committees
to give due regard to relevant information they receive
through this mechanism. We recently witnessed the
first listing of an individual by the Council’s
Democratic Republic of the Congo Sanctions
Committee on children-and-armed-conflict grounds.

28

Similar listings of individuals on sexual-violence
grounds would be an important deterrent to others.
Of course, information flowing to the Council
should be reliable. The Council’s endorsement in
October of the comprehensive set of indicators was a
significant achievement in that regard. We look
forward to the United Nations system putting those
indicators into action to collect data on sexual
violence, as well as to inform policy and programmatic
responses.
Early warning signs of conflict-related sexual
violence are often received. But as the mass rapes in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in July and
August sadly demonstrated, our coordinated and
comprehensive analysis of those signs must be
strengthened in order to improve the prospects for
preventing attacks on civilians. Sexual violence is not
unique in that regard. We encourage all relevant parts
of the United Nations system to collaborate in
identifying a comprehensive matrix of early warning
signs and recommended responses. As we know, the
Special Advisers on the prevention of genocide and on
the responsibility to protect are also undertaking
relevant and important work in this field. A coordinated
and comprehensive approach to early warning will
enhance the response capacity of peacekeepers on the
ground.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/604) was
particularly valuable because it identified practical,
pragmatic ways in which this issue can be tackled.
Australia is a firm supporter of tangible, practical
solutions. There remains a gap between our collective
expectations on what United Nations peacekeeping
should be able to do and the actual capacity of
peacekeepers on the ground. Operational guidance,
training and resources must be provided to mission
leadership and peacekeepers so that they are prepared
to take action in response to threats against civilians
during conflict, including sexual violence.
We were very pleased to support the joint
analytical inventory developed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Fund for Women under the auspices of
the inter-agency network United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict. This is a key tool
for the Organization to use in improving its ability to
protect civilians from conflict-related sexual violence
as part of peacekeeping operations. We are supporting

10-69655

S/PV.6453

our United Nations partners in fully operationalizing
this tool, including by incorporating it into
predeployment training for peacekeepers. That is the
scenario-based training referred to in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
We are also supporting the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in
implementing a strategy to combat sexual violence in
communities of internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
North and South Kivu, in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. UNHCR’s strategy of creating a common
framework and actions for all those involved in
combating sexual violence in that country could be
applied in other situations involving IDPs.
Much more needs to be done to address this vital
issue, as we have heard this evening. We look forward
to further reporting and briefing on how the United
Nations system has gone about translating into action
the list of proposals in the Secretary-General’s report.
Annual reporting is needed. Next year a report could,
for example, document action and achievements in
addressing conflict-related sexual violence, including
the development of terms of reference for the new
women’s protection advisers and any actions they
undertake. Real and effective action to address sexual
violence in conflict-related situations requires ongoing
dedication to action. We look forward to the Council in
particular taking forward that action on behalf not just
of the United Nations or States Members, but the entire
international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I wish to congratulate you,
Madame President, on organizing this open debate of
the Security Council, as well as to commend your
commitment to an issue of the utmost importance to the
international community. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General, Special Representative Margot
Wallström, Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy and
Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye, the Military Adviser,
for their briefings, which have given us a clear picture
of the serious challenges involved in protecting women
from the scourge of sexual violence in conflict.
While Italy aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union later on, I
wish to make some remarks in my national capacity.

10-69655

Let me start by expressing our deep appreciation
for resolution 1960 (2010), which has been adopted
today and which Italy was proud to have co-sponsored.
By requesting the establishment of monitoring and
reporting arrangements for conflict-related sexual
violence, the Security Council has taken an important
step forward. Timely and accurate information will
enhance the Council’s ability to track and deter this
heinous crime. It will still be up to the Council to take
the necessary measures to translate these elements into
concrete action; which brings me to an issue that is
often invoked in cases of human rights violations,
namely, the impunity of perpetrators. We must reverse
the social dynamics that allow sexual violence to
perpetuate itself, moving from stigmatizing the victims
to criminalizing the authors.
That goal can be achieved by various means:
adopting sanctions or targeted measures, referring
matters to the International Criminal Court when
necessary and naming and shaming perpetrators at
every opportunity. We therefore welcome the Council’s
decision to encourage the Secretary-General to list in
his reports the parties who have engaged in patterns of
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict. That
decision is a step in the right direction.
Conflict-related sexual violence is a threat to
security and an impediment to peacebuilding in many
parts of the world, not only in the crisis areas on the
Council’s agenda. In today’s conflicts, sexual violence
is not just collateral damage but an actual front-line
strategy. There are two areas that we deem particularly
important.
The first is the need to address sexual violence in
peace and mediation processes. If women do not have a
say in peace processes and sexual violence is not
addressed in the agreements aimed at ending a conflict,
gender-based discrimination and violence will remain
embedded in society.
The second is the importance of giving
systematic consideration to sexual violence in
authorizations and renewals of peacekeeping and
special political missions. Moreover, when missions
are mandated, technical assessments of country
situations should include gender expertise.
In 2008, Italy, in its capacity as a member of the
Security Council, was one of the strongest advocates of
resolution 1820 (2008), on sexual violence in conflict.
We also supported the appointment of a Special

29

S/PV.6453

Representative of the Secretary-General. At the
national level, we are finalizing a plan of action to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. The draft plan includes the
protection of women and girls from sexual violence.
The specific focus is on the assistance, recovery and
psycho-physical rehabilitation of victims, as well as on
special training for our staff deployed in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions.
In conclusion, Italy remains fully committed to
implementing the resolutions of the Security Council in
the area of women and peace and security, including
the important resolution adopted today.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): The Netherlands
aligns itself with the statement that will be made later
by the representative of the delegation of the European
Union.
The Netherlands would like to congratulate the
Secretary-General on his excellent report (S/2010/604)
and on its recommendations. We also wholeheartedly
co-sponsored resolution 1960 (2010), which was
introduced by the United States in its capacity as the
current President of the Security Council. We agree
with the emphasis on applying listing and de-listing
criteria with regard to parties to armed conflict. The
resolution provides concrete measures to define,
implement and monitor specific and time-bound
commitments — indispensable commitments, I would
like to add.
The Netherlands is committed to strengthening
the protection against and the prevention of conflictrelated sexual violations and violence. We provide
financial support to scenario-based training on sexual
violence for United Nations peacekeepers, which is
referred to both in the Secretary-General’s report and
in the new resolution. We believe that operational
readiness with regard to sexual violence can increase
effectiveness in the overall protection of civilians.
In addition, the Netherlands supports a training
initiative on the protection of human rights and the
prevention of sexual violence with the Congolese
Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo. That innovative project makes use of footage
from the award-winning documentary Weapon of War,
about the perpetrators of sexual violence.
In the context of the tenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) and of the third year of the Dutch national

30

action plan, the Dutch Ministries of Foreign Affairs and
Defence jointly produced a publication entitled The
Dutch Do’s on Women, Peace and Security —
Diplomacy, Defence and Development in Partnership.
The publication describes the implementation of the
Dutch integrated approach towards women, peace and
security at the country level — for instance, by
supporting the political participation of women in
Afghanistan and by integrating gender training with
security-sector development in Burundi and sexual
violence issues in the Dutch support to the Congolese
security sector.
Finally, we are pleased to announce bilateral
collaboration between the Netherlands and Spain in the
development of more civilian and military gender
capacity so as to increase operational readiness. We
have a responsibility to arrive well prepared at our
respective missions, be they peacekeeping, military or
civilian. That commitment resulted from a recent
Spanish-Dutch seminar with troop-contributing
countries on the subject of gender in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. One conclusion of the seminar was that
sustainable peace and reconstruction could only be
achieved by involving local communities and by
supporting active roles for women.
That has implications for the way that United
Nations and other missions are planned, but also for
their composition. The Netherlands is committed to
supporting such a development through practical
contributions, such as training.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Madame President, for
convening an open debate on this important issue. My
appreciation also goes to Ms. Margot Wallström,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, for her comprehensive and
informative presentation of the Secretary-General’s
report on this issue (S/2010/604).
As the Secretary-General’s report states, over the
past year, there has been much progress at the policy
level on the implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008)
and 1888 (2009). In particular, we would like to
commend the measures that it outlines to improve the
collection of information on sexual violence that would
lead to better monitoring, deeper analysis and more
systematic reporting.

10-69655

S/PV.6453

Despite that progress, the impact of resolutions
1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009) has yet to be fully
realized on the ground. Women and children continue
to suffer disproportionately in areas of armed conflict.
The use of sexual violence and brutality as weapons of
war still prevails. The horrifying mass rapes that
occurred in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in August were a stark reminder of how
much remains to be done.
We must redouble our efforts to combat sexual
violence in conflict. In that regard, the Republic of
Korea supports the strong leadership of the Security
Council and welcomes the package of measures that
the Secretary-General suggests to accelerate the full
implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888
(2009). Among others, my delegation would like to
highlight the following three points.
First, it is essential to grasp the reality of sexual
violence committed in armed conflict through reliable,
timely and objective information, as well as to ensure
that, in turn, perpetrators are identified and brought to
justice. In that respect, we strongly support the
Secretary-General’s call for the Security Council to
mandate that the Secretary-General’s annual reports list
those parties that have engaged in patterns of sexual
violence in armed conflict. We believe that this
measure would contribute to halting impunity by
providing a basis for more focused approaches and
targeted measures towards those parties.
Secondly, preventing and responding to sexual
violence require a more coherent and coordinated
approach within the United Nations system. For
example, a more integrated strategic framework
between peacekeeping missions and United Nations
country teams should be established to formulate
mission objectives targeted at women and peace and
security, as well as to evaluate their implementation.
We hope that UN Women, which will come into
operation in January 2011, will play a leading role in
coordinating various activities related to the work on
women and peace and security among United Nations
entities.
Thirdly, we need to increase the participation of
women in peace processes and to strengthen their
capacity. The full participation of women, particularly
local women, in such efforts is essential to creating
inclusive and sustainable peace. Research conducted
by the United Nations Development Fund for Women

10-69655

demonstrates that, since 1992, women have, on
average, made up less than 8 per cent of the
participants in official delegations to peace processes.
Where women have participated in peace negotiations,
the resulting peace agreements are more likely to
reflect women’s experiences of conflict and to contain
elements of judicial, economic, social and political
remedies for the abuses that they have suffered.
On its part, the Republic of Korea has been active
in implementing resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) by mainstreaming a gender-sensitive approach
in all its policies and activities and by increasing
women’s participation at all levels. In that regard, we
recently deployed a gender adviser as a member of an
Afghanistan provincial reconstruction team. We will
remain committed to the complete and successful
implementation of the resolutions.
Finally, I would like to conclude by expressing
my sincere hope that today’s open debate will guide us
further by resulting in a clearer direction and concrete
measures that will advance our noble endeavours for
women and peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): I wish to thank the United
States for convening this open debate on conflictrelated sexual violence and to say that Canada was
very happy to co-sponsor resolution 1960 (2010),
which was adopted today.
Canada strongly supports the Security Council’s
recognition of the need to take effective measures to
address conflict-related sexual violence and welcomes
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/604)
pursuant to resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009),
including their recommendations. The systemic acts of
sexual violence recently perpetrated in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo starkly
demonstrate the urgent need for serious action.
Canada welcomes today’s presentation by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wallström,
and strongly supports her efforts to provide strategic
leadership and strengthen United Nations coordination
mechanisms in order to prevent and respond to
conflict-related sexual violence. Addressing sexual
violence demands a double focus: ensuring women’s
empowerment and participation, while also focusing on
matters of accountability and justice.

31

S/PV.6453

In this sense, preventing, addressing and
eliminating sexual violence requires cultural, societal
and institutional changes. Canada calls on Member
States and the United Nations system to ensure that
Ms. Wallström’s Office is adequately resourced and
capable of timely action to support such changes. We
also suggest to the Council that it request regular
briefings by the Special Representative following her
visits to countries on its agenda.
Canada’s long-standing support for the rights and
well-being of women and girls in situations of conflict
is
reflected
through
our
continuing
active
implementation of Council resolutions, including
through strong advocacy work, significant international
programming addressing sexual violence, support for
civil society and efforts to strengthen international
criminal justice mechanisms. Canada’s National Action
Plan on Women, Peace and Security, adopted in
October, will help us to focus and coordinate
implementation of our commitments and increase the
effectiveness of Canada’s response.
Canada
welcomes
the
jurisprudence
of
international courts and tribunals confirming that rape
and sexual violence can be war crimes and crimes
against humanity. Individuals responsible for these
crimes must be brought to justice; that includes those
responsible by virtue of command responsibility.
Canada calls on Member States to ensure that these
crimes are investigated and that those responsible for
committing serious crimes are held to account.
In addition, as recognized in resolution 1820
(2008), we also strongly support the exclusion of
crimes of sexual violence from amnesty provisions in
the context of peace processes. Furthermore, Canada
calls on all parties to conflict to make specific
commitments to ceasing all acts of sexual violence, and
urges the Council to support the efforts of United
Nations officials to engage in dialogue with parties to
elicit commitments to that effect.
Canada also calls on the Council to increase
pressure on States to hold perpetrators of sexual
violence to account through adoption of sanctions and
other targeted measures against individuals and entities
that have perpetrated sexual violence. This must, of
course, be done in accordance with standards of due
process. We also support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to make public in his annual reports

32

the names of parties who engage in patterns of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict.
Systematic data collection on grave violations of
women’s and girls’ human rights, including on sexual
violence, is of the utmost importance in effective
monitoring and response. In order to tailor the
international response to specific contexts, it is also
important that all relevant country reports to the
Security Council include information on the situation
that pertains to all aspects of the resolutions on women,
peace and security, in addition to information on sexual
violence. United Nations reporting on the movement
and activities of armed groups, for example, should
systematically include information on the threat of
sexual violence. With this in mind, Canada supports
the recommendation to establish monitoring, analysis
and reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence.
(spoke in French)
The prevention of and response to sexual
violence should also be included in the mandates of all
United Nations peacekeeping missions. To that end, the
Council must design and implement mandates to
support peace efforts that better respond to all forms of
violence against civilians, and ensure that strategies for
combating sexual violence in conflict are integrated
into the work of United Nations country teams. Local
organizations devoted to protecting women often
assess the ongoing threat of sexual violence in their
communities.
For those reasons, networks among United Nations
peacekeepers, local and international non-governmental
organizations and women’s networks must be
strengthened to facilitate the establishment of early
warning mechanisms on conflict-related sexual violence.
Consequently, we welcomed the efforts made by the
United Nations this year, through the Open Days on
Women, Peace and Security, to engage in dialogue with
local communities and women’s groups. We noted at the
time that the most frequent protection concern raised by
participants was the level of sexual violence during and
after conflict and the impunity enjoyed by perpetrators
of those crimes. We call on the United Nations to pursue
dialogue with local communities and women’s groups so
that the international community can respond effectively
to these issues.
To conclude, we are encouraged by the additional
measures proposed in the Secretary-General’s report.

10-69655

S/PV.6453

Canada calls on the Security Council to take action
today to respond to the report’s recommendations so
that the international community can undertake active
and coordinated efforts to prevent and respond to
conflict-related sexual violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg
congratulates
the
United
States
presidency of the Council on organizing this open
debate, which gives us an opportunity to review the
implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888
(2009) and the challenges still to be addressed in order
to fight effectively against sexual violence in conflict
situations. We welcome the Council’s adoption of
resolution 1960 (2010), which we had the honour of
co-sponsoring, as we did for resolution 1888 (2009) a
year ago also under your presidency, Madame. We
hope that the Council will proceed with determination
to ensure the use of these new mechanisms and
implementation of the new resolution.
Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of the European
Union.
In his report (S/2010/604), the Secretary-General
provides a relevant analysis of sexual violence
committed in the course of conflicts. We welcome the
follow-up that the Council has devoted to the report, in
particular to the Secretary-General’s recommendation
to create a monitoring, analysis and reporting system
that will allow the Council and the United Nations
system as a whole to receive timely, objective, accurate
and reliable information on which to base their
interventions. This system will also help to improve
efforts in the field of prevention, since trends and early
warning indicators will be better known.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report,
impunity for perpetrators of sexual violence remains
the norm in the vast majority of countries where it
occurs. This impunity risks undermining public
confidence in the nascent justice and security sectors
and eroding the whole process of peacebuilding. It is
therefore essential for the Security Council to step up
pressure on the perpetrators of sexual violence. We
welcome the Council’s intention to consider sexual
violence as a criterion for applying sanctions against
individuals. The recommendations made in that regard

10-69655

by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict will be most important.
We warmly welcome the fact that the Council
also encourages the Secretary-General to list in an
annex to his annual reports the parties that have
systematically engaged in acts of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict on the Council agenda.
However, we would have preferred that the SecretaryGeneral could also have been invited to provide
information on perpetrators of sexual violence in other
conflicts and situations, which should not escape the
attention of the international community.
We must all redouble our efforts to contribute to
better protection of women in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Let me dwell for a moment on some
initiatives that my Government has decided to support
since our debate on women and peace and security in
October (6411th meeting).
The mass rapes in Walikale in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo this summer were a brutal
reminder of how sexual violence continues to be used
as a weapon of war. In that context, Luxembourg has
just decided to make a voluntary contribution to the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the
financing of a training programme for 120 trainers and
thus help to professionalize the Congolese national
police. That training will also raise awareness among
the members of the Congolese police with regard to
sexual violence and will give them the ability to better
protect women and children against acts of sexual
violence.
At the same time, in a broader context,
Luxembourg has just decided to fund a major project of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations that is
aimed at strengthening the leadership and participation
of women in peacebuilding activities in countries
emerging from conflict. That project includes the
organization of several meetings at national and
regional levels — one on West Africa, the other the
Great Lakes region — to facilitate the exchange of
good practices in that regard. The protection of women
and girls against sexual violence will also be discussed
in that context.
Luxembourg will continue to pay close attention
to the needs of women and children in conflict
situations. We encourage the Security Council not to
relent in its efforts to achieve concrete progress and

33

S/PV.6453

reduce the suffering of women and children in conflict
situations.
Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
At the outset, let me thank the United States for
leading the Council’s work in its efforts to address the
scourge of sexual violence in conflict. Sexual violence
is a grave violation of human rights and a threat to the
health and lives of the victims and of their
communities. And let me be clear: sexual violence is a
serious impediment to peace, security and
development. Resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009)
and 1960 (2010) — the latter adopted today —
complement in important and concrete ways the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security by recognizing sexual violence as a
security issue and a possible war crime and in adding
provisions on protection, monitoring and enforcement
tools. The Nordic countries fully support the
resolutions and the Council’s work.
Let me also thank and give further
encouragement to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Margot Wallström and to United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Special Representative Wallström’s briefing to the
Council and the insightful report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/604) show that all possible synergies
and joint efforts are needed for the United Nations to
support national Governments in their efforts to fulfil
their responsibilities to prevent and effectively respond
to sexual violence.
Preventing sexual violence should be our highest
priority. Unfortunately, in many conflict situations,
national Governments and the United Nations alike
have failed to protect civilians from violence.
Widespread impunity in conflict situations has led to a
culture of impunity and the “normalization” of sexual
violence after the conflict has ended.
Better monitoring and reporting, effective
measures against impunity and comprehensive
reparations for victims all contribute to prevention, and
that is why I am focusing on these aspects today.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s
recommendations to establish monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence, including the listing of those parties who

34

commit sexual violence in situations of armed conflict.
We further support the Secretary-General’s call for a
coherent and coordinated approach at the field level.
We are therefore very pleased that the resolution
adopted by the Council today endorses those
recommendations in full.
It is also of crucial importance that the
information gathered reaches the Council and its
sanctions committees in a timely manner. In that
regard, we welcome the intention of the Council to
ensure the flow of information from the field to the
Security Council and to take action based on that
information.
Monitoring, reporting and sanctions are not ends
in themselves. Their aim is to change behaviour and
promote adherence to national and international law.
We were therefore particularly happy to note that
resolution 1960 (2010) also endorses the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal for a dialogue with parties to armed
conflict, where verified behavioural change will lead to
delisting, while sanctions will be applied against
persistent violators.
All of those provisions together build a longawaited mechanism for accountability for sexual
violence, and we congratulate the Council for its
decision.
Investigating and prosecuting all acts of conflictrelated sexual violence are both legal obligations and
powerful
deterrents.
This
includes
holding
commanders accountable for ordering, condoning or
failing to prevent acts of sexual violence committed by
troops under their control. We must find ways to
strengthen national judicial systems and processes,
including through the deployment of the teams of
experts on the rule of law. In some instances it may be
necessary to refer cases to the International Criminal
Court (ICC). We also encourage the Council to use
other mechanisms at its disposal, such as fact-finding
commissions and commissions of inquiry.
Justice should always be sought with the
perspective of survivors in mind. The Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights has recently
convened a panel in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where survivors of sexual violence gave their
views on justice and reparations. The findings support
a holistic approach encompassing not only access to
justice, judicial remedies and financial reparations, but

10-69655

S/PV.6453

also attention to the security, health, education and
economic needs of the affected communities.
Nordic countries contribute to the ICC’s Trust
Fund for Victims and support the work of United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
also support a large number of local and international
organizations engaged in rehabilitation for survivors of
sexual violence.
The Nordic countries promote women’s
participation at all stages of conflict prevention, peace
negotiations and peacebuilding processes. Sexual
violence should always be addressed in peace and
ceasefire agreements, and no amnesty should be
granted for such abuses.
The Nordic countries support the efforts of UN
Women and the Department of Political Affairs in
developing guidance for mediators on addressing
sexual violence in peace negotiations. We also
welcome and support their Joint Strategy on Gender
and Mediation. We believe that it will be an effective
tool for strengthening women’s participation in peace
processes and for providing expertise and guidance to
the parties and the mediators. Leaving sexual violence
unaddressed undermines the very purpose of a peace
agreement: peace and security for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Reuben (Israel): I thank you, Madame
President, for your delegation’s leadership in holding
this very important debate. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General Le
Roy, Special Representative Wallström and Military
Adviser Gaye for their valuable briefings.
In the 10 years since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), we have seen some positive steps to
prevent sexual violence in conflict. Unfortunately,
overall progress is slow. Israel joined the list of
sponsors of resolution 1960 (2010), recognizing the
urgent need for collective action on this pressing issue.
As a co-sponsor of the previous resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009), Israel remains deeply
committed to their full implementation. We welcome
the increased deployment of gender advisers, the
routine inclusion of provisions in peacekeeping
mandates that protect women and girls from sexual
violence, and the growing awareness of the need to
include women in any peacemaking process.

10-69655

Israel welcomes the Secretary-General’s report of
24 November (S/2010/604) and commends him for his
efforts and leadership on this issue. The report
documents how widespread acts of rape and other
forms of sexual violence — too often committed with
impunity — continue to plague many zones of conflict.
As Special Representative Wallström has made clear in
various forums, including the Security Council, sexual
violence in conflict is neither cultural nor sexual; it is
criminal.
Acts of sexual violence are horrific crimes
against individuals. Women, girls and boys who are
raped are not only heartlessly robbed of their basic
dignity during the time of the crime, but also bear the
scars of those appalling acts long after hostilities have
ceased. No amount of compensation can heal those
wounds. The sad reality is that most victims are
forgotten, and the perpetrators of the unspeakable
crimes against them are never brought to justice. When
committed in armed conflict and employed deliberately
and systematically, such acts constitute a weapon of
war designed to inflict suffering, instil fear and destroy
the social fabric of communities and families. As is
rightly emphasized in the Secretary-General’s report,
“Depending on the circumstances of the offence,
sexual violence can constitute a war crime, a
crime against humanity, an act of torture or a
constituent act of genocide” (S/2010/604, para. 4).
The Secretary-General’s report provides a
number of important recommendations for improving
the international community’s efforts on this issue.
There is a growing consensus about the need for
timely, objective and accurate monitoring and reporting
arrangements for incidents of sexual violence to ensure
a coherent and coordinated approach to addressing
violations and enforcing accountability. We support the
listing of perpetrators of sexual violence, as
encouraged by resolution 1960 (2010). This can serve
as a means for advancing more focused measures for
combating such atrocities when they occur.
Israel strongly supports the mandate that created
the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
recognizes that Special Representative Wallström will
play a pivotal role in addressing the issue. The newly
formed UN Women, led by Executive Director
Michelle Bachelet, also has a central role to play and is

35

S/PV.6453

well positioned to work with the entire United Nations
system.
The impact of sexual violence in conflict can be
measured in the overwhelming pain it has inflicted on
women and men, in the devastation it has wrought in
communities and in the instability it continues to foster
throughout entire regions. Israel believes that Member
States, individually and collectively, must take firm
action to curb this serious threat to human dignity and
peace.
Together, we must make clear that the
international community has zero tolerance for the
perpetrators of sexual violence in armed conflict and
will bring them to justice wherever they carry out their
appalling and destructive crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Ms. Anderson (Ireland): This is an urgent and
necessary debate. Amid the glow of the holiday season,
it is all the more difficult for our imaginations to
comprehend the horror and brutality of sexual violence
on the scale to which the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/604) attests. The contrast could not be more
shocking between the civility of our lives here and the
depravity of sexual violence so widely associated with
conflict. The report and resolution 1960 (2010) connect
the two worlds. They signal the determination of the
international community to stand with the victims and
to deal with the perpetrators.
Conflict and sexual violence feed off one another.
The poisonous interrelationship is fully demonstrated
in the Secretary-General’s report. This is an excellent
report, clear and dispassionate in its analysis and
incisive in its recommendations. Ireland strongly
supports the full range of recommendations and
welcomes the extent to which they have been reflected
in the resolution. Each of the operative paragraphs of
the resolution must be followed up with vigour. In her
compelling
opening
address
today,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wallström
spelled out the standards to which we must hold
ourselves. I wish to make a few comments that draw on
Ireland’s experience in United Nations peacekeeping
and on our involvement in cross-learning processes.
Our extensive engagement in United Nations
peacekeeping has taught us that the triggers for sexual
violence and the entry points for influence are different

36

from one case to another. But there are some common
points. In all situations, active monitoring and timely
reporting are critical. Without them, early warnings
will be missed, policymaking will not be properly
founded, and perpetrators will slip through the cracks.
Almost always, too, there are groups that are
particularly vulnerable and need specific and special
protection. Again and again, one sees the pattern of
preying on refugees and internally displaced persons,
especially those — mostly women — who have to
venture outside villages and camps in search of water
and firewood.
The recent deployment of Irish defence forces
with the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad has left us with some reflections.
Our experience of that deployment was that, by raising
awareness of human rights, of the unacceptability of
sexual and gender-based violence and of the
responsibilities of Government and other parties, the
Mission helped to foster a climate in which
communities were less likely to tolerate and more
likely to report acts of sexual violence. That was
certainly a positive lesson that a peacekeeping mission,
operating as intended, can raise consciousness and
change tolerance standards in communities.
But helping to change attitudes and standards
brings a follow-up responsibility. It cannot be right that
communities are left with new ways of looking at
things but — with the international presence gone —
no means to ensure that new standards are
implemented. This is where the continuum between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding really matters. In
many
peacekeeping
contexts,
an
effectively
functioning domestic judicial or penal system is
lacking. Although international peacekeepers can
temporarily fulfil a very important role, tackling sexual
violence ultimately necessitates support for a wide
range of capacity-building, training and infrastructural
development activities. This may not be quick or easy,
but only such an integrated approach will ensure that
the scourge of sexual violence in conflict is dealt with
in a sustainable and lasting way.
A further source of insight for us has been the
cross-learning process on women, peace and security
that Ireland conducted in partnership with Liberia and
Timor-Leste. This innovative initiative drew on the
experiences of those directly affected by conflict in
Ireland, Northern Ireland, Liberia and Timor-Leste to
discuss the most critical issues facing women and girls

10-69655

S/PV.6453

in conflict and post-conflict settings. The report on the
process, which we presented to Under-SecretaryGeneral Bachelet on 25 October, highlights a number
of important points.
Among the particular priorities stressed
throughout this initiative were the need to fight against
the culture of impunity in relation to sexual violence,
to exclude sex crimes from amnesties, to improve
women’s access to formal, traditional and transitional
justice, to increase awareness among family members
and community leaders of issues surrounding sexual
and gender-based violence, to enhance capacity to
prosecute sex crimes, and to incorporate reporting on
sexual and gender-based violence into early warning
systems.
Ireland is already seeking to take these
recommendations forward. For example, sexual and
gender-based violence has been incorporated as an
indicator into an Irish Government-funded early
warning/early response system in Timor-Leste.

10-69655

Let me conclude by reiterating our unequivocal
support for Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Wallström and her Office, as well as our
appreciation for the incremental steps that are being
taken by the Security Council on this issue. The
perpetrators of crimes of sexual violence now know
that they are caught in the headlamps of Security
Council attention. Slowly but surely, the darkness in
which they took refuge is being dissipated.
In this season that reminds us all of our common
humanity, I can think of no more appropriate message
from the Security Council than today’s expression of
support for and solidarity with victims of sexual
violence in conflict.
The President: There are a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. I therefore
intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 10 a.m.
tomorrow, 17 December.
The meeting was suspended at 6.35 p.m.

37
