S/PV.8798*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8798th meeting

Wednesday, 16 June 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jürgenson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Estonia)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Syed
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Laouani
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)
Working methods of the Security Council
Letter dated 2 June 2021 from the Permanent Representatives of Estonia and
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2021/527)

* Reissued for technical reasons on 21 June 2021.

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by a
compilation of annexes (S/2021/572) containing the statements submitted by interested nonmembers of the Council.

21-15420 (E)
*2115420*

S/PV.8798

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of Professor Edward Luck
and of Ambassador Kenzo Oshima of Japan
The President: Before turning to the item on our
agenda, it is fitting that we pay tribute to Professor
Edward Luck and Ambassador Kenzo Oshima of
Japan, who both passed on since the Security Council’s
previous discussion on this topic (see S/2020/418). Both
of these distinguished men contributed extensively
to the examination and improvement of the Council’s
working methods — Professor Luck through the
dynamic discussions he organized in the context of the
annual Hitting the Ground Running workshops and
reports, and Ambassador Oshima for his important role
in revitalizing the Council’s Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
leading to the first comprehensive “Note 507” document
in 2006 (S/2006/507). They will both be missed by the
members of the Security Council.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/507)
Working methods of the Security Council
Letter dated 2 June 2021 from the Permanent
Representatives of Estonia and Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2021/527)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Loraine Sievers, co-author of the fourth edition
of The Procedure of the UN Security Council, and
Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive Director of Security
Council Report
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/527, which contains the text
of a letter dated 2 June 2021 from the Permanent
Representatives of Estonia and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines to the United Nations addressed to the
2/17

16/06/2021

At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by Ms. Sievers, Ms. Landgren and Ambassador Inga
Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, in her capacity as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions.
I now give the floor to Ambassador King.
Ms. King: I welcome this opportunity to brief the
Security Council as Chair of the Informal Working
Group of Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. Before I proceed, however, I also would
like to pay tribute to Professor Edward Luck and
Ambassador Kenzo Oshima of Japan, both of whom
contributed extensively to the working methods of the
Security Council and are no longer with us.
Over one year ago, the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic resulted in a number of acute
disruptions to the Security Council’s sturdy mode
of operation. While the centrality of the Council’s
mandate remained unchanged, our ability to discharge
that mandate was challenged. Not only were we unable
to convene in person, but our ability to interact with
the wider United Nations membership was challenged.
The Security Council was forced to contemplate
and adopt a new mode of operation to ensure its
continuous functioning, in line with the Charter of the
United Nations.
Through a series of letters, beginning with the
Chinese presidency in March 2020 (S/2020/253),
which has been built upon by successive presidencies,
the Security Council adapted its working methods to
the circumstances in order to maintain its effective
functioning. Over one year since the World Health
Organization declared a pandemic, the Security Council
continues to convene uninterruptedly, both in person and
via video-teleconference (VTC), to negotiate and adopt
resolutions, ensuring the timely renewal of mandates,
and to maintain its engagement with other United
Nations organs as well as with the wider United Nations
membership, particularly through the monthly briefing
on the programme of work and wrap-up sessions, and
has incorporated multilingualism in its open videoteleconferences. Notwithstanding the existence of
some outstanding issues, the Security Council has
been able to ensure its continuous functioning, in a
21-15420

16/06/2021

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

manner that strives to secure transparency, efficiency
and effectiveness.
The extraordinary circumstances under which we
operated for the majority of the past year demonstrated
a need for the Security Council to remain agile and
responsive to all situations that might disrupt its
functioning. The open debate on working methods in
2020 (see S/2020/418) was held on the theme “Ensuring
transparency, efficiency and effectiveness”. While
we emphasized the significance of those elements,
the concept of agility was introduced as equally
critical to the work of the Council. Contained within
the statements and submissions summarized in the
subsequent analytical summary were a number of
proposals and views related to the issue of the Council’s
working methods. In that context, the United Nations
membership considered interim practices introduced
during the pandemic that could be adopted during the
ordinary functioning of the Council to enhance its
effectiveness. This year, the open debate is being held
under the appropriate theme “Agility and innovation:
lessons for the future from the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic”. That theme may be regarded as
a sequel to last year’s open debate, as it aims to reflect
on how far we have come and urges us to think ahead.
To that end, the Informal Working Group remains
a critical framework, within which we can assess
and improve our working methods. Accordingly,
the Working Group has continued to meet virtually
approximately every five weeks. Under the standing
agenda item “Implementation of the note by the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/507): Reflections from
past presidencies and proposals for future action”,
presidencies have been given the opportunity to reflect
on the working methods of the Security Council during
their respective months, assessing some of the best
practices, challenges and areas for further movement.
That agenda item facilitates reflection on the Security
Council’s working methods, as well as on presidential
note S/2017/507, which contains many useful provisions
that are sometimes overlooked. To ensure our effective,
efficient and transparent functioning, during both
ordinary and extraordinary circumstances, we must
continue to implement all provisions contained within
the note by the President of the Security Council
S/2017/507 and all subsequently adopted notes.
Allow me to recall the remarks of Professor
Edward Luck during last year’s open debate, where he
noted that the ultimate test was how fully and faithfully

S/PV. 8798

measures were implemented. It is also worth noting
that the Informal Working Group is considering the
practice and procedure concerning the circulation of
communications for the consideration of the Security
Council in order to promote transparency and strengthen
its efficiency.
The Security Council slowly made a muchwelcomed gradual return to the Council Chamber,
resuming in-person meetings in the Economic and
Social Council Chamber under the German presidency
in July 2020 and in the Security Council Chamber
under the Russian presidency in October 2020. The
Council has held a blend of VTCs and in-person
meetings, with the latter having been the format for
the majority of briefings and consultations in recent
weeks. This month, the majority of the meetings are
envisaged to take place in the Chamber. In that regard,
this open debate is an opportunity for the Security
Council to listen to the wider membership’s comments
about the Council’s achievements and suggestions
for the further enhancement of its working methods.
The timing of this dialogue is apposite as we return to
ordinary functioning.
The unforeseen COVID-19 challenges and
constraints have given us much to consider for future
extraordinary circumstances, such as the status of
our VTCs, how to better facilitate the meaningful
participation of the wider membership in VTCs, how
to secure multilingualism during VTCs and produce
comprehensive records of VTCs and how to undertake
a procedural vote in cases where in-person meetings
cannot take place. However, it has provided us with
new and innovative ways to maintain our continuous
functioning, including through the use of technology.
I take this opportunity to recognize and emphasize
the general position that modern technology can never
replace interactive communication and the quality
of engagement among Council members in person,
including the valuable discussions that take place on
the margins of normal Council meetings.
The working methods remain the foundation upon
which the Security Council effectively discharges its
mandate. Despite formidable challenges, the process
of improving our working methods and adapting them
to reflect the current circumstances must not waver.
I look forward to the proposals of the membership of
the United Nations as we strive towards enhancing and
maintaining the Council’s effectiveness, efficiency and
transparency, as well as its preparedness and agility.

21-154203/17

S/PV.8798

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

I have no doubt that that is a collective endeavour to
which we are all committed.
The President: I thank Ambassador King for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Sievers.
Ms. Sievers: I wish to express my appreciation
for having been invited to participate as a briefer in
today’s open debate. I would like to add my voice to
your tribute, Mr. President, and to that of the Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions to Professor Edward
Luck and Ambassador Kenzo Oshima, who both made
exceptional contributions to the work of the Security
Council and were wonderful people.
The theme of this year’s open debate is well
chosen. During this transition phase, it is important
to assess how the Security Council has responded to
the challenges of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
restrictions not only to discern best practices for future
situations, but also to identify those pandemic working
methods that may merit being carried forward into
more normal times.
Ambassador King gave an insightful briefing on
how the Security Council has approached business
continuity during the pandemic. Last year, the most
pressing issue for the Council was how to adopt
resolutions. The Council was obliged to halt in-person
meetings after 12 March 2020, and yet two mandates
required renewal by the end of that month.
A particular difficulty faced by the Council
was that, whereas, according to the Charter of the
United Nations, General Assembly resolutions are
recommendations, Security Council resolutions,
depending on their wording, are binding decisions. For
that reason, any alternative to in-person voting would
have to bear up to rigorous legal scrutiny.
It was therefore essential that by the end of March
2020, the Council agreed to a written voting procedure,
as set out in the letter from the President of the Security
Council (S/2020/253). That procedure has perhaps been
unduly time-consuming and convoluted and could
benefit from further refinement. But what is most
important is that it met the necessary requirements of
legality and verifiability.
There are now 16 letters from the President of the
Security Council on the Council’s pandemic working
4/17

16/06/2021

methods. Some have carried forward what was
previously agreed, while others reflect new elements,
especially evolving practice with respect to videoteleconferences (VTCs). Therefore, one question now is
whether the Security Council should consolidate those
working methods as a reference for the future. There
are several options.
The first option would be a note by the President of
the Security Council that distils into a single document
the most up-to-date elements of the letters from the
President of the Security Council.
A second option would be to adopt stand-alone
notes by the President on individual working methods,
which would apply both in times of restrictions and
under regular conditions.
A third option may be to follow the model of the
1996 Wisnumurti guidelines or the 2017 Bessho letter,
contained in document S/2017/93. In both cases, a
Security Council representative, in his individual
capacity, drafted a reference document on the process
for nominating the Secretary-General.
A fourth option may be a background note by
the Secretariat, similar to the one on Arria Formula
meetings, which, with the agreement of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, was read into the record by the
Chair at a formal Council meeting and then included
in the Security Council handbooks published by Japan.
Irrespective of the format followed, should the
Council agree to create a record, it would seem desirable
to convey that, although the pandemic working methods
are a product of consensus, some Council members
proposed additional or alternative modalities that have
not been agreed but that may merit future consideration.
I would now like to raise an important matter
relating to the return to in-person meetings. That is
the fact that for all official meetings, the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure apply. Beneficially, under
the rules procedural disagreements can be resolved
through procedural votes. That contrasts to meetings
not deemed official — including, to date, the VTCs held
during the COVID-19 pandemic — for which virtually
all procedural decisions require consensus, which
occasionally has created delays or even blockages.
Operating without the rules of procedure for
so many months has given Council members a new
appreciation of them. Nonetheless, in recent years those
21-15420

16/06/2021

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

rules have been under the shadow of a misunderstanding
because their title still retains the word “provisional”. I
would like to take this opportunity to bring clarity to
that issue.
The misunderstanding arises when people assume
that the word “provisional” means “draft” and conclude
that the rules of procedure have never been adopted,
but rather exist as loose guidelines that can be set
aside casually at the caprice of Council members.
That assumption has done unnecessary damage to the
Council’s reputation.
That the rules of procedure have never been
adopted is not true. They were initially adopted at the
Security Council’s first meeting, so that the Council
could begin its official work. And then from April
through June 1946, the Council adopted revisions and
the rules of procedure were considered sufficiently
complete to publish them under the symbol “S/96”,
which is the symbol they still carry today, as document
S/96/Rev.7. According to the leading legal treatises on
the Charter of the United Nations, the Council’s rules
therefore have the same legal standing as those of the
General Assembly and the other principal organs of the
United Nations.
The question then arises: Why does the word
“provisional” remain in the title when that word was
removed from the rules of procedure of the other
principal organs after their adoption? The reason is that
the Council remained stuck on one issue that did not
confront the other principal organs — the unique voting
arrangements set out for the Council in Article 27 of
the Charter. Reflecting Cold War tensions, Council
members could not agree on the extent to which the
voting arrangements should be spelled out in its rules
of procedure. It was for that reason that when the rules
were published, the word “provisional” was retained. It
was merely a political signal to indicate that although
the Council had adopted the rules of procedure, it
intended to revisit the outstanding voting issues.
By the 1950s, those voting issues had been resolved
by practice on a case-by-case basis. But the word
“provisional” remained in the title and over the years,
the fact that the rules of procedure had been adopted in
1946 began to be forgotten by many.
Of course, the misunderstanding about the
legal status of the rules of procedure could be set to
rest if the Council were to agree to remove the word
“provisional” from the title. However, reopening the

S/PV. 8798

rules of procedure to do so would undoubtedly raise
the issue of some rules that over the years have become
outmoded. To attend to them would require a thorough
and potentially divisive review. For that reason,
whereas up to 1982 seven amendments were adopted
in resolutions and incorporated directly into the rules
of procedure, in 1993 and 2019 the Council was able
to agree amendments only through the issuance of
presidential notes, with the changes not yet reflected in
the rules of procedure themselves.
While I think many would concur that updating
the rules of procedure would be beneficial, given the
number of contentious substantive issues currently
before the Council I am not sure that trying to revise
the rules at this time would give an optimal result.
Pending such an exercise, however, the reassuring fact
is that the rules in need of modernization relate mainly
to documentation.
This has been a lengthy explanation, but I felt it
was important to confirm that the rules of procedure
that govern the conduct of official meetings — the rules
of procedure that are of greatest relevance to Council
members as they return to in-person meetings — are
valid. Those rules of procedure can be applied and
relied upon as currently written.
In conclusion, the General Assembly considered the
Council’s 2020 annual report (A/75/2) on 11 June. There
was a fair amount of criticism over the reduced access
of non-Council Member States to the Council under
its interim working methods. Yet, widespread respect
was expressed for the agility with which the Council
had ensured business continuity during the pandemic. I
share that respect and I look forward to seeing how the
Council will translate the lessons learned into the next
phase of its work.
The President: I thank Ms. Sievers for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren.
Ms. Landgren: It is a privilege for Security
Council Report to be invited to brief the Security
Council. Security Council Report’s aim is to contribute
in an informed and impartial manner to the Council’s
effectiveness, transparency and accountability.
Let me acknowledge the work of Ambassador
Rhonda King of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
in presiding over the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, as
well as the role of Estonia as Vice-Chair. I also want to

21-154205/17

S/PV.8798

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

pay tribute to Loraine Sievers, co-author of the fourth
edition of The Procedure of the UN Security Council.
It is a particular pleasure to be present in the
Security Council Chamber in a week when all but one
of the meetings of the Council and its subsidiary bodies
will be held in person for the first time since mid-March
2020. That month, faced with a mounting pandemic
and its brutal impact on New York City, the Security
Council acted decisively in agreeing on interim working
methods. By so doing, the Security Council was true
to Article 28 of the Charter of the United Nations and
quickly resumed meeting continuously — the first of
the principal organs, aside from the Secretariat, to get
back to business.
The Security Council’s rapid agreement on new
ways to work was historic. Those ground-breaking
arrangements have now been tested for 15 months.
Members have found that video-teleconference (VTC)
meetings can save considerable time. More ministers
and Heads of Government join and preside over Council
open debates. Subsidiary body meetings are never
constrained by a lack of meeting rooms. Daily agendas
and draft resolutions are now circulated electronically,
in a fine example of environmental awareness. Digital
platforms have truly shown their value to the Council.
At the same time, coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
restrictions struck at the heart of international
diplomacy, leaving Council members without face-toface negotiations and the myriad informal opportunities
to explore possible ways forward, where personal
relationships deepen and trust can develop. The new
Council best practice may be found in hybrid working
methods that balance the remote with the proximate.
At the end of March 2020, Security Council Report
observed that while numerous technical difficulties
had gradually been resolved, some fundamental
procedural challenges had arisen. Key among them was
whether VTC meetings would be considered official
meetings of the Council. If they were not considered
official, Security Council Report asked, how would
the Council perform certain essential tasks, such as
adopting resolutions to renew mandates that would
otherwise expire?
The Council quickly found ways to perform its
most essential tasks. It renewed mission and sanctions
mandates, even establishing a new peace operation,
while holding briefings and debates on its agenda
items. VTCs made all that possible and at times made
6/17

16/06/2021

it easier. Over the past year of Council VTCs, technical
malfunctions have become fewer and users more
proficient. The level of security risk perceived to be
present in the Council’s digital platforms may be ripe
for reassessment.
Did the Council’s innovations in any way limit
its ability to deliver on its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security?
During these 15 months, the Council did not add any
new agenda items. The decision to designate VTC
meetings as informal meetings may have imposed
some unintended constraints on Council processes.
Voting on resolutions, a feature of formal meetings,
has been encumbered with a written procedure. The
accompanying oral explanations of vote, a boon to
Council transparency, have been eliminated. Closed
consultations, intended to permit frank discussion
and to avoid prepared statements, appear, in general,
to have taken on heightened formality, and the use of
press elements to keep the public informed, which had
a strong start in March 2020, appears to have dwindled.
Procedural votes, which require a formal meeting,
have not been held during meetings held via videoteleconference. Council members may wish to give
serious consideration to ways of enabling procedural
votes and to treating video-teleconference meetings
as official.
In March 2020, monthly letters from the President
became the vehicle for communicating the Council’s
agreed interim working methods. These letters, in
themselves a new tool, reflect the critical role the
Council President can play in shaping better ways
of working.
As in-person meetings and travel resume, perhaps
nothing will be more pressing than live engagement with
peace operations and other situations of concern. It has
been 20 months since the last Council visiting mission.
Some elected members are about to begin the final
quarter of their Council tenures without ever having
benefited from a Council field trip. Well-designed field
visits can strengthen Council members’ sense of ground
realities, the effect of their decisions and the challenges
to mandate implementation — especially important
now as the United Nations seeks to strengthen the
impact of Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
Still, there is scope for the Council to derive more
value from its field visits. The Council might consider,
where possible, consolidating its own travel schedule
21-15420

16/06/2021

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

and those of the heads of sanctions committees, other
subsidiary organs and the Peacebuilding Commission
for greater coherence and effectiveness. There could
also be a fresh look at the need for full-scale Council
visiting missions. These tend to be extremely costly, but
also brief, with packed programmes. Late last year, one
speaker at the Hitting the Ground Running workshop
said that the visiting Council members “tended to be
moved from the airport to conference rooms and back
to the airport without adequately seeing the situation
on the ground”.
In past years, the Security Council has successfully
deployed mini-missions of a subset of Council
members. The most recent was in November 2012,
when six elected Council members went to TimorLeste just before that United Nations operation closed,
spending four days in the country. That added ground
time can expand possibilities for effective diplomacy.
Would this not be a useful option now, for instance with
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in Sudan, a new Mission, and perhaps for visits
to a handful of situations not on the Council’s agenda?
Council members remaining in New York could, at
selected moments, join those missions virtually via
video-teleconference. The Council also once asked
a single member to travel on its behalf, when the late
Ambassador Kenzo Oshima of Japan, as Chair of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, visited
Ethiopia and Eritrea in November 2005.
The Council has proved that it can use the
provisional rules of procedure and the Charter of the
United Nations to be innovative and effective. This
active use of existing tools and the ready development
of new ones, need not end as the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic recedes. As the Council
comes back to in-person meetings, the flexibility that
the institution and its members showed during the
COVID-19 period is important to retain. The Council
can keep existing good practices, resurrect worthwhile
older initiatives and continue to break new ground.
The President: I thank Ms. Landgren for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Estonia for its initiative to convene
today’s open debate. We thank Ambassador King, Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and

S/PV. 8798

Other Procedural Questions, as well as Ms. Sievers and
Ms. Landgren for their briefings.
The Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. As new challenges and threats keep cropping
up, the Security Council needs to constantly improve
its working methods, ensure fairness and justice,
embody openness and inclusiveness, further enhance
its efficiency and effectiveness, and better fulfil the
critical duties entrusted to it by the Charter of the
United Nations.
Since the coronavirus disease outbreak, the
Council has developed its interim working methods and
overcome many difficulties and inconveniences and
has maintained business continuity. Looking back on
the past year, we need to take stock of our experiences
and good practices. We must also identify deficiencies,
focus on the tasks and the future challenges facing the
Council and actively improve its working methods.
In the light of what we have learned from our
presidency of the Council in March 2020 and May 2021,
I would like to recommend the following.
First, we stress the need for the Security Council
to maintain unity, including in its decision-making. In
the face of increasingly complex and formidable global
challenges, the Council needs more than ever to practice
and uphold true multilateralism, which is about having
international affairs addressed through consultation.
Council members should be mindful of maintaining the
unity of the Council, respect one another and engage
in consultations on an equal footing, enhance mutual
trust and consolidate consensus. Unity among the 15
Council members is a show of power and strength, and
is the source of its authority. We should duly enhance
communication, accommodate each other’s concerns
and prioritize consensus-based decision-making. In
particular, we should properly manage differences and
avoid resorting to a vote whenever a difference arises.
Secondly, the Security Council must focus on its
duties and highlight priorities. The world today is ridden
with myriad problems and challenges. It is impossible
and indeed untenable for the Council to be everything
to everyone. It must stay focused on tackling major
and urgent issues concerning international peace and
security. In recent years, the number of items addressed
in the Council has gradually swelled. This is a cause for
concern. The Council should maintain the continuity of
its work priorities and be prudent in introducing new

21-154207/17

S/PV.8798

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

topics for consideration. When it comes to cross-cutting
issues, the Council should improve communication
and coordination with the General Assembly and
other organs so as to avoid broadening its scope of
consideration, which would duplicate efforts and may
lead to encroachment into the purview of the Assembly.
Thirdly, there must be extensive communication,
openness and transparency. The Security Council
performs its duties on behalf of all Member States.
In addressing hotspot issues, it should heed the views
of the wider membership, especially the countries
concerned, countries of the region and regional
organizations. Their unique advantages should be fully
leveraged. The Council should be flexible and creative
in organizing field visits and informal dialogues
around relevant issues, and make good use of its
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and other
mechanisms, such as meetings with troop-contributing
countries. In addition, the Council must consider and
heed their views from all parties, especially those of
troop-contributing countries on issues pertaining to the
formulation of peacekeeping mandates and ensuring
the safety and security of peacekeepers.
During its presidency in May, China consulted
extensively and listened to the comments and
suggestions of the countries concerned and regional
organizations on hotspot issues. We communicated
and coordinated with the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, as
well as the Secretary-General — with good results. We
support the Council strengthening its interaction with
the Peacebuilding Commission so as to leverage its
positive role.
The Council should be mindful of both efficiency
and transparency and strike the balance between open
and closed meetings. China supports the Council
in stepping up communication with the media,
while Council documents subject to consultations
should be kept confidential to prevent leaks and
avoid compromising the work and efforts aimed at
reaching consensus.
Fourthly, we must improve mechanisms and
embrace fairness. The Council should be pragmatic
and efficient and constantly optimize its working
mechanisms. Last Friday, the General Assembly elected
new non-permanent members of the Security Council.
China supports the idea of facilitating newly elected
members in performing their duties and, with the
8/17

16/06/2021

assistance of the Secretariat, strengthening capacitybuilding, including by helping elected members
familiarize themselves in advance with the work of the
Council and its subsidiary organs.
The allocation of penholdership should be more
rational and reflect the shared responsibilities and
collective participation. China supports multiple
Council members serving as co-penholders and
encourages non-penholders to actively contribute to the
drafting of documents.
The rotating presidency of the Council has a special
role to play. Coordination should be strengthened
between incoming and outgoing presidencies to maintain
coherence and consistency in working priorities.
Fifthly, we must be creative, flexible and more agile.
The coronavirus disease presented an unprecedented
challenge to the work of the Council. In March 2020, the
Council defied all odds in exploring a set of contingency
work modalities with many unprecedented practices.
These practices have enriched the Council’s working
methods. Good practices need to be upheld and carried
forward, which would help the Council cope with future
emergencies. There is still room for improvement, such
as the stability of the video-teleconferences and the
quality of remote simultaneous interpreting platforms,
but admittedly the contingency modus operandi is only
an interim measure, not a long-term solution; it cannot
replace our normal working modalities.
We are pleased to see that since the end of May
the Council has gradually resumed in-person meetings.
Considering the lingering risk of infection, the Council
should continue in the next stage to maintain rigorous
pandemic-prevention measures, follow maintain
democratic and science-based decision-making
processes and make sound arrangements for
in-person meetings.
Improving the Council’s working methods is an
ongoing process. China stands ready to work with other
Council members to continuously take stock, make
steady progress and keep improving the Council’s
working methods to enable it to better perform its
duties. We also support the Informal Working Group
continuing to play a major role in this regard.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I would like to endorse
Ambassador Inga Rhonda King’s tribute to Professor
Edward Luck and Ambassador Kenzo Oshima for
21-15420

16/06/2021

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

S/PV. 8798

their contributions to the working methods of the
Security Council.

can withstand pandemics and any other major future
disruptions of the normal workings of the Council.

I have the honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of the current 10 elected members of the
Security Council (E-10) — Estonia, India, Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam .

We may start by agreeing that video-teleconference
meetings are considered formal meetings of the
Council, where the same provisional rules of procedure
apply, allowing for the participation of non-members,
the possibility to vote in real time on procedural and
substantive matters, provide fully for multilingualism
and ensure the attendant record-keeping rather than
developing temporary special measures again. As a first
step, we will continue to engage actively as the E-10
in the work of the Informal Working Group under the
Chairpersonship of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to
secure the eight draft notes currently under discussion.

Allow me to express our appreciation to the
Estonian presidency for convening today’s meeting and
inviting the written participation of other members of
the United Nations. This is unfortunately necessary in
a period where we still need to observe a lot of caution
due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
We thank Ambassador Inga Rhonda King,
Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and Chair of the Security Council’s
informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, Ms. Karin Landgren,
Executive Director of Security Council Report, and
Ms. Loraine Sievers, co-author of the fourth edition of
The Procedure of the UN Security Council, for their
insightful briefings.
When the pandemic struck last year, no one had a
grasp of the journey it would take us on, as we were not
prepared for it. We should commend the Council for its
quick response in formulating the COVID-19-related
working methods to adapt to the situation and ensure
business continuity. It is important that we reflect on
these working methods and formalize those that can
continue to enhance the work of the Council.
Agility has taken up a strong place in our work as
a critical element for the effective functioning of the
Council, particularly during this extraordinary season.
The effects of this pandemic should not affect the value
placed on transparency, accountability, efficiency and
the building of effective bridges between the Council
and other organs and agencies of the United Nations.
Actually, the pandemic has clearly demanded that we
deliberately pause, look back and consider how best
to move forward, ensuring that the work performed
during this period — and the lessons learned — are not
lost to history.
On the contrary, the work of the Council must be
recorded for posterity so that this unprecedented season
can also serve to improve the workings of the Council.
Therefore, as we emerge from the pandemic, we need
to look to the future and agree on working methods that

As we adjusted to the new reality, there was more
scrutiny on how the Council would continue executing
its mandate. This promoted calls for more transparency
from the Council, including through the holding of
more public meetings, wider representation by such
stakeholders as women, civil society and youth, inter
alia, and interaction with the media. This resonates
with the progressively improving working methods,
implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council S/2017/507 and the provisional rules
of procedure.
The Council has been using video-teleconferences
for meetings and consultations with increasing
frequency. One of the benefits of working in a virtual
format is the ability to secure the attendance of briefers
from a wide range of stakeholders from across the
world. Unfortunately, the year 2020 saw a significant
decrease in the number of female rule 39 briefers.
The monthly presidency of the Council has a
particular role to play in contributing to the promotion of
transparency of the Council’s work through engagement
with the wider United Nations membership, the media,
civil society and other stakeholders, which includes
briefings on the programme of work, conducting wrapup sessions and producing monthly assessments. We
also welcome the growing practice of presidencies
making and publicizing monthly commitments on the
implementation of note 507 and the eight related notes
of 2019, and we emphasize their key role in creating and
testing new practices under their presidencies.
This journey has not been devoid of challenges.
However, these challenges have also presented great
opportunities for the Council to seize. One of the
greatest challenges to operational continuity of work

21-154209/17

S/PV.8798

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

16/06/2021

is the technological capacity of the Secretariat and the
political will to ensure that virtual open debates can
include the participation of the wider membership of
United Nations. Written contributions by non-Council
member States are not an appropriate substitution
for their participation in such debates. A progressive
approach would be consideration of holding meetings
that combine in person and virtual participation to
attract a wide spectrum of briefers in choice events.

To help ensure that smooth rollover of E-10
membership, capacity-building should be conducted for
incoming members immediately upon their election.
The envisaged capacity-building would involve chairs
of subsidiary bodies helping incoming members to have
a clearer understanding of what chairing subsidiary
bodies entails. That should also help to demystify
penholdership arrangements and create linkages among
penholders and co-penholders.

The Council greatly benefits from understanding
the physical setting of conflicts, which is why field
visits are of great importance. This important aspect
of the Council’s work has been greatly impeded by
the precautionary travel restrictions necessitated by
COVID-19 in the past year. However, with technological
creativity and advancement, visits may be carried out
virtually as we have already witnessed. We urge that
such virtual visits be conducted only where travel is
not possible and with the same frequency that in-person
visits would have been conducted, so as to allow the
Council to continue being more agile and responsive
and to contribute to its prevention mandate.

In order to promote transparency and the fair and
equitable distribution of work — including current
penholders agreeing to co-penholdership arrangements
with E-10 members who have valuable experience to
contribute — the provisions of note 507 on the selection
of the chairs of subsidiary bodies must be implemented.
In particular, the informal process of consultations
should start with incoming members as soon as
possible after the elections and in conjunction with the
envisaged capacity-building.

At a time when the Council is under increased
scrutiny, we should continue striving for more
transparency, efficiency, effectiveness, democracy,
inclusivity, accountability and balance. The Council
needs to strike a healthy balance between public and
private meetings, both to enhance the transparency and
visibility of its work and to encourage more interactivity
of discussions and consensus-building.
In that regard, for effective participation and in line
with the promotion of multilingualism, the E-10 urges
that efforts be invested in ensuring that interpretation
is provided, including at closed meetings. We also
welcome the current engagement of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions on analysing ways to strengthen
and improve the practice and procedure concerning the
circulation of communications for the consideration of
the Council.
The E-10 views that those ideals would be best
achievable through a more equal distribution of work
among all members of the Council in the spirit of
burden-sharing. We therefore urge that cooperation
be fostered among the outgoing, current and incoming
elected members to help maintain critically needed
continuity.

10/17

The selection process must be carried out in
a transparent manner and ensure that the views of
incoming members are taken into account in the
allocation of roles. The expertise of elected members
should be an additional factor in the process. In that
regard, the consensus proposal by elected members
needs to be respected. To promote efficiency and a
smooth transition, the selection process should be done
in a timely manner to allow incoming members, during
the observation period commencing on 1 October, to
monitor closely and better understand the work of the
subsidiary bodies that they will chair.
Targeted sanctions are an important tool for
addressing threats to international peace and security
and are therefore critical to the execution of the mandate
of the Council. The E-10 underscores the importance
of accountability and transparency in the work of the
sanctions committees. The working methods must align
with international due-process standards.
We strongly believe in the need to increase the
efficiency of United Nations sanctions by strengthening
fair and clear procedures for sanctions regimes,
including by creating review mechanisms similar to
that of the Ombudsperson for the sanctions regime
of the Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/
Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities.

21-15420

16/06/2021

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

In addition, the Council should take into account
the efficacy of sanctions through evolving phases of
conflicts and respond accordingly by periodically
reviewing and suspending, lifting or strengthening
measures, as appropriate.
With respect to the working methods of subsidiary
bodies, including sanctions committees, a transparent,
open and evidence-based methodology needs to be
followed. Any agenda items being introduced for
consideration, as well as holds placed on listing requests
or other matters of the Committees’ business, need to be
supported in writing, with necessary justification by the
requesting member, in order to promote transparency
and accountability and ensure efficient record-keeping.
That would also help maintain the credibility of the
work of the Committees and in turn of the Council.
To satisfy the Council’s efforts to be both agile and
promote transparency and also to prevent conflicts,
we urge continued targeted periodic engagement with
regional organizations. That should not be limited only
to signature events but should also include covering
topical issues that arise, such as the exchange of
experience in regional management of the pandemic.
Engagement with regional organizations also speaks to
the importance of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations in executing the mandate of the Council.
On that note, the E-10 members recall that in the
Council video-teleconference on working methods
held on 15 May 2020 (see S/2020/418), the critical and
urgent need for reforms in the Security Council to
reflect contemporary realities was underscored. While
the Council needs to be more efficient, representative,
transparent, accountable and democratic, it is the only
United Nations organ that has been left behind in
having a truly representative composition. The use, or
threat of use, of the veto also continues to prevent the
Council from acting on vital topics.
We call for restraint on the use of the veto,
especially on actions aimed at preventing or ending
mass atrocity crimes — the very heart of the Security
Council’s mandate. Those imbalances should therefore
be addressed.
Finally, the E-10 reassures you, Sir, of its
commitment to live up to the responsibility bestowed
upon us through election by the States Members of the
United Nations to efficiently and effectively execute
the Council’s mandate and drive forward improvements
in its methods of work.

S/PV. 8798

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
join others in paying tribute to Professor Edward Luck
and Ambassador Kenzo Oshima for their work.
I would first like to thank Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
for their excellent stewardship of the discussions
on improving Council working methods and for
maintaining momentum on this important topic. I also
thank our briefers today for their stimulating ideas and
their reflections.
Like others, the United Kingdom recognizes how far
the Council has adapted to challenging circumstances
in the last year. And I pay tribute to the Security Council
Affairs Division for their role in enabling that. I agree
that there have been some positive developments from
the adoption of virtual working methods.
First, I have been struck by how easily the
technology now allows us to include more diverse voices
from the field — the voices of civil society, women
peacebuilders and young people — as we did during our
presidency of the Council in February. As our fellow 10
elected members of the Council highlighted, we should
continue such practices.
Secondly, the virtual convening of leader-level
debates has brought greater visibility and weight to
issues of international concern, such as the impacts of
climate change on security and fragility.
But we need to be honest with ourselves that there
have been downsides, which have affected the Council’s
capacity to fulfil its mandate, including to face new
challenges. Agility does not mean just being able to
convene; it is also about responsiveness to emerging
issues of concern and our working methods, as we have
heard from others, have inhibited that responsiveness.
Due to objections from a single Council member,
the Council has not held formal meetings via videoteleconference since last March.
That has meant that, without the procedural
mechanisms for the resolution of disagreements, we
have at times not been able to discuss new or existing
agenda items more substantively or to bring visibility
and attention to issues in the open when needed.
Looking forward, we need to build back better. I
call on all of us to work collectively towards three goals
so that the Council can continue to fulfil its mandate in
the face of new challenges.

21-1542011/17

S/PV.8798

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

First, on effectiveness, the Security Council
best fulfils its mandate by solving problems through
interactive debate, critical analysis, challenge, building
consensus and making decisions that move issues
forward. Sometimes that means more talking in private
rather than in public, and sometimes that means
discussing new issues that may be uncomfortable to
some. But it is of overriding importance that we address
risks of conflict before they escalate if the Council is to
remain relevant and effective.
Secondly, on efficiency, we have all tried to make
progress in bearing down on speaking times in the
Council. However, lengthy meetings, using prepared
statements, without moving issues forward, rarely, if
ever, fulfil the Council’s mandate.
Thirdly, on transparency, as we heard many times
this morning, we must remain relevant and connected
with the wider United Nations membership and public.
We must explain ourselves where we can. We therefore
support a return to using press elements regularly to
help transparency and project the voice of the Council
when we agree.
Engaging with a diverse set of briefers is an
important way of staying connected, and we will
continue to promote the participation of civil society in
Council activity.
In conclusion, I welcome the chance to hear from
Council and non-Council members about how else we
can build back better. We have an opportunity to reset
as we return to the Chamber to ensure that we can
credibly fulfil our mandate in the face of twenty-firstcentury challenges. Let us not waste it.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines for her work in leading the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. I would also like to thank Ms. Sievers and
Ms. Landgren for their insights and proposals.
The Security Council has adapted to the health
crisis, but that adaptation has come at a cost: we have
departed from our rules of procedure and undermined
multilingualism, which is a fundamental value of the
Organization. I am therefore pleased that, with the
return to the Chamber, the Council is now holding its
public meetings and consultations in all the official
languages. We must now return to our usual working
methods. That means in particular putting an end to
12/17

16/06/2021

virtual meetings. The return to normality can be only
gradual in the current health context.
France shares the desire to reform the Security
Council and its working methods, which the elected
members just expressed. We are committed to reforming
the Council in order to strengthen its legitimacy and
effectiveness. Furthermore, together with Mexico, we
proposed the voluntary and collective suspension of
the use of the veto in cases of mass atrocities. We are
pleased that the five new members elected last Friday
support that initiative. We call on all other members, in
particular the permanent members, to join it.
We worked with all our partners to ensure a
transparent and predictable selection procedure for
the Secretary-General. We are ready to supplement
the note by the President of the Security Council
S/2017507 to achieve greater efficiency, transparency
and inclusiveness. The proposals of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines will help to move in that direction.
However, our work on consolidation and
clarification must not be at the expense of flexibility.
In particular, the freedom of any State member of the
Council to submit a draft text at any time on any topic
must be preserved. France is not opposed in principle
to the chairing of subsidiary bodies by permanent
members. In fact, we chaired the Working Group
on Children in Armed Conflict for four years. But
assigning subsidiary body chairpersonships to elected
members allows for a regular rotation, which is useful
to prevent blocks and to generate ideas.
We must implement the recommendations already
agreed. France is working on that with all its partners
in the Council. With my colleagues from the European
Union, Estonia and Ireland, we established common
working methods for our Security Council presidencies.
We are also committed to involving the countries
concerned in our initiatives. We raised the issue of
condemning the coup d’état in Mali with the three
African members of the Security Council — the Niger,
South Africa and Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines (A3+1). Yesterday, elements of the
press were adopted at the initiative of the A3+1 and
France on the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of Congo. We are working with the Niger to
ensure that the Security Council supports the countries
of the Sahel in their fight against terrorism, which
results in many civilian victims, as was also recently the
case in Burkina Faso. We continue to work with Tunisia
21-15420

16/06/2021

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

S/PV. 8798

on the implementation of resolution 2532 (2020), on the
coronavirus disease.

that the working methods themselves and any steps to
modify them are the preserve of the Council members.

Apart from our working methods, our priority must
be to ensure the effectiveness of the Council on a daily
basis. We support convening interactive dialogues
and meetings in Arria Formula format. They help to
inform the Council on important issues. However,
such meetings should not add to the work programme
at the expense of the time needed to deal with crises.
Moreover, they must remain informal.

The issue of the Security Council working methods
is very sensitive. Russia has consistently maintained
that any changes in that regard should be aimed at
really improving the effectiveness and efficiency with
which the Council carries out its primary function of
maintaining international peace and security. Resorting
to ill-conceived initiatives that are not tailored to the
specific nature of the Council’s work not only does
not help to achieve results but, on the contrary, is
often counterproductive.

In the same spirit, we must avoid an excess of
public meetings to the detriment of decision-making.
We spend too much time successively presenting
our national positions and too little time working on
compromises and joint actions. Public meetings are
important but they tend to polarize positions. We need
to find a better balance. We are still quite far from that.
We are counting on the chairmanship of the
Informal Working Group and subsequent presidencies
of the Security Council to align our efforts in that
direction. We will strive for that during our presidency
of the Security Council in July.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to thank the briefers,
Ms. Loraine Sievers and Ms. Karin Landgren, for their
comprehensive briefings. We echo the colleagues who
paid tribute to Professor Edward Luck and Ambassador
Kenzo Oshima for their studies of the Security
Council’s working methods. We also thank Ms. Rhonda
King and the entire delegation of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines for their statement, as well as for their
able leadership of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

We welcome the efforts of the delegation of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines to improve the working
methods of the Security Council. We have taken note
of its intention to amend the note by the President of
the Security Council S/2017/507, which is of great
importance as a compendium of Council working
methods and is actively used by non-permanent
members of the Council as an important primary
source. We stand ready to assist the delegation of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines in that painstaking work.
In our view, there should be no undue haste in doing
so. Our efforts in that regard should be coordinated and
focused on achieving consensus.
We note the growing interest in the procedural
aspects of the Security Council’s work on the part of
its non-permanent members. That undoubtedly helps to
develop best practices for the Council’s work.

For several years in a row, the Security Council has
discussed its working methods in an open format, with
the participation of a broad representation of States
Members of the United Nations. We note that for the
second year running this debate has been held under the
Estonian presidency.

The year 2020 has been difficult for all humankind.
The world has had to face a new and previously unknown
challenge — the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. The ensuing sanitary and epidemiological
restrictions necessarily impacted the work of the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council. However,
despite the difficulties, the Security Council was able
to prove its ability to adapt quickly and in a timely
manner to the new situation. Temporary extraordinary
measures were developed to ensure the uninterrupted
continuation of its work. We strictly adhered to that
modus operandi in the months that followed.

We support the importance of enhancing
coordination between the Security Council and the
wider membership. We trust that today’s debate, as
well as the external assessment of the current state of
affairs itself, will make a particular contribution to the
activities of the Working Group and also help to provide
it with new ideas, on the understanding, of course,

As the situation in New York changed and the
phases of reopening began, Russia advocated a swift
return of Council members to the Chamber, subject to
the necessary precautions. To that end, we supported the
holding of the first in-person meetings of the Security
Council in the Economic and Social Council Chamber
during the presidency of Germany last July. That same

21-1542013/17

S/PV.8798

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

principle also guided our own presidency of the Council
in October 2020, which was successfully carried out
with the use of the newly installed plexiglass partitions
in the Chamber.
The COVID-19 pandemic provided us with an
excellent opportunity to assess the important role of the
Council’s face-to-face discussions of the international
agenda. It has become clear that no alternative working
methods can replace face-to-face interactions among
Council members. I think all representatives will agree
with me in that regard.
We are pleased to note the Council’s gradual return
to normal work in the Chamber. We are of the view that
the video-teleconference (VTC) format used throughout
2020 and in part in 2021 worked only on a temporary
basis and under extraordinary circumstances. As
agreed when it was introduced, meetings held in the
VTC format cannot be considered formal meetings of
the Security Council procedurally, legally or logically.
Accordingly, we see no need to institutionalize those
temporary measures. In the event of a recurrence of a
crisis similar to that of last year, we have experience and
a solution, which is set out in the letters of the President
of the Security Council, to which we can always return.
We do not deny that VTC meetings have their
advantages and we can continue to use them to
convene informal meetings. In particular, they help
to significantly expand the circle of those who can
provide the Council with important information for
decision-making. I am referring to mechanisms in the
Council’s toolkit, such as the interactive dialogues and
informal Arria Formula meetings. We are convinced
that those formats should be used only to enhance the
awareness of Security Council members about issues
on the Council’s agenda. At the same time, we do not
support any hybrid formats, which risk introducing
unpredictable and serious legal consequences for the
Security Council and the United Nations as a whole.
We continue to draw attention to the Council’s
excessive documentation workload. Every year the
Security Council produces several hundred documents.
The added value of some of them is, unfortunately,
questionable.
The
often
observed
excessive
micromanaging of resolutions is not helpful either. We
are convinced that the final products of the Security
Council should be concise, clear, easy to understand
and, most importantly, action-oriented.
14/17

16/06/2021

In recent years, the practice of considering thematic
subjects in the Council has become more frequent,
especially those that, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, fall under the competence of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and
other organs of our global Organization. That violates
the well-established division of labour and distracts
the Security Council from addressing its priorities, on
which it can and should take concrete decisions.
In the context of an even distribution of
responsibilities in the Security Council, the question
of penholdership deserves particular attention. We
have consistently advocated expanding the circle
of penholders, first and foremost to non-permanent
members. In that regard, we are guided by presidential
note 507, which states that any member of the Security
Council may be a penholder and more than one Council
member may act as co-penholder. Individual members
of the Council should not consider certain countries or
even regions as their fiefdoms or act as their mentors
on particular issues. We are ready for constructive
interaction with Council members on that question.
We would also like to recall once again the
inadmissibility of the practice of introducing artificial
deadlines into the Council’s work. It is no secret that
the dates for the adoption of most Security Council
resolutions are already known at the stage when the
Council decides on its programme of work for the
month. Nevertheless, many drafts continue to be
received late without justification, which does not
allow for a comprehensive expert assessment, let alone
meaningful consultations.
One sometimes has the feeling that the penholders
do that deliberately, believing that in their haste their
colleagues may simply not notice problematic points in
the texts. The wording of Security Council resolutions
is sometimes changed a few minutes before the vote.
The resulting output consists of half-baked products
that do not address the concerns of Council members
and provide unclear instructions to the Secretariat.
All that is unacceptable. We will continue to fight
against such tactical tricks. We do not rule out the
possibility that in the end we will be forced to evaluate
the effectiveness of penholders’ work according to
those parameters.
The issue of Council visits was also raised. We
support the resumption of that useful practice. Visits
help Council members not only to be heard but also
21-15420

16/06/2021

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

S/PV. 8798

to form their own impressions of what is happening
on the ground and to engage with key stakeholders in
any given situation on the Council’s agenda. That is
important to all of us without exception.

the Security Council ensured that it could renew
peacekeeping mandates and sanctions resolutions and
could respond to the crises of the day, in particular the
COVID-19 pandemic itself.

At the same time, we must also understand that the
lack of representation of certain States during those
visits could be construed as a political signal. That is
why I believe that it would be optimal for missions to
include all members. With regard to virtual and hybrid
visits, they hardly allow us to achieve the goals that we
set for such visits.

The Security Council was also able to convene
virtually through the video-teleconference (VTC)
system. Through the utilization of VTC technologies,
the world was able to see that the Security Council
continued to receive briefings, engage in debates and
perform its role in maintaining international peace
and security.

In conclusion, as the issue of the right of the veto
was raised today, I would like to underscore that it does
not pertain to Security Council working methods but
rather is the cornerstone of the entire architecture of
the Security Council and key to achieving balance in
Council decisions and ensuring that they have a good
chance of being implemented as effectively as possible.

Nonetheless, the United States is concerned that
these virtual discussions have not had the status of
actual meetings of the Security Council. And because
they are not actual meetings of the Security Council, the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure do not apply
to them. Thus, due to the objections of one Council
member as the pandemic began, for well over a year
the Security Council has not been regularly functioning
pursuant to its provisional rules of procedure and has
not been holding “meetings”. So, for almost a year and
a half, the Council has effectively been unable to take
any votes whatsoever on procedural decisions, even
when the vast majority of Council members may have
supported the decision in question.

Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank you, Mr. President, for paying tribute to Professor
Edward Luck and Ambassador Kenzo Oshima. Both
made unique contributions to the United Nations. I
personally knew Ed for many years and had the great
honour to sit with him on panels about the work of the
Security Council — mostly in front of students — where
Ed would gently but firmly correct my interpretation of
procedural matters. And he was always right.
I would like to thank the briefers for their thoughtful
interventions. We are grateful to Ambassador King
for her leadership in shepherding productive and
pragmatic discussions in the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and other Procedural Matters.
Many thanks go to Lorraine Sievers for her insightful
presentation. She literally wrote the book on Security
Council procedure and we at the United States
Mission frequently consult her authoritative treatise.
It is lovely to see her again. We appreciate Karin
Landgren’s thoughtful briefing, as well as the work
that she and her team undertake to provide the Security
Council community with the informative Security
Council Report.
The Security Council persevered during the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, adapting
innovative methods of maintaining continuity so that
it could fulfil its vital functions. Most significantly,
the Security Council adopted and implemented a
written correspondence process for the adoption
of its resolutions. Through that essential measure,

In rules 2 and 3, the fundamental rules requiring
the President of the Council to call a meeting of the
Council, have been eroded over the past year and a half.
This state of affairs is not acceptable and we think that
the Security Council members should address it, even
after this horrible pandemic is behind us, so that we can
be on a sound legal and procedural footing in the event
that the Security Council is unable to meet in person
again in future.
After all, the General Assembly was able to adopt
a contingency decision (General Assembly decision
75/520) to enable it to vote electronically on resolutions
in the event that it is unable to hold in-person meetings.
The Security Council should be able to adopt a
procedural decision establishing that virtual meetings
are indeed meetings of the Security Council, and that
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure apply
to them.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
profound gratitude to the Secretariat, in particular the
Security Council Affairs Division, the United Nations
interpreters and the United Nations Technical Support
Team, for their hard work throughout the pandemic.

21-1542015/17

S/PV.8798

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

16/06/2021

Their tireless and crucial efforts behind the scenes
enabled the Council to continue to function — and
for that the international community owes them a debt
of thanks.

first responsibility for monitoring the results lies
with the members of the Council, but external
observers should not take their eye off the ball in
this consolidation phase.” (S/2020/418, annex 3)

The President: I now give the floor to Ambassador
King to respond to comments and questions raised.

In that context, I reiterate that we do welcome
the written statements to be submitted by the wider
membership. We will miss Professor Luck’s engagement
and his wisdom, but his legacy will undoubtedly live
on. May he rest in eternal peace.

Ms. King: I am grateful for the opportunity to add
a few comments.
First, I would like to thank Ms. Sievers and
Ms. Landgren for their insightful reflections, which
will no doubt inspire our working methods deliberations
within Committee. I also thank my colleagues for their
critical observations during this debate. It is clear that
we are all committed to the optimal functioning of the
Security Council.
It is worth repeating that the flagship open debate
remains a critical opportunity for the Security Council
to engage with the wider membership of the United
Nations. Over the past year, the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has challenged the quality of
that engagement. However, the Council’s resilience did
not falter. As such, the Council was able to creatively
adapt its working methods to maintain — and in some
cases enhance — that engagement.
While we were not able to convene this open debate in
the usual format, with the wider membership physically
with us, the presidency’s willingness to facilitate the
Security Council’s presence in the Chamber is indeed
laudable. It is our hope that the next open debate on
working methods will be convened with the Council
and the wider membership assembled jointly in the
Chamber to continue these important discussions.
Until then, I look forward to reading the membership’s
written interventions geared towards strengthening the
working methods of the Security Council.
I conclude by recalling the words of the late
Professor Edward C. Luck during his last briefing to
this organ in May 2020 (see S/2020/418), in which
he reminded the Council — and as the Chair stated
earlier — that “the ultimate test will be how fully and
faithfully those measures are implemented.” He went
on to say:
“As we have seen with different elements of the
507 process, putting agreed words into practice
has not always been easy or quick. Some of the
phrasing sounds ambiguous, imprecise or open to
interpretation — in other words, diplomatic. The
16/17

The President: I thank Ms. King for the
clarifications she has provided.
I now give the floor to Ms. Sievers to respond to
comments and questions raised.
Ms. Sievers: I wish to echo Ambassador King’s
statement about how important these annual working
methods open debates are. I think that this time,
in particular, having been through such unusual
conditions over the past year, there have been a number
of statements that indicate a very fresh look at how the
Security Council has been conducting its work. I think
we are all convinced that it is not going to be a return to
business as usual from now on.
One of the things that struck me in today’s
comments is that the role of the President has been seen
as critical during the pandemic interim period. In that
connection, there were some interesting suggestions
on how the role of the President can continue to be
strengthen, not only individually, but in cooperation
with other presidencies.
I also wish to pay tribute to the work of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. At this point, with the combined
operative paragraphs of S/2017/507 and the eight
presidential notes that were adopted at the end of 2019,
there are 154 paragraphs that need careful attention.
This represents a great deal of work and is expensive. At
the same time, the Informal Working Group is trying to
make progress. I think we can all admit, to some extent,
that the low-hanging fruit has been picked and the more
difficult issues are now before the Group.
I also want to express my gratitude for the kind
words offered in relation to my briefing and my book,
The Procedure of the UN Security Council.
The President: I thank Ms. Sievers for the
clarifications she has provided.
21-15420

16/06/2021

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren to respond to
comments and questions raised.
Ms. Landgren: Let me add my sentiments to the
many expressed about the sad passing of Ambassador
Oshima, with whom I briefed the Security Council
last year.
It was very encouraging to hear the many
references to the need to constantly optimize working
methods as an ongoing, rather than periodic, process.
One speaker talked of formalizing working methods
that can withstand pandemics. Many speakers pointed
to the value of both engaging with others and keeping
others informed of what the Council is doing — other
Member States, of course, but also the public at large.
We heard several recommendations to that effect. If I
could add one, it may be worth recalling the option that
the Council has to meet outside New York. If this is the
moment to underline the importance of multilateralism
and the role the Council plays or to focus on a particular
region, country or regional organizations, we might
recall that the Council has done this in the past — in

S/PV. 8798

Addis Ababa, Panama, Geneva and Nairobi — but not
since 2004. Since we have alluded to a number of past
useful working methods, this might be one to add to
that list and review.
The President: I thank Ms. Landgren for the
clarifications she has provided.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
Before concluding, I would like to thank once again
all of the participants who joined us today. I would also
like to thank the following Member States, which have
so far submitted written statements on the subject of
today’s discussion: Argentina, Austria, Brazil, Chile,
Cyprus, El Salvador, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Italy, Japan, Kuwait and Singapore. We look forward to
receiving more. Statements that are received by the end
of today will form part of the compilation of statements
from this meeting.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

21-1542017/17
