X
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORT OF THE JOINT SECOND
AND THIRD COMMITIEE AND THE FIFTH COMMITIEE,
MEETING JOINTLY
tions already constitutes a very complex problem,
which would be further aggravated by a too rapid
growth of those activities,

309 (IV). Action taken in pursuance
of the agreements between the
United Nations and the specialized
agencies

Considering the desirability of concentrating the
limited technical, administrative and financial resources of Member States for the effective implementation of projects already approved or under
consideration, which cover a wide variety of
fields, and of limiting new initiatives, in so far
as possible, to those which are of an urgent nature
or deemed necessary to achieve the objectives of
plans already initiated,

The General Assembly,
N oi,ng the report 1 on action taken in pursuance of the agreements between the United
Nations and the specialized agencies, transmitted
to it by the Economic and Social Council in
response to the instruction given by the General
Assembly in its resolution 50 (I) 2 of 14 December 1946,
Noting the recommendations made by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 259
(IX) C of 9 August 1949, 3
Decides to take no measures at this session for
revision of the agreements with the specialized
agencies and requests the Economic and Social
Council to submit a report on this subject to the
next session of the General Assembly.
255th plenary meeting,
24 November 1949.

Resolves therefore
1. To urge Member States to refrain from
initiating new projects other than those which
are urgently required and which can be effectively
carried out ;

2. To draw the attention of the competent
organs of the United Nations and of the specialized agencies to the recommendations contained
in the annex to resolution 259 (IX) 4 of the Economic and Social Council of 9 August 1949, with
special attention to paragraph 2 of section I
relating to a greater concentration of effort and
available resources;

310 (IV). Problem of the proliferation and overlapping of the programmes of the United Nations and
of the specialized agencies

3. To request the Secretary-General, through
the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to
assist the Economic and Social Council in the
discharge of its responsibility in this regard by
putting before it any relevant recommendations ;

The General Assembly,
Considering that the proliferation of acttv1ttes
and the multiplicity of projects and programmes
may impair the effectiveness of the United Nations
and the specialized agencies, impeding the necessary concentration on projects and programmes
of primary importance,
Considering, further, that the resulting excessive number of sessions and meetings, as well as
the creation of subsidiary organs, is placing a
severe burden on the technical and personnel resources of Member States, rendering difficult an
adequate participation and representation of their
Governments in international work,
Noting with concern that the majority of Member States are encountering increasing difficulties
in meeting the contributions and other indirect
expenses incidental to their membership in the
various international organizations,
Bearing in mind that the co-ordination of the
increasing activities of the international organiza-

4. To request the Secretary-General to supplement the Catalogue of Economic and Social
Projects with such information on costs and duration of · projects described therein as may be
available;
5. To request the Economic and Social Council
to review the Catalogue referred to above in terms
of categories of priorities and to report thereon
to the fifth regular session of the General Assembly;
6. To commend the Economic and Social
Council for the initial action it has taken looking
towards the termination, absorption and integration of certain inter-governmental organizations
and the establishment of relationships between
other such organizations and the United Nations
or the specialized agencies, and to urge the Members of the United Nations concerned to take such
action as may be necessary to give effect to the
recommendations of the Council ; and further
3
See Official Records of the Economic and Social
Council, Fourth Year, Ninth Session, Resolutions,
page 67.
• Ibid., page 68.

1 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fourth Year, Ninth Session, Supplement No. 17.
2 See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
during the second part of its first session, page 78.

29

7. To request the Council to pursue its work
on this matter with a view to simplifying the
structure of the inter-governmental organizations
and reducing the over-all cost of participation
therein.
255th plenary meeting,
24 Novem/,er 1949.

the standards of conference services, in order to
achieve a maximum oi economy and efficiency;
7. Urges the specialized agencies not already
participating in the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Scheme to take the necessary steps to
this encl; and to adhere to the ioint system of
external audit approved by a majority 'of th~
specialized agencies through the Administrative
Committee on Co-ordination ;
8. Requests the specialized agencies to supply
the Secretarv-General of the United Nations with
appropriate 'information concerning total assessments under the 1950 budgets by 1 December
1949 in order that complete information may be
sent to all Governments by the beginning of the
new fiscal year.
255th plenary meeting,
24 N ovembcr 1949.

311 (IV). Budgets of the specialized
agencies for 1950
A
The General Assembly,
Having reviewed the sixth report 6 of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Uud~etary
Questions on the budgets of the specialized
agencies for 1950,
1. Requests the several specialized agencies and
the several organs of the United .l\"ations to give
continued attention to the relative urgency and
productivity of each of their projects, with a view
to obtaining the best results from the lmdget
expenditures of the Cnited Nations,_ the International Labour Organisation, the Umted Nat10ns
Educational, Scientitic and Cultural Organization,
the Food and Agriculture Organization, the lnternational Civil Aviation Organization, the \Vorld
Health Organization, the International Refugee
Organization, the International Telecommunication Union and the Universal Postal Union;
2. Requests the specialized agencies ·and the
United l\ ations to give continuing attention to a
reduction in the total number of meetings and to
strive towards a balanced over-all meeting calendar to facilitate programme and budgetary coordination ;

I3
The (;cneral Assembly,
Believing that there is room for closer relationship between the assessments of Member States in
the contributions both of the United Nations and
oi the specialized agencies,
1. Recogni:::es that, to the extent that the contributions of members of the specialized agencies
are assessed in accordance with principles similar
to those on which the contributions of Members
of the United Nations are based, it is desirable
that the same data should be utilized for the
assessment of those contributions;
2. Autlzori::;es the Committee on Contributions
to recommend or advise on the scale of contributions for a specialized agency if requested by that
agency to <lo so;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to inform
each agency that thl' Cu11m1ittce is available to
Jll'rform this service.
255th plenary meeting,
24 November 19"19.

3. Draws the attention of Member States of
the United ~ations and of the specialized agencies
to the necessity for prompt payment of contributions to assure the adequate financing of liudgeb
approved by them ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General and the
heads of the specialize<l agencies to review the
arrangements of the agencies as to their rcsen-e
funds, including the adequacy of the existing
funds and simplicity of arrangements, and the
purposes and conditions for the use of these
funds; and to study methods for maximum utilization of soft currencies for the financing of
expenditures ;

C
f11e c;cHcral ,·/ sst'111/J/_\',

I I az•ing l'xa111i11ed the administrati\·e budgets of
the specialized agencies in accordance with Article
17, paragraph 3 of the Charter,
I. N ates with concern that, since some c011
trilmtions are in arrears, the expenditure o[ certain agencies considcralily exceeds the funds rea
sonably expected to be received cluring the year,

5. Requests the Secretary-Ceneral of the United
Nations and the heads ni the specialized agencies
to intensify their efforts to achieve a com111on
form of budget, giving particular attention to
common definitions of administrative and operational expenses, to the quality of budget justification and to methods for showing e,timates of
reimbursement for services rendered;

2. Rcco111mcnds to each specialized agency t!Mt
it keep its expenditure each year irom its regttlar
budget within the amount oi funds reasonabl_v
expected to be received in respect oi that year.
and that the programme of expenditure be reviewed periodically during the year so that, if
necessary, it can be adjusted to keep it, as far as
possible, within the limits of the anticipated annual
receipts;
3. Requests that this recommendation be brought
to the attention oi the next meeting of the gcl\·erning body and of the assembly oi each speci;tl ized agency.
:}55th {'lcnary mecti11;1.
24 November 1049_

6. Requests the Secretary-General of the Unite<l
Nations and the heads of the specialized agencies
to continue further their studies of the organization of administrative and financial services and
5
See Official Records of the fourth session of the General Assembly, Annex to the Joint Srcond and Third
Committee, document A/1005.

30
