A /70/PV.110

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

110th plenary meeting

Friday, 1 July 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/70/674,
A/70/826 and A/70/826/Corr.1)
Draft resolution (A/70/L.55)
The President: As announced in my letter
circulated to Member States this morning, we shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/70/L.55.
I give the floor to the representative of Israel, who
wishes to speak in explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. Roet (Israel): First, I would like to thank you,
Sir, your dedicated staff and the co-facilitators, and
express our appreciation for the hard work invested in
draft resolution A/70/L.55.
While we were consulting and discussing the draft
resolution in New York, in my country, Israel, there
have been three horrendous terror attacks in the past
two days. In one of them, a terrorist stabbed to death
a 13-year-old girl while she was sleeping in her bed. In
an another attack this morning, a father of 10 was shot
to death in front of his family. While we are discussing
national and political strategies in the halls of the
United Nations, in real life citizens in my country are
brutally killed day after day.
Let me therefore assure you, Sir, that we take this
matter very seriously and attach great importance to it.
Israel understands the enormous efforts that have been

16-20726 (E)

invested in this process and in our negotiations with
regard to the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy over the past few weeks. We participated in all
discussions and understand and are well aware of the
extremely difficult negotiations that went on. Indeed,
much is at stake for each and every delegation here.
Each delegation has its own priorities, and during the
past few days we have moved from one country’s redline priority to another’s. In fact, as a result of all the
red lines respected, the proposed package text is now
significantly and extremely watered down. Many of the
crucial issues that we needed and desired to address in
the draft resolution were left on the cutting floor and
omitted from the package text.
In an effort to receive everyone’s agreement,
language that was controversial was removed. It seems
that all of the Member States’ red lines were respected,
except for one — the red line of my delegation. My
delegation, together with a significant number of others,
was very clear from the very beginning that we must
not single out one specific situation. If we all intend to
keep a general and generic draft resolution, then this
has to be applied across all of its paragraphs and all of
its parts. We cannot allow this to be the general rule yet
that solely in one case it will not be respected.
The attempts to single out my delegation were
as clear and blunt as I have ever witnessed in the
Hall. From the very beginning of and throughout the
negotiations, there was a clear refusal to cooperate or
negotiate on the part of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, in blunt contradiction to the spirit of the
Organization, with the single intention of achieving

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1620726*

A/70/PV.110

nothing but narrow political purposes that serve to
delegitimize my country.
I would like to reiterate again that Israel cares very
much about the draft resolution. Having stood at the
forefront of terror on a daily basis for over 68 years, we
know what terror is and how important it is to counter
it. I am aware that for many in the Hall, it has become
normal for a certain group of countries to constantly
insist on attacking my country at every opportunity,
regardless of the issue or its importance. Too many of
us have become so accustomed to the demand to satisfy
every whim of one observer that, instead of putting the
blame on those who pollute every discussion and every
draft resolution with demands for language that should
be dealt with in other forums, some choose instead to
blame Israel for not allowing itself to be singled out.
Let me be clear. The Palestinian-Israeli conflict
is dealt with at the United Nations in many forums.
A few hours ago, the Quartet came out with its report
(S/2016,595, annex). Yesterday, a discussion on the issue
was held in the Security Council and another is planned
in two weeks’ time. The issue at hand, therefore, is not
a country’s sympathy for the Palestinian people or one’s
view on how to reach a peaceful resolution to the conflict
that we all desperately aspire to, but the insistence by a
certain group to make every meeting, every negotiation
and every event into a mini-meeting of the Security
Council and an anti-Israel matter. Unfortunately, there
are many conflicts around the world that need to be
resolved, but only on one conflict does a group of
countries insist on constantly obstructing discussion,
contaminating dialogue and wasting the valuable time
of all of us.
Much is at stake for each and every delegation here,
including mine, and for the international community as
a whole. For Israel, countering terror is all too real and a
daily reality, and we are unfortunately too familiar with
it and its related phenomena. Israel fights and counters
terror shoulder to shoulder with many of the States in
this Hall and assists in many regions throughout the
world with trainings and the sharing of expertise. We
attach great importance to this topic, and Israel will
continue to be an integral part of the counter-terror
efforts at the United Nations. We will continue to work
closely with our partners in this Hall.
Out of respect for the issue at hand, for the
facilitators’ work, for our many colleagues who have
worked so hard and for the efforts of the President of the
2/28

01/07/2016

General Assembly and his staff, we have decided not
to call for a recorded vote. However, Israel would like
to disassociate itself from the thirty-third preambular
paragraph of the draft resolution, which states,
“Reaffirming Member States’ determination to
continue to do all they can to resolve conflict, end
foreign occupation, confront oppression, eradicate
poverty, promote sustained economic growth,
sustainable development, global prosperity, good
governance, human rights for all and the rule of
law, improve intercultural understanding and
ensure respect for all religions, religious values,
beliefs and cultures”.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position before action is taken on draft
resolution A/70/L.55.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/70/L.55, entitled “The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review”. May I
take it that the Assembly decides to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/70/L.55 was adopted (resolution
70/291).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My country, Pakistan, has
made huge sacrifices in the fight against terrorism —
sacrifices that must be valued by fully committing
ourselves to defeating this scourge. This commitment
has been reflected in the constructive spirit with which
my delegation engaged in the review process. It is also
the reason why we joined the consensus on resolution
70/291. For us, it was important to send a strong and
united message against the scourge of terrorism on the
tenth anniversary of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
Despite differences of view, we have been able
to reinforce our collective commitment to addressing
the conditions conducive to terrorism and all drivers
of violent extremism in a balanced manner. For us,
this approach rests on promoting a culture of peace
at all levels, as reflected in the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace, adopted
consensually by Member States at the fifty-third
session of the General Assembly. This consensus
included, inter alia, resolution of conflicts, the full
realization of the right to self-determination enshrined
16-20726

01/07/2016

in the Charter of the United Nations, the elimination
all forms of discrimination, including xenophobia, and
discouraging and deterring unilateral measures that
violate the United Nations Charter.
The linkage to this consensual document and the
resolution adopted today will guide our way forward
to the preventive approach to terrorism and violent
extremism. Also helpful in this regard was the joint
determination of Member States, now reflected in
resolution 70/291, to address some of the most pervasive
root causes of terrorism and violent extremism,
including the resolution of conflicts, both protracted
and new, ending foreign occupation, confronting
oppression, promoting the rule of law and ensuring
respect for all religions, religious values, beliefs and
cultures.
The resolution stresses that when counterterrorism efforts neglect the rule of law at the national
and international levels and violate international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations, and
fundamental freedoms, they not only betray the values
they seek to uphold, but they can also fuel violent
extremism. In this regard, the Secretary-General, in
his remarks yesterday, also said, “When we fail to
uphold the values that unite us, we end up feeding the
grievances that can lead to terrorism” (A/70/PV.108,
p.8).
Pakistan has repeatedly emphasized this aspect in
the context of the use of drone strikes that violate the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of States, seriously
undermining the fundamental rights of innocent victims
and further fuelling terrorism and violent extremism.
We strongly condemn these unlawful measures and
demand their immediate cessation. The continuation of
these drone strikes reflects a blatant disregard for our
unequivocal and existing commitments on the use of
remotely piloted aircraft, as set forth in the resolution on
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
With that in view, Pakistan proposed several
paragraphs to strengthen the resolution regarding
the legality and humanitarian aspect of the use of
drones. We thank the large number of delegations that
supported these proposals. It is unfortunate, however,
that we were not able to make the desired progress
in the resolution adopted. In the spirit of maintaining
consensus, my delegation agreed to noting the report
of the Special Rapporteur on protecting human rights
and fundamental freedoms, while countering terrorism

A/70/PV.110

on the use of drones, including its conclusions and
recommendations. We believe that this is an important
first step towards addressing the legal questions related
to the use of drones, the consequent violation of the
fundamental rights of victims and lack of respect for
the principles of distinction and proportionality in their
use.
Pakistan welcomes the significant progress made
in strengthening most areas of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, including measures against
foreign terrorist fighters and the counter-financing of
terrorism, strengthening the role of youth, women and
civil society, emphasis on education, a robust criminal
justice system, preventing access to illegal arms and
weapons, countering terrorist narratives and a renewed
focus on capacity-building and assistance to Member
States upon their request by the United Nations system.
We are therefore satisfied that we have been able to
preserve these important developments by maintaining
consensus on the resolution.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position.
I would like to congratulate everyone on the
adoption of resolution 70/291 and to thank all Member
States for their constructive engagement throughout
this important process. Of course, I would also like
to congratulate the Permanent Representative of
Argentina, His Excellency Mr. Martín Garcia Moritán,
and the Permanent Representative of Iceland, His
Excellency Mr. Einar Gunnarsson, for their commitment
and leadership during the negotiations.
Today’s message by the General Assembly is
indeed a strong indication of our collective commitment
to enhancing cooperation to prevent and combat
terrorism. Today, we have a sent a message to the world
that the pain, suffering and destruction being caused by
terrorism is not just a major concern for all of us, but
a matter that we are addressing as a matter of priority.
We shall now continue with the remaining speakers
on the list for this agenda item.
Mr. Ávila (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): It is an honour to speak on behalf of the
members of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States (CELAC). In order to respect the time
limit allotted to us, we will deliver a condensed version
of our statement, and make the full and final version
available to all present.

16-207263/28

A/70/PV.110

Let me start by thanking Their Excellencies
Ambassador
Einar
Gunnarsson,
Permanent
Representative of Iceland, and Ambassador Martin
Garcia Moritán, Permanent Representative of
Argentina, and their teams for the dedication and skill
with which they led the fifth review process.
The adoption of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy by the General Assembly
in 2006 marked a significant advance in the fight
against terrorism because Member States recognized
the concerns expressed by the Secretary-General
in the Plan of Action outlining his approach to the
fight against global terrorism beyond policing and
security aspects. Ten years later, CELAC reaffirms
its commitment to the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy as the most effective way to end the
threat of terrorism while ensuring full respect for the
rule of law and respect for human rights. The terrible
attacks perpetrated in Turkey this week make it even
more important to recommit to the Strategy and its full
and effective implementation.
In that regard, CELAC takes note of the report of
the Secretary-General (A/70/826) on the activities of
the United Nations system in implementing the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. CELAC
shares the concern expressed by the Secretary-General
in his report with regard to the spread of violent
extremism, and accordingly recognizes the need to
pay greater attention to the issue of terrorist groups
using social media to communicate. The Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States acknowledges
the important role played by civil society in the fight
against terrorism and the need to fully respect the
rights of freedom of expression and association. In that
regard, we encourage Member States to prevent the
abuse by and for terrorists of non-governmental, notfor-profit and charitable organizations.
The Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States emphasizes that only those measures taken in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
other relevant international norms can be successful and
enjoy the broad support of the international community.
In that respect, CELAC recalls resolution 70/148 on the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism, adopted by consensus on
17 December 2015. Our community vigorously rejects
the use of information and communication technologies
in violation of international law and directed against any
Member State, and stresses the importance of ensuring
4/28

01/07/2016

that the use of such technologies be fully compatible
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, in particular
with regard to sovereignty, non-interference in internal
affairs, the right to privacy and the internationally
recognized norms pertaining to peaceful coexistence
among States.
In the context of the fight against global terrorism,
the countries of CELAC reiterate their commitment to
intensifying international efforts aimed at safeguarding
cyberspace and promoting its exclusive use for peaceful
purposes. On a similar note, the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States also rejects the
unilateral establishment of blacklists of States that
allegedly support and sponsor terrorism. Regarding
the establishment of the sanctions regime against
Al-Qaida and Da’esh by the Security Council as a
means of fighting terrorism, our countries recognize
the measures taken by the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, which is aimed at
achieving more effective, inclusive and participatory
working methods, and clear and transparent procedures.
In that regard, CELAC strongly supports the role of the
Ombudsperson, which has significantly improved the
fairness and transparency of the exclusion process.
CELAC strongly condemns the recruitment and
use of children to carry out terrorist attacks, as well
as violations and abuses committed by terrorist groups
against children, and notes that such violations may
constitute war crimes or crimes against humanity.
The Community of Latin American and the Caribbean
States also stresses that the proliferation of the illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, among
other phenomena, can also fuel terrorism.
CELAC also wishes to acknowledge the important
work carried out by regional and subregional
organizations in the implementation of the Strategy. In
that regard, we urge the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime to carry out capacity-building activities
in our region and to continue providing technical
assistance, upon request, and taking into account
the individual needs and national priorities of our
countries. In order to improve the international legal
counter-terrorism framework, our group of countries
is convinced that a comprehensive convention against
international terrorism is necessary. CELAC therefore
16-20726

01/07/2016

calls on Member States at the seventy-first session to
again address the outstanding issues that have impeded
the achivement of that essential agreement.
Lastly, the members of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States reaffirm their
profound solidarity with the victims of terrorist acts
and emphasize the need to provide them with all
necessary support. CELAC also reiterates the need to
prevent impunity for those who commit terrorist acts,
with a view to providing justice to the victims and
their families. In that regard, we call on Member States
to cooperate fully in the fight against terrorism, in
accordance with international law.
Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): Allow me to thank you,
Sir, for overseeing the process of the fifth review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
with your characteristic patience, good humour and
firmness of purpose. I would also like to pay tribute
to the Secretary-General for his strong leadership in
bringing us to focus on countering violent extremism.
It has been my great honour and that of my
colleague and friend Ambassador Garcia Moritán to
have conducted the facilitation of resolution 70/291 on
the review of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy on
your behalf, with the added and very important task
of discussing and taking into account the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674). I would like to extend my heartfelt thanks
to all delegations for the professional, friendly and
constructive manner in which negotiations have been
conducted. Allow me to say that those representatives
were extremely able and tough in defending their
national positions. They gave nothing away for free,
except for the very constructive and friendly spirit that
allowed us to reach a consensus. Allow me also to also
thank the Secretary-General’s excellent team and the
Secretariat for their highly professional and skilful
support throughout our work.
Vicious terrorist attacks demonstrate with
devastating regularity the scale and urgency of our task.
From the highly organized mass murder in Istanbul to
the recent brutal murder of an Israeli child in her bed,
we are faced with a vortex of hatred fuelled by violent
extremism and equipped with an arsenal of modern
weapons and techniques. Africa and the Middle East
bear the brunt of terrorism and its destabilizing and
corrosive effects on the lives of millions of individuals
and whole communities, but there is virtually no

A/70/PV.110

country left untouched. Our citizens all share a common
experience as victims or potential victims of terrorism,
and it is our common responsibility as Governments
and human beings to address these issues together.
All our societies potentially harbour individuals
who instigate and nurture ideologies that can be turned
into a justification for violence and terrorism. We do
not have to look far from this Hall to see regular events
of mass murder fuelled by a wide variety of warped
doctrines. Our challenge is to root out the complex webs
of tacit or active support, sympathy and encouragement,
which are often hard to identify.
The level of sophistication available through new
technologies presents us with new challenges and
demands of us a united and sophisticated response to
terrorism and the drivers of terrorism. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (s/2016/627) on the threat posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) paints
a frightening picture of the sophistication of ISIL and
other similar movements in manipulating young people
through the use of visual and social media. The report
makes the point that the journey of each individual
fighter into terrorist activity involves a unique
combination of factors. There is no simple approach to
identifying potential terrorists, much less a silver bullet
to stop them from being radicalized and recruited in the
first place.
It is therefore absolutely vital that the United Nations
demonstrate a singleness of purpose. Iceland believes
that the resolution adopted today is a step towards
improving coordination within the United Nations
of how we address terrorism and violent extremism.
But there will be more work to do, particularly on
architecture. We need to be honest about identifying the
internal and external drivers of violent extremism and
terrorism. This includes ensuring that all measures are
in line with international human rights instruments. As
has already been highlighted, Sustainable Development
Goal 16 has a major role to play in addressing the drivers
of terrorism. If we do not do that work, then we will be
fighting with one hand tied behind our back.
Mr. García-Larrache (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement delivered this
morning by the representative of the European Union
(see A/70/PV.109). We thank the Ambassadors of
Argentina and Iceland and their respective teams for
their efforts to reach an acceptable resolution.

16-207265/28

A/70/PV.110

On the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
it is important to recall the message conveyed by
the Secretary-General yesterday at the beginning
of the debate. We must work together with strong
determination to defeat terrorism, without interference
from specific political agendas. Only in that way will
the Global Strategy be a truly effective instrument.
Resolution 70/291, adopted today, contains
positive elements that have been duly spelled out by
the European Union. They include the identification
of a phenomenon that has emerged as one of the main
threats to international peace and security — foreign
terrorist combatants. The General Assembly’s inclusion
of some elements of Security Council resolution 1267
(1999) is a positive development, as are the paragraphs
devoted to highlighting the essential role of women in
the fight against terrorism and the role of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and especially
those that address law enforcement and criminal
justice. Only through the law in its entirety, with full
respect for the rule of law and human rights, can we
defeat terrorism without sacrificing the fundamental
values of our societies. We commend the mention of the
threat to peace and security posed by the acquisition by
terrorists of weapons of mass destruction and the use of
improvised explosive devices. However, we would have
appreciated an explicit reference to the role played by
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) in that regard.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
I wish to highlight what in our view will constitute
one of the key elements of the resolution — the
recommendation that the Secretary-General begin the
implementation of his Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism (A/70/674). We must make full use of this
mandate to leverage all of the tools of the United
Nations and its Member States in order to implement
the recommendations contained in the Plan of Action,
which will be very effective in eliminating terrorism
even before it manifests.
Nevertheless, we must point out certain deficiencies
in the resolution. We believe that we have missed a good
opportunity to strengthen the United Nations counterterrorism architecture. The appointment of a high-level
coordinator for the prevention of violent extremism
would have strengthened the Organization’s capacity in
6/28

01/07/2016

that regard. We also regret that the General Assembly
did not further contemplate the role that victims can
and, indeed, do play in preventing and countering
violent extremism, putting an end to the cycle of hatred
and strengthening the role of rule of law institutions.
In conclusion, I reiterate that the resolution
enhances our opportunities to implement the Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. We will need the
resolute action of all for it to be truly effective.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico would like to convey its heartfelt
condolences to the Republic of Turkey for the criminal
attacks that occurred in Istanbul a few days ago.
We recognize the commitment and work of
the Permanent Representatives of Argentina and
Iceland and their respective teams in facilitating the
consultative process leading up to the fifth review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Mexico deems it critical to coordinate a more efficient
and comprehensive response to terrorism, always
through dialogue. The tragic events of this week remind
us of the urgent need for the United Nations to address
this scourge effectively, and they highlight the critical
importance of this debate.
Over the years, the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy has become a reference point for
coordinating the international community’s cooperative
effort to prevent and combat the threat of international
terrorism. As Member States, we have benefited from
the Strategy, which has allowed us, inter alia, to build
and create capacity and to share best practices. However,
after four biannual review processes, we also recognize
the need to fully implement the Strategy’s four pillars,
which have not been given due attention — owing not to
intentional omission, but rather to the need to address
immediate priorities.
We have recently seen terrorist groups evolve
and adapt in response to our efforts to put an end to
their activities. Their operational characteristics
and recruitment, communication and financing
methodologies have spread their extremist ideologies
among certain groups, particularly among young
people, which has led to more violence and intolerance.
Consequently, and aware of the urgent need to understand
and address those new phenomena, Mexico reiterates
its support for the Strategy’s focus on prevention. The
creation, promotion and enhancement of non-coercive
means that effectively prevent individuals or groups
16-20726

01/07/2016

from mobilizing towards the commission of terrorist
acts require us to also address the political, social
and economic grievances these groups use to justify
their actions.
On the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations,
the Member States are building a new paradigm for
peace through development. The concept of “sustaining
peace”, adopted both by the General Assembly and the
Security Council, is a landmark in defining how we
will tackle security challenges in our communities. A
society with a healthy and inclusive social fabric and
where the rule of law and human rights prevail will be
less prone to outbreaks of violent extremism conducive
to terrorism.
Mexico once again welcomes the presentation
of the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism (A/70/674), insofar as it illustrates
the connection between the development, security
and human-rights agendas. We must give priority to
strengthening and complementing these agendas by
promoting tolerance, respect for cultural, social and
religious diversity, and above all, the inclusion of the
most vulnerable groups in our societies — women and
young people — in order for them to become active
agents in building the society in which they want to
live. However, as we have said before, we must avoid
conflating the concepts of violent extremism and
terrorism, as doing so may result in an overly broad
interpretation of counter-terrorism measures and
potentially against actions that could not be described
as terrorist acts under any circumstances.
In Mexico, we have favoured a preventive approach
by combating extreme poverty and by promoting
education, universal access to health services, social
inclusion, tolerance, gender equality, sustainable
development and measures to prevent violence. Those
social development efforts are in addition to those
that my country’s high-level specialized committee
on international disarmament, terrorism and security
is making to strengthen our domestic legislation and
comply with Mexico’s international obligations in that
area. The committee serves to ensure that coordinated
measures are taken to prevent and respond to acts of
terrorism within the national territory, while respecting
human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Ten years on, the international community is
facing an unprecedented challenge. There is obviously
an urgent need for the United Nations to come up with

A/70/PV.110

effective and comprehensive short-, medium- and
long-term responses to the threat of terrorism that also
prevent messages of hatred and discrimination from
encouraging expressions of violent extremism that lead
to terrorism. We take the opportunity afforded by this
review process to reiterate that efforts to prevent and
combat terrorism must always be multilateral and that
they must respect human rights, without stigmatizing
any population group. Otherwise, our societies will
be involved in xenophobic confrontations. Racism,
discrimination and stigmatization of social groups
foster terrorism.
Finally, it is imperative that we adopt a convention
against terrorism once and for all. The reality of our
times does not allow us the luxury of continuing to
postpone the matter. My delegation hopes that the
General Assembly and the United Nations as a whole
will be up to the task of confronting this scourge and
that we will effectively implement the resolution that
we have adopted here today.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba strongly supports the collective efforts of the
United Nations in its fight against terrorism. The
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
constitutes a milestone in the international fight against
this scourge. The Strategy respects the central role of
the General Assembly in that endeavour. We would like
to express our appreciation for the efforts made by the
Permanent Representatives of Argentina and Iceland
and their respective teams in coordinating the process
we have concluded. We also thank all delegations that
demonstrated the political will to move forward towards
our common goal.
Cuba reiterates its unwavering determination
to combat terrorism, as well as its deepest rejection
and condemnation of all acts, methods and practices
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations by
whomever, against whomsoever and wherever they are
committed, regardless of their motivation, including
those in which States are directly or indirectly involved.
The international community must not accept that,
under the banner of the supposed fight against terrorism,
any State may commit acts of aggression, interfere in
the internal affairs of other States, commit or allow
flagrant violations of human rights and humanitarian
law, such as torture, kidnapping, illegal detention,
disappearance or extrajudicial execution. Cuba rejects
double standards and unilateral actions contrary to the

16-207267/28

A/70/PV.110

Charter of the United Nations and the principles and
norms of international law.
Wherever legal and ethical principles are
violated, extremist ideologies find fertile soil and
the legitimacy of our fight against international
terrorism is undermined. Hatred, revenge and terror
have no place in the just and equitable international
order that we are fighting to establish. Resolution
70/291 includes advances in the area of international
cooperation against terrorism. Matters of particular
importance are addressed, such as neutralizing the
abuse of information and communication technologies
in support of terrorism and promoting the constructive
use of those technologies in line with international law,
respect for privacy, ensuring that the use of remotely
piloted aircraft fully complies with international law,
and the rejection of any practices inconsistent with
international law under the pretext of combating
terrorism.
The resolution highlights the dialogue and
understanding among cultures and civilizations and
gives priority to the prevention of this scourge. Certain
States’ harmful practice of financing and promoting
messages of intolerance and hatred of other peoples,
cultures and political systems through the Internet,
radio or television, in clear violation of the principles
of the United Nations Charter and international law,
deserves our most resolute condemnation.
In assessing the progress made during this review,
Cuba recognizes that much remains to be done in the
fight against terrorism. The international community
must take concrete steps towards the adoption of a
comprehensive convention on terrorism that defines that
scourge in its entirety. It is not acceptable to associate
a particular religion, race or ethnicity with terrorism.
There is a need to address the causes and conditions that
may foster terrorism. Poverty, inequality, poor health,
illiteracy, discrimination, desires for hegemony and
domination, among many other factors, are core causes
of the proliferation of this scourge. The international
community’s efforts must also be aimed at tackling the
root causes of terrorism.
Protecting the victims of terrorism is a priority.
States are called upon to fulfil their international
obligations without double standards, including the
obligation to prosecute and extradite all terrorists,
without distinctions of any kind. The Cuban people
demands that the impunity enjoyed by the terrorist
8/28

01/07/2016

responsible for the in-flight explosion of a Cubana de
Aviación aircraft on 6 October 1976 — resulting in the
death of the flight’s 73 passengers — come to an end.
Allow me to conclude by emphasizing Cuba’s
support for multilateral efforts to strengthen the central
role of the General Assembly in the implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The General Assembly and all Member States can count
on our full participation in the fight against terrorism.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): Global terrorism is by
no means a new phenomenon. However, the scope of
the threat it poses today, 10 years after the adoption of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
is unprecedented. Hardly a week passes without
attacks that carry a significant human cost. Since
the last review (see A/68/PV.94 et seq.), the Security
Council, the General Assembly and other relevant
bodies, including the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum,
have taken significant steps. Those steps include
suppressing terrorism financing, countering terrorist
narratives and addressing the evolving threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters. We are encouraged by the
increased recognition of the essential role of women,
youth, civil society and local communities in counterterrorism activities.
There have also been positive developments in the
effective and transparent use of sanctions. This has
been a feature of New Zealand’s work as Chair of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities. New Zealand strongly supports the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674). One of his clear messages is that we need
to work with youth and communities to effectively
address the factors that give rise to violent extremism.
Engagement with local communities is a key pillar of
New Zealand’s approach.
We are acutely aware that marginalized groups and
individuals have a greater chance of being reintegrated
at the local level than through a top-heavy, Governmentimposed approach. We do not accept that terrorism and
violent extremism can be overcome by Governments
alone. The United Nations has a number of tools at its
disposal and is uniquely placed to ensure a coordinated
response to this common threat. Going forward, we
must continue to assess whether the structures and
16-20726

01/07/2016

processes that we have in place are fit for purpose. As
the methods employed by terrorist groups continue to
evolve, so must the methods of the United Nations.
Negotiations on resolution 70/291, adopted this
afternoon, have demonstrated once again that terrorism
is a highly political issue. We think that this review has
been a valuable process, and we recognize that the text
of the resolution represents a compromise for many
States. Nevertheless, we are heartened that Member
States have been able to come together to discuss these
issues. The international community must be united in
the face of today’s terrorist threat, and New Zealand is
committed to playing its part.
Ms. Wilson (Australia): I would like to thank the
delegations of Argentina and Iceland for their tireless
efforts as co-facilitators of the review process. No
one envied their challenging task. A decade after
the adoption of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, few people today could say their
lives have gone untouched by the threat posed by
terrorism. This tenth anniversary of the adoption of
the Strategy and the tragic terrorist attacks occurring
around the world today should serve as a reminder of
the task at hand and a call to all of us to implement a
decisive course of global action on combating terrorism
and preventing violent extremism.
Preventing and responding to terrorism and
violent extremism — and to those that espouse
its ideology — are global responsibilities. United
Nations conventions and resolutions have set valuable
international standards to guide our efforts, including
robust and effective sanctions regimes. The Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy is critical to our efforts. I
wish to briefly touch upon a few key positive elements
of the Strategy, but, in doing so, I underline the priority
Australia affords to a balanced implementation of all
four pillars of the Strategy.
The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters is
having an impact on many Member States represented
in the Hall today, and Australia is not immune. The
increased attention in the Strategy resolution to foreign
terrorist fighters reflects the gravity of the threat.
We need to follow through on the recommendations
contained in resolution 70/291 to enhance international
cooperation and develop effective measures to counter
the threat. Australia continues to advocate for the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 2178

A/70/PV.110

(2014) and is working to strengthen the capacity of
partners within our region.
As we develop our responses to terrorism and
violent extremism, we need to work on and look
more closely at them from the perspective of women.
Globally, women are among the greatest victims of
violent extremism and terrorism. Some are themselves
becoming radicalized, conspiring or engaging in
terrorism and violent extremism. The resolution’s
recognition of the important role played by women
underscores the critical role of women and women’s
groups in bringing peace to their communities. It also
recognizes that women suffer disproportionately from
the consequences of radicalization, terrorist activities
and conflict more broadly.
We know that the global terrorist threat cannot
be defeated by security solutions alone. We cannot
arrest our way out of this problem. That is why it
was critical that the resolution explicitly link the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action for Preventing
Violent Extremism (A/70/674) with the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. Member States recognize that we
cannot afford to wait until people have already become
radicalized and turned to violence.
This recognition is in line with Australia’s approach
to countering and preventing violent extremism,
intervening early and tackling the cause of the problem
while drawing on the strength of local communities
and civil society. Well-informed and well-resourced
communities and institutions are among our best
defence against acts of violent extremism. We encourage
Member States to develop national plans of action for
preventing violent extremism. Nationally developed
plans ensure that national sovereignty is respected, that
national drivers of violent extremism are addressed and
that national ownership becomes paramount.
In conclusion, Australia has been a staunch
supporter of United Nations efforts to counter terrorism
and prevent violent extremism. The United Nations can
be only as effective as its institutional arrangements
allow it to be. This tenth anniversary resolution
should have provided the opportunity to enhance the
architecture in order to enable it to meet the growing
needs of Member States. This situation needs to be
remedied in the course of the seventieth session of the
General Assembly. We will strongly support proposals
that facilitate better United Nations system-wide
coordination when options are presented in May.

16-207269/28

A/70/PV.110

Mr. Minami (Japan): Allow me to express my
sincere gratitude to President Lykketoft for convening
today’s important debate on the review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. My
appreciation also goes to the delegations of Argentina
and Iceland for their tremendous efforts in facilitating
the review discussion.
From the beginning of this year, we have witnessed
terrorist attacks all over the world almost every week.
This means that the threat of terrorism remains very
high, even after the adoption of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. On this occasion, Japan strongly
condemns the heinous terrorist attacks that took place
at the Ataturk International Airport in Istanbul, Turkey
on 28 June. We express our sincere condolences and
heartfelt sympathies to the victims and their families.
The adoption of resolution 70/291 by consensus
today reaffirms the commitment of all States Members
of the United Nations to combating terrorism and
violent extremism. Japan has been strengthening its
counter-terrorism efforts. We have not only introduced
an advanced passenger information and passenger
name record system, but we have also used biometric
tools to secure border control. Moreover, we have been
contributing to INTERPOL databases.
Japan hosted the Group of Seven (G-7) Summit at the
end of May. Together with other leaders, it formulated
the G-7 Action Plan on Countering Terrorism and
Violent Extremism. No one country can fight terrorism
alone. Terrorism is a global phenomenon. Foreign
terrorist fighters travel to the Middle East and Africa
to join the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
or other terrorist groups and return to their countries
of origin. Lone-wolf terrorists attack civilians in their
home countries, whether or not they are directed to do
so by terrorist groups, including ISIL. We have to make
collective efforts, both domestically and internationally,
to combat terrorism and violent extremism. In that
context, I welcome the resolution, which engages
civil society, local communities, non-Governmental
organizations, women, youth and other stakeholders.
Before closing, allow me to touch upon institutional
arrangements. We strongly support enhanced
cooperation among the relevant entities in order to
effectively combat terrorism and prevent violent
extremism, including by streamlining existing entities.
Today is a landmark day to renew our commitment to
counter-terrorism, but this is not the end. Our goal is to
10/28

01/07/2016

implement the resolution. I urge all Member States to
take concrete actions on the basis of the Strategy and
the review.
Mr. Tenya Hasegawa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to convey my condolences to the
delegations of Turkey and Cameroon and, through you,
Sir, to the families and loved ones of those killed and
injured in the terrorist attacks in Istanbul and Yakana,
which Peru condemns in the strongest terms.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made earlier by the Permanent Representative of the
Dominican Republic on behalf of the States members
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, and thanks their Excellencies Ambassador Einar
Gunnarsson, Permanent Representative of Iceland,
and Ambassador Martín García Moritán, Permanent
Representative of Argentina and their respective teams
for the dedicated manner in which they have guided
this arduous and delicate process of biennial review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Since 2006, the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
has been a valuable tool against this scourge. Today,
which marks its 10 years of existence, as we continue
to witness and suffer the painful consequences of
terrorist acts, the Strategy is more relevant than ever. It
is therefore our responsibility to update it in the face of
new challenges and to equip it with new tools to address
those challenges. The Strategy must be implemented
in a coordinated and comprehensive manner that
ensures balance among all its pillars, in accordance
with Member States’ obligations under international
law, human rights law, refugee law and international
humanitarian law. That coherence must be translated
into conceptual work and practical implementation at
the national, regional and international levels.
We also believe it important and necessary to
refer to the threat posed by violent extremism, which
can lead to terrorism. In that regard, Peru has received
with great interest the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674),
which addresses the need to mitigate the structural and
circumstantial factors that foster the radicalization of
individuals. In particular, we attach special importance
to the recommendation on reducing inequalities and
strengthening the social fabric. It is therefore a matter
of preventing the radicalization of individuals and
including them in society. In that context, we stress
the importance of bringing national development
16-20726

01/07/2016

policies into line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1), including Sustainable
Development Goals 1 and 16.
Strengthening customs and financial intelligence
work and increasing cooperation are critical to
combating terrorism financing mechanisms, which
are often created by other criminal activities, such as
trafficking in drugs, weapons, natural resources and
cultural material, among others. In that regard, we
must prevent and combat any links between terrorism
and transnational organized crime. We must also recall
that terrorist groups use or misuse various civil society
forums to disseminate and propagate their terrorist
ideologies, seeking to recruit new adherents, attract
financing and even justify their own actions as well
as those taken by their leaders. Therefore, with full
respect for the freedom of expression and association,
we must prevent terrorist organizations’ abuse of civil
society organizations.
My delegation recalls the importance of finalizing
the process of formulating a draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism, as well as
that of discussions on the question of convening
a high-level conference under the auspices of the
United Nations. In that regard, efforts to conclude a
comprehensive convention must be redoubled. I pledge
the unwavering support of my delegation and reaffirm
Peru’s commitment to combating the threats posed by
terrorism and violent extremism.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): I thank you, Sir,
for giving my delegation the floor and for presiding
over the fifth biennial review of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. At the outset, allow me to assure
you of my delegation’s support. South Africa would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (A/70/826) and the Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism (A/70/674), both of which provide
useful recommendations for Member States to consider
in the development of their national plans of action.
As previous speakers have already mentioned, this
event marks the 10-year anniversary of the adoption of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which provides Member States with a credible, holistic
and flexible mechanism to counter terrorism. Attacks
on the African continent and across the globe, most
recently in Turkey, have shown that no country is
immune from terrorism. We have seen the brutality
and hatred espoused by terrorist organizations, which

A/70/PV.110

control territory and have access to vast resources, as
well as by single-minded, radicalized individuals who,
in their belief that they are right, indiscriminately use
violent methods to sow fear and discord in communities.
Now more than ever, the increasing complexity of the
terrorist threat requires new and innovative approaches
to addressing that threat and the conditions that give
rise to it.
The work of the United Nations and its structures
in support of the implementation of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy by Member States, as well as the
Organization’s efforts to find ways of countering
these new and emerging threats, underscore its
pivotal, leadership role in the international campaign
against terrorism. My delegation continues to support
a counter-terrorism approach that places the United
Nations at the centre of international efforts to find
solutions to tackle this threat. The Organization retains
a vital role in the exchange of information, experiences
and best practices.
Moreover, my delegation also supports initiatives
that will improve coordination and cooperation among
United Nations counter-terrorism entities and between
the United Nations and regional structures. However,
we are of the view that the establishment of any new
mechanism should be weighed on the basis of its
potential to contribute to facilitating and assisting
international efforts to counter terrorism, instead of
duplicating work already being done in other structures.
South Africa prefers the adoption of a consensus
resolution because we believe that it will ensure a
holistic and multifaceted approach to countering the
scourge of terrorism. It will also address emerging
threats and challenges within the framework of human
rights and the rule of law. We are firm in our belief that
terrorism cannot be defeated militarily and cannot be
dealt with solely through the use of force or coercive
measures. To counter the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism in the medium to long terms, international
cooperation must also address the factors that give rise
to terrorism.
There is an urgent need to understand and address
the conditions and contexts that make terrorism an
attractive option to the disaffected. There is also a
continued need for the global community to address
long-standing conflicts in accordance with international
law and international human rights law. Unresolved,
those conflicts could become the incubators of

16-2072611/28

A/70/PV.110

terrorism. However, terrorism should not be equated
with the legitimate struggles of national liberation
movements for self-determination and statehood, as
provided for in numerous resolutions of the Assembly.
The struggles for human dignity and equality and the
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms
cannot be conflated with terrorism, extremism and
violent extremism.
In addition, my delegation believes that extremism
in itself deserves attention as it may be a precursor to
violent extremism and terrorism. It should therefore
be addressed on an equal footing and with the same
emphasis. The international community should
maintain its commitment to its objectives to eradicate
poverty and promote sustained economic growth,
sustainable development and prosperity for all.
Engagement — including through education,
eliminating
inequalities
and
working
with
disadvantaged groups of society, particularly young
people, and developing appropriate strategies at the
national, regional and international levels — remains
critical. That has informed both South Africa’s
national counter-terrorism strategy and the counterterrorism strategy for the Southern African region.
The institutionalized cooperation between the African
Union Peace and Security Council and the United
Nations Security Council presents an ideal opportunity
to strengthen cooperation in countering terrorism,
based on the specific requirements of the continent.
In conclusion, terrorism cannot and should not be
associated with any religion, nationality or civilization.
We therefore welcome and support initiatives and
efforts that promote dialogue, tolerance, diversity and
understanding among peoples, cultures and religions.
Acts of mobilization directed against individuals,
communities or nations simply because of their faith,
language or race cannot be justified. I would like to
reiterate my delegation’s commitment to continuing to
work within the United Nations and other multilateral
structures to seek ways of countering the threat posed
to international peace and security by terrorist acts
effectively and efficiently.
Mr. Elshinawy (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Einar Gunnarsson,
Permanent Representative of Iceland, and Mr. Martín
Garcia Moritán, Permanent Representative of Argentina,
and their team for their efforts to facilitate the review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
12/28

01/07/2016

This year’s review has been conducted in
circumstances that differ from those of any previous
years. We have recently seen terrorism continue to
renew its financial and operational tools. Since the
range of countries where terrorists acts have been
perpetrated has greatly increased, the international
community, especially the United Nations, must
address that mounting danger in a different manner. We
must consider the root causes of terrorism and stand
against all terrorist groups without differentiation and
with due respect for international law.
While the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy review considers violent extremism, many
people have noted that it has not focused on all the
circumstances or root causes that promote it. Many
countries have agreed to implement the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations, but that is not always
possible because of a lack of financing. In addition, the
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674)
does contains no suggestion as to how we might
facilitate the financing of such actions and measures.
We have adopted by consensus resolution 70/291,
which sends a strong message to terrorist organizations
that we are all committed to fighting this scourge. The
resolution contains important provisions, including
with respect to foreign terrorist fighters, the financing
of terrorism and the use of telecommunications for the
purposes of terrorism. The resolution also addresses
the link between terrorism and criminal organizations,
as well as the root causes of terrorism. The resolution
takes note of the Security Council’s request to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee to prepare a proposal
for a comprehensive international framework by April
2017. It also seeks to prevent charity organizations from
being used for the purposes of funding terrorism.
Paragraph 33 calls on Member States to prevent
refugee status from being abused by the perpetrators,
organizers or facilitators of terrorist acts. Paragraph
40 recalls that the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism gives States
and organizations the discretion to do whatever they
deem appropriate in order to implement the measures
according to their national strategies and policies.
The resolution also calls on States to redouble their
efforts to coordinate their actions and measures with
the Secretariat.
In conclusion, the delegation of the Arab Republic
of Egypt reiterates that defeating terrorism requires
16-20726

01/07/2016

political will and a comprehensive, holistic approach
to the scourge, cooperation among countries and States
that have experience in that regard, the implementation
of all General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions related to the topic, and the devotion of all
resources at our disposal to defeat terrorism.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation associates itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Dominican Republic on
behalf of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States, and reiterates its firm commitment
to United Nations counter-terrorism activities.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 70/291,
facilitated by Argentina and Iceland, on the occasion
of the fifth review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. It sends a message of
unity and commitment against that scourge 10 years
after the launch of the Strategy. Unfortunately, the
recent terrorist attack at the Istanbul airport highlights
once again the gravity and urgency of this agenda
for the United Nations system. Allow me to offer my
condolences to the Government of Turkey and to the
families of the victims.
Chile endorses the principles and cross-cutting
approaches reflected in the text of the resolution, which
emphasizes the four pillars of the Global Strategy to
strengthen national, regional and global efforts to
prevent and combat terrorism, under the Charter of the
United Nations. In particular, we reject and condem
absolutely terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
and support for counter-terrorism efforts to be
undertaken with respect for human rights and in
accordance with international law and international
humanitarian law. We believe that terrorism cannot be
associated with any religion, nationality, civilization
or ethnic group. In particular, we believe in close
international cooperation to improve the capacities of
States to implement the Global Strategy.
Furthermore, there is a need for the participation
of civil society, the private sector and the different
sectors of society, such as women, youth and religious
leaders, who are indispensable actors to ensure a
multidimensional approach to this task. We recognize
the need to address terrorism on the basis of the three
main pillars of the United Nations: international peace
and security, sustainable development and full respect
for the human rights of all.

A/70/PV.110

Collectively, much remains to be done. In addition
to summoning the will to achieve an international
convention against terrorism, we must improve
our understanding of the factors that contribute
to radicalization, and take appropriate preventive
measures to stop the recruitment of youth by terrorist
groups, as reflected in Security Council resolution
2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security. In that
regard, my delegation confirms its endorsement of the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism (A/70/674) and stresses the need to ensure
the establishment of synergies between the Plan of
Action and the Global Strategy.
We are convinced that strengthening intercultural
and interfaith dialogue; promoting democratic values,
respect for human rights and the dignity of all people
without exclusion; education; enhancing diversity and
tolerance; and measures aimed at redressing inequalities
will promote greater inclusion and cohesion, which are
deterrents to terrorism and the violent extremism that
leads to terrorism.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to offer my most heartfelt
condolences to the peoples and the Governments of
Turkey, Bangladesh and Afghanistan and to the victims
of the recent immoral terrorist attacks, including
in Dhaka and Istanbul, and their families. I ask the
Almighty to extend his mercy on them.
The Sudan associates itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (see A/70/PV.109).
We commend the efforts of Argentina and Iceland
to facilitate the consensus adoption of resolution
70/291 on the fifth review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. They performed their task
with a great deal of enthusiasm and professionalism.
We also take note of the report of the Secretary-General
(A/70/826), on the activities of the United Nations
system in implementing the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the contribution of
States to that implementation.
The Sudan denounces any and all acts of terrorism,
including State terrorism. We also express our
commitment to cooperation in the implementation
of the Global Strategy. We stress the importance of
international and regional cooperation in strengthening
the efforts made within the framework of the Strategy

16-2072613/28

A/70/PV.110

to promote its complementarity and universality. We
also support the four main pillars of the Strategy.
The review was undertaken against the backdrop
of the emergence of new forms of terrorism, requiring
renewed resolve on our part. As the scourge of terrorism
poses the greatest danger to the global family and
the international community, our will must be all the
stronger. We have to stand even more united and work
together to address the underlying causes of terrorism,
not just its external manifestations.
Foreign occupation, military intervention, the
threat of the use of force, unilateral coercive measures
and the imposition of unfair sanctions in contravention
of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations clearly represent a very serious threat to global
peace and security and provide fertile ground for the
terrorism and extremism that threaten international
relations. The international community must therefore
unite to put a definitive end to that phenomenon so that
peace and stability can prevail throughout the world.
The Sudan reiterates the importance of ensuring that
terrorism does not become associated with one region,
ethnicity or religion. It is an international phenomenon
that must be denounced and stopped, regardless of the
perpetrator. We need to eliminate resort to stereotypes.
The delegation of the Sudan therefore expresses its
concern over the emergence of an aggressive attitude
against Muslims in several societies and the binding
measures taken against them, which only entrench
hatred.
Let us work together to strengthen dialogue and
tolerance among religions, peoples and civilizations
and build a humankind based on a common foundation;
put an end to xenophobia; create societies that live in
peace; respect different religions and cultures; promote
development; fight poverty, in particular in Africa;
put an end to injustice and the imbalance in levels of
development; strengthen the dialogue between the North
and the South and strengthen dialogue internationally
so as to a create balance in international institutions.
All of this is key to combating terrorism and helps in
fighting the underlying causes of terrorism.
It is impossible to completely eliminate terrorism
through military force alone. It must be dealt with
comprehensively by addressing its economic, cultural
and political manifestations. We in the Sudan reject
the unilateral measures used by several countries in
denouncing some countries for allegedly protecting
14/28

01/07/2016

and harbouring terrorists. This serves clear political
goals and is not helpful in combating terrorism. On the
contrary, it aggravates existing tensions and politicizes
an area that should instead inspire international
solidarity. Therefore, we must denounce terrorism,
regardless of where it exists, without associating it with
any particular ethnicity, country or faith and we must
do so while respecting international law and human
rights.
The Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674) submitted by the Secretary-General shows
that violent extremism does not have a specific
interpretation. It cannot be aligned with any religion,
region or society. The plan describes the reasons why
it has worsened internationally and nationally. At the
same time, despite the fact that the Plan is a timely
and important initiative that is worthy of respect, it is
not balanced. It focuses on violent extremism at the
national level while not paying enough attention to
international factors. In our opinion, that is one of the
most important comments that can be made about this
Plan. Also, it does not offer specific proposals as to how
resources can be mobilized to support the programmes
and activities under the Plan.
The Sudan participated in the negotiations that led
to the consensus adoption of resolution 70/291 today
with a clear spirit. We worked with the delegation of
Saudi Arabia to arrive at a consensus among Member
States based on our conviction that we need counter
terrorism and violent extremism, which have spared no
country or society. We want to bring about international
peace and security; foster tolerance and dialogue among
civilizations and religions; and work together with all
of humankind.
We held negotiations for several weeks that resulted
in a consensus on the resolution. The resolution is a
reasonable and balanced package, but it did not meet
a number of our national concerns. Nonetheless, we
continued making a variety of efforts to ensure that
the resolution contained the elements necessary to
counter violations of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. The responsibility for the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy falls first and foremost on States.
The Plan of Action and the recommendations of the
resolution were addressed in a balanced way. They
underscore the importance of national frameworks
in line with the priorities and specific conditions in
each State and also take into account national plans,
16-20726

01/07/2016

which can help States assume their address their own
individual challenges.
Neither the preamble nor the operative part of
the resolution clearly state the factors that have an
international impact on the situation and lead to
the escalation of terrorism and violent extremism.
Generally speaking, the resolution encourages dealing
with the internal and foreign factors in a balanced way.
My delegation would like to reaffirm that the primary
responsibility for the implementation of this agreement
lies with the States themselves.
The resolution also refers to the important role
played by the Counter-Terrorism Committee. In that
regard, my delegation believes that there is a need
to strengthen coordination among the institutions
mandated with helping States implement the Strategy
by providing them with what they need for its
implementation. The proposals and alternatives for
coordination through United Nations mechanisms also
need to be dealt with so as to help them fight terrorism.
In conclusion, we welcome the efforts made by the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, established
within the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force. Its role is to consolidate the capacities of Member
States to combat terrorism. We would like to ensure
that the Centre can carry out its functions by providing
it with the financial needs to implement its programme
and activities aimed at providing training and technical
assistance to States.
We reiterate once again our commitment to
combating terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
as well as violent extremism, which leads to terrorism.
We will pursue our efforts to implement the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy through
coordination and cooperation at the national, regional
and subregional levels and to support the role of the
General Assembly in monitoring the implementation of
this Strategy and its periodic review.
Mr. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to strongly condemn
the terrorist attack in the Kingdom of Bahrain, which
led to the death of a woman and the injury of three
children. We also condemn all acts aimed at terrorizing
civilians. I would like to express our condolences to
the delegations of Turkey and Jordan with regard to the
attacks that both countries have witnessed.

A/70/PV.110

The United Arab Emirates aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (see A/70/PV.109)
and it welcomes the adoption of resolution 70/291 by
consensus.
Today, we are discussing a challenge that deeply
threatens international peace and security, as terrorism
is a global phenomenon that transcends borders,
cultures and religions, leaving no State or city in the
world safe from its dangers. The multitude of heinous
terrorist attacks that have occurred in the recent years
have left enormous damage in their wake, including
thousands of casualties, an exacerbated migration crisis
and irreversible damage and destruction of property
and cultural heritage. This situation requires a robust
international response to effectively counter terrorism.
The review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, which was adopted 10 years
ago, provides the international community with an
opportunity to assess its achievements in this area and
develop mechanisms to stay abreast of new developments
in countering terrorism and of new challenges, most
notably the spread of extremist ideologies, foreign
terrorist fighters and the use of social media and
modern technology by terrorist groups to achieve their
malicious agenda.
Terrorism is a complex and multifaceted
phenomenon, and tackling it will require us to engage
in a multipronged approach that goes beyond military
operations alone. We must address terrorism in its
early stages, analysing the roots of radicalization and
extremism and countering recruitment. The United
Arab Emirates has developed a comprehensive and
multi-policy strategy to combat terrorism and remains
committed to fighting extremism and terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations.
We are also aware of the importance of addressing
the conditions that are conducive to the spread of
extremism and terrorism. In this context, the United
Arab Emirates pursues efforts aimed at preventing
extremism before it becomes violent. The United Arab
Emirates focuses on the empowerment of its society
by encouraging participation in State-building and
providing alternatives to the options posed by terrorist
groups. For example, the recent appointment of a
female Minister of State for Youth to the United Arab
Emirates Cabinet is rooted in our faith in young people.

16-2072615/28

A/70/PV.110

In the United Arab Emirates, we are convinced that,
by providing our young people with the opportunity
to fulfil their aspirations and live up to their potential,
we are investing in long-term development and the
stability of our nation and beyond. We have also worked
to promote the participation of women in all sectors of
society and their integration in our efforts to combat
extremism and terrorism.
Moreover, it is vital to work on the consolidation of
moderation, tolerance and pluralism in our societies to
prevent extremist groups from exploiting sectarianism
and racism to recruit individuals. In this regard, the
President of the United Arab Emirates has issued Decree
Law No. 2 for the year 2015, which criminalizes all acts
associated with the contempt of religion and holy sites
and combats all forms of discrimination and rejects
hate speech. We have also appointed a female Minister
of Tolerance, who is working to spread the values of
tolerance and peaceful coexistence in the country. In
addition to supporting moderate religious discourse, the
United Arab Emirates has promoted many initiatives,
including the Muslim Council of Elders, which aims to
address the roots of extremism.
Issuing laws and regulations to deter extremism
and terrorism is crucial. We have worked in the
United Arab Emirates to develop a comprehensive
legal framework to address violent extremism. The
Government of the United Arab Emirates has enacted
the 2014 amendments to the Terrorism Act in order to
provide new tools to prosecute terrorists, while at the
same time offering the opportunity to rehabilitate those
who have rejected terrorism and abandoned its path.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy has highlighted the importance of counterterror financing, and since 2014, the United Arab
Emirates has issued large-scale, anti-terrorist financing
laws that criminalize all funding of terrorism. The
United Arab Emirates has also joined important
international conventions on this issue. We need to
develop long-term strategies to overcome extremist
and terrorist groups and to ensure their intellectual
defeat, including through social media, which is
being exploited to spread extremism and terrorism.
The United Arab Emirates is therefore working to
counter online messaging by extremist groups through
the Sawab Center, which was launched by the United
Arab Emirates in cooperation with the United States of
America in March 2015 to fight extremist propaganda
and recruitment by raising and strengthening the voices
16/28

01/07/2016

of moderates and opposing extremist ideologies in the
region and around the world.
States must come together and unite their efforts
regionally and internationally to uproot extremist and
terrorist threats, including by exchanging best practices
and experiences in this field and building international
partnerships and coordinating efforts. The United Arab
Emirates has willingly supported international efforts
in the fight against extremism and terrorism, and has
played an active role in the activities of the Working
Group of the Global Coalition to Counter Islamic State
of Iraq and the Levant and the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum. The United Arab Emirates is honoured to
host the Hedayah International Center of Excellence
for Countering Violent Extremism, which works to
provide support, research, training and assistance to
the international community to build capacities and
share best practices.
In conclusion, I commend the efforts of the United
Nations for its significant role in the development of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In
this regard, I thank the co-facilitators from Argentina
and Iceland for their tremendous efforts to ensure that
the resolution was adopted by consensus. We invite
the international community, once again, to redouble
its joint efforts to build societies that are safe and free
from extremism and terrorism.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I have just come
from the Mission of Turkey, where I offered condolences
on behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands for the
terrible loss of life in the terrorist attack earlier this week
in Istanbul. Such attacks can only serve to strengthen
our common resolve to counter terrorism. Terrorism is a
grave threat to peace, justice and development, and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands is a partner in countering
that threat.
Let me commend the General Assembly for
adopting resolution 70/291 on the fifth review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Getting the resolution adopted was not an easy task, and
I would like to thank the Permanent Representatives of
Argentina and Iceland for their hard work.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union (see A/70/PV.109). In my national capacity, I will
address three issues: resolution 70/291, implementation
and the way ahead
16-20726

01/07/2016

On the first element — the important aspects of the
resolution — the resolution contains language that is
less ambitious than we had hoped for, but also contains
various elements that will enable us to step up our
common efforts in the fight against violent extremism
and terrorism. Let me highlight some elements.
First, as regards the references to foreign terrorist
fighters, the call to prevent their travels and to develop
and implement strategies for prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration for those returning, the Kingdom of
the Netherlands — as co-Chair of the working groups
on foreign terrorist fighters of the Global CounterTerrorism Forum (GCTF) and the Global Coalition
to Counter the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
together with Turkey and Morocco — strongly supports
strengthening the role of the United Nations and
its Member States in countering the complex threat
of foreign terrorist fighters and their return. In our
view, women and youth require special attention in
that regard.
Secondly, we welcome the references in the
resolution to the prevention of violent extremism. An
effective counter-terrorism strategy requires a balanced
approach between preventive and repressive measures
and should be in line with human rights obligations. We
underline the fact that the resolution recommends that
Member States consider the implementation of relevant
recommendations of the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674).
My second point concerns implementation.
When preventing and countering terrorist threats,
no community, country, region or international
organization can be effective on its own. We all need
to work together. We need to share more information,
stop more terrorists and secure our homelands. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore welcomes
the fact that the resolution contains several strong
references to the importance of coordination within the
United Nations, but also externally with local actors
and regional and international organizations. We need
to think globally and act locally. As co-Chair, together
with the Kingdom of Morocco, of the Global CounterTerrorism Forum, we are firmly determined to be a
partner in that endeavour.
The GCTF has become the main forum for
discussing meaningful actions to fight terrorism in all
its complexity. In recent years, the GCTF has adopted
valuable good practices in areas such as foreign terrorist

A/70/PV.110

fighters and the prevention of violent extremism. It has
mobilized funds to implement existing United Nations
resolutions, and has worked with United Nations
agencies to build capacity in Member States.
In the Strategic Plan of Action for 2016-2018, we
have made a commitment to strengthen the GCTF’s
relationship with the United Nations and other
countries to have more impact. Through the GCTF, we
are committed to contributing to analyses, enhancing
the implementation of United Nations resolutions,
coordinating capacity-building on the ground and
working with the United Nations system, its Member
States and other stakeholders. The resolution that
was adopted today makes us feel empowered in that
commitment within the GCTF.
My third point concerns the way forward. As I
said earlier, getting the resolution adopted was not
an easy task. Terrorism strikes real people, parents,
grandparents, brothers, sisters, friends and children.
The fact that the resolution that we discussed today
was adopted by consensus is therefore crucial. In our
view, it sends a strong signal to violent extremists and
terrorists all over the world that, despite our differences,
the States Members of the United Nations stand united
against violence, intolerance and hatred. Let the spirit
of consensus that we are displaying today guide us
in implementing the important commitments that we
have made.
I have pointed out the elements in resolution 70/291
that the Kingdom of the Netherlands finds particularly
important. I have underscored the necessity of
cooperation at all levels and urged all of us to continue
our work in the spirit of consensus. Let me conclude
by stressing that the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
bilaterally and as co-Chair of the GCTF, stands ready
to lead in this by example. We are firmly committed
to working even harder and better to implement the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the resolution
we adopted today. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
will continue to be a partner for peace, justice and
development so that future generations can live in a
world free from terrorism.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): The
General Assembly adopted the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy by consensus 10 years ago,
but terrorism activities have increased. The nature of
terrorism has become increasingly complex due to its
changing manifestations, its geographical origins and

16-2072617/28

A/70/PV.110

the evolution of its tactics. To these elements, we would
add the growth in the number of terrorist organizations
and in the nationalities of those who carry out terrorist
acts.
We hope that the fifth review of the Global Strategy
will offer an opportunity to reassess the tools at our
disposal in order to rise to those new challenges on the
basis of the measures that we have adopted, evaluate the
situation of countries that are victims of terrorist acts,
counter the phenomenon, and to curb the recruitment of
marginalized and poverty-stricken, unemployed youth.
United Nations efforts to eradicate terrorism will
succeed only if we implement the Strategy. We also
need to recognize that military efforts alone will not
be successful, to understand the root causes of the
phenomenon and to address them at the political,
economic and social level and with respect for the
sovereignty of States, human rights and the principle of
non-interference in the domestic affairs of other States.
We believe in adopting measures that help States
strengthen their institutions for the benefit of balanced
local development. Undoubtedly, the settlement of
conflicts will help to prevent terrorists from using
entire regions as safe havens for their activities. In
this context, I reaffirm the need to strengthen regional
cooperation, provide technical assistance for capacitybuilding in those countries that have been subject to
terrorist acts, exchange expertise, and take legislative
and judicial action to criminalize terrorist acts in order
to facilitate the prosecution of perpetrators of such acts.
It is important to note that many countries that
have endured terrorist acts on their soil, including
mine, need assistance in the fight against terrorism.
My Government and Parliament would like to receive
needed support in fighting such organizations as Ansar
al-Sharia, Al-Qaida and Da’esh, all of which are present
in many regions of our country. We would also like to
request wider international cooperation and assistance
so that we can implement Security Council resolution
2178 (2014), on foreign terrorist fighters, with a view
to preventing such fighters from joining international
terrorist organizations and stopping and punishing the
sources of funding for terrorism.
There is a close link between terrorism and other
kinds of crime. Transnational crimes such as trafficking
in arms, drugs and persons, money laundering and
the sale of oil are used by terrorists to fund their
activities. States need to act bilaterally, multilaterally
18/28

01/07/2016

and regionally in order to have the means to coordinate
and exchange information and experience. They also
need to implement the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), which
was designed to support of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, given the relationship
between violent extremism and terrorism. In addition,
we need to help countries implement their own plans
for countering violent extremism. This needs to be
done by States themselves, in coordination with other
States, and with the help of the United Nations.
My country, Libya, has endured great suffering as a
consequence of terrorism. Da’esh, Al-Qaida and Ansar
al-Sharia have sought to take over certain Libyan towns
and cities in order to control the oil resources there,
or, where they have been unable to do so, to destroy
them. These groups bring in terrorists from many other
countries and are now threatening the unity and stability
of my country. Their actions also threaten neighbouring
countries. As a result, the international community
must adopt a strong position in order to enable my
country, Libya, to discharge its duties to strengthen the
rule of law, respect international obligations, restore
peace and stability, combat terrorism and ensure that
terrorism does not continue to spread. Specifically,
the Libyan army, in addition to much-needed technical
assistance, also needs weapons and matériel to fight
terrorist organizations, secure the national territory and
control its borders. Moreover, Libya’s institutions need
support, in accordance with the provisions of Security
Council resolution 2214 (2015).
In conclusion, I reiterate that we condemn and fully
reject terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
whatever its justification may be, whatever the identity
of the perpetrator. Terrorism is a global phenomenon;
it is not associated with any particular race, religion,
ethnicity, or society. We further affirm that terrorist
acts that are purely criminal must be distinguished from
those that are the expression of the struggle of a people
for self-determination or to be free of occupation.
Mr. Dahl (Norway): Terrorism and violent
extremism are among the greatest security challenges
of our time. They bring death and suffering to innocent
people and destruction and insecurity to entire societies
and regions. No country is immune, as Norway
unfortunately learned in 2011, when it was struck by
right-wing extremism.
16-20726

01/07/2016

Since the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy was adopted by consensus in the General
Assembly in 2006, the threat landscape has changed
dramatically. New terrorist groups have emerged.
Violent extremists are finding new ways to carry
out their attacks, spread their propaganda, finance
their activities and recruit people to their ranks. The
international community must adapt to this changing
landscape. The United Nations must play a central
role in our collective response to terrorism and in
preventing violent extremism. Respect for democracy,
human rights, the rule of law and freedom of expression
are fundamental values that must be upheld if we are
to successfully counter radicalization and violent
extremism.
Norway believes in a balanced implementation of
the Global Strategy. The Secretary General’s new Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674) is
timely. Norway welcomes and strongly supports the
Plan. It gives a much-needed emphasis to pillars I and IV
of the Strategy’s Plan of Action. The new Plan focuses
on national, regional and United Nations activities as
drivers for positive change. It seeks to tackle conditions
conducive to terrorism and to ensure respect for human
rights and the rule of law. We must pursue both push
and pull factors. At the same time, we must ensure that
our interventions are specific to preventing violent
extremism, rather just relevant to preventing violent
extremism.

A/70/PV.110

a framework for Norway’s international efforts to
counter terrorism and prevent violent extremism. It also
addresses the nexus between those threats, in particular
threat-financing and the nexus between terrorism and
organized crime, whereby terrorist organizations, often
indirectly, benefit from the trafficking of arms, drugs,
persons and cultural artefacts, as well as the illicit trade
in natural resources, such as oil and charcoal.
National action plans on preventing violent
extremism are important tools. Norway adopted its
first plan of action in 2010. The plan has since been
revised. It takes a whole-of-Government approach,
with nine ministries involved in its implementation.
The current plan is updated regularly to respond to the
rapidly changing landscape of threats. This approach
ensures legitimacy, credibility and effectiveness.
Norway is contributing to all five lines of effort set out
by the Global Coalition to Counter the Islamic State
of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). ISIL is losing ground in
Syria and Iraq, and its recruitment seems to be slowing
down. We must increase our focus on the threat that
foreign terrorist fighters pose upon returning home
or travelling to other areas of instability. Thirty-four
foreign terrorist fighters have returned to Norway, of
whom 20 have been indicted and 4 have been convicted
for terrorism-related crimes.

The Plan addresses how we can effectively counter
the manipulative messages of violent extremism, by
advocating freedom of expression and the values of
tolerance, pluralism and understanding. These are all
necessary ingredients when building peaceful and
inclusive societies. Improved coordination will help
strengthen the role of the United Nations and ensure
a balanced implementation of the Strategy and an
effective response to the Plan Action. This is a matter
of urgency, and resolution 70/291, adopted today, gives
us a clear time frame for the provision of concrete
suggestions to reform the United Nations counterterrorism architecture.

In June 2015, Norway hosted a regional summit
on countering violent extremism as part of President
Obama’s initiative on countering violent extremism. The
Oslo conference paved the way for a new global alliance
of women’s organizations working to prevent violent
extremism. This alliance will provide an important
opportunity for small grass-roots organizations to have
their voices heard. Another initiative at the conference
was the Youth Against Violent Extremism initiative,
which gathered 200 youth workers and young activists
from across Europe. Their message was strong and
clear — young people’s voices must be heard when
Governments are forming new polices and strategies.
We welcome the fact that the importance of including
women and youth in decision-making processes is
underlined in the resolution.

Member States have the primary responsibility
for implementing measures to prevent and counter
terrorism and violent extremism. Let me highlight some
of Norway’s efforts since the last review. In April, the
Norwegian Parliament adopted a white paper on global
security challenges, addressing terrorism, organized
crime, piracy and cybersecurity. The plan provides

The young people at the conference formed a
network against violent extremism called YouthCAN.
Prime Minister Cameron has taken the initiative to
expand the network to Commonwealth countries.
Today, YouthCAN has more than 600 members from 85
countries, and more are needed. We asked the members
of the YouthCAN network for their views on the

16-2072619/28

A/70/PV.110

Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism (A/70/674) and Security Council resolution
2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security. They urged
the international community and national Governments
to facilitate encounters between local and national
Governments and youth activists working on preventing
violent extremism, investing in education and training
for young people, as well as supporting international
youth networks that provide platforms for young people
to share knowledge, projects and best practices.
Last year, the launch of the Strong Cities network
highlighted the important role of local Governments.
It is at the local level that the drivers of violent
extremism can best be addressed, and local authorities
are well placed to take preventive measures. The
Strong Cities network enables cities across the world
to pool their resources, knowledge and best practices.
Two Norwegian cities, Oslo and Kristiansand, are
participating in the network, and we hope that other
Norwegian cities will join, as well.
Violent extremism is both an international security
concern and a development issue. Poverty alone is not
the sole cause of violent extremism. Nevertheless, real
or perceived marginalization, whether economic, social
or political, is often an important element in the process
of radicalization, resulting in violent extremism.
We need to remember that violent extremism is an
important driver for many of the world’s current
conflicts. These conflicts are obstacles to social and
economic development, and sometimes roll back
already-achieved progress and growth. That is why
sustainable Development Goal 16, on peaceful, just
and inclusive societies, is so important. In March, the
United Nations Development Programme organized
a global conference in Oslo on preventing violent
extremism and promoting inclusive development. The
conference revealed how development actors can play
a significant role.
I would like to sincerely thank the co-facilitators,
the Permanent Representatives of Iceland and
Argentina, and their teams for their tireless efforts
and leadership, which led to the adoption by consensus
today of resolution 70/291 on important issue.
To conclude, we must step up our efforts against
terrorism and violent extremism, and urgently
implement concrete measures. The Plan of Action
is a crucial part of this and the Secretary-General’s
ambition to re-energize the United Nations’ prevention
20/28

01/07/2016

agenda. We need a strong United Nations to show
global leadership. We need a United Nations that is
fit for purpose, better coordinated and has sufficient
resources to do its part.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela joins in the expressions of solidarity and
condolences to the Government and the people of Turkey
following the recent terrorist attacks in Istanbul. The
serious consequences of those acts lead us to reaffirm
our firm commitment to combatting terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, in the belief that this scourge
is a threat to international peace and security.
We welcome the adoption by consensus of resolution
70/291, marking the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
on this subject. Furthermore, our delegation wishes to
recognize the leadership with which the Ambassadors
of Argentina and Iceland and their respective teams
led the work of co-facilitating the fifth review of the
Strategy and text we have adopted, following complex
rounds of negotiation.
The Venezuelan delegation aligns itself with the
statement made earlier by the representative of the
Dominican Republic on behalf of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States.
Venezuela reiterates its categorical rejection of
terrorist acts, whatever their motivations and wherever
and by whomever they are committed, because they are
deliberate attacks on international peace and security
and constitute flagrant violations of international law.
The commitment of my country to the fight against
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations is reflected
at the international and regional levels in its adhesion
to numerous treaties and conventions in that area,
and nationally in a series of legal instruments that
emphasize, inter alia, control, prevention and oversight
measures in combating terrorist financing and moneylaundering.
Venezuela believes that the acts committed by
terrorist groups endanger the territorial integrity
and political unity of States, contributing to the
destabilization of legitimate Governments and
undermining their constitutional order with the ultimate
aim of overthrowing them. All of that negatively
impacts the economic and social development of
peoples, including the deliberate destruction of their
infrastructure and national institutions. Experience
16-20726

01/07/2016

teaches us that terrorist groups feed on despair,
injustice, frustration, lack of opportunity and the denial
of human rights and fundamental freedoms to promote
their criminal and political agenda, based on hatred,
intolerance, sectarianism and violent extremism.
Poverty, social and economic inequality; political, ethnic
and religious intolerance; the imposition of unilateral
coercive measures; occupations, foreign interventions
and violations of the sovereignty of peoples and nations
are also some of the drivers of terrorism.
My country believes that the current situation of
our brothers and sisters in the Middle East and North
Africa is no coincidence. In our view, the military
interventions of major Powers in Iraq in 2003 and Libya
in 2011 — aimed at overthrowing the Governments of
sovereign countries, in violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, with the subsequent collapse of State
institutions — created the conditions for the emergence
of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), Al-Qaida,
Ansar al-Sharia and others in those regions to
implement their strategy of destruction, based on terror
and negation of the other. The rapid rise of terrorism
is the result, inter alia, of the financial and military
support provided to armed and violent non-State
actors who were previously exploited as instruments of
destabilization before becoming terrorist groups that
merged with ISIS, expanding rapidly in those regions.

A/70/PV.110

countries all over the world have joined these terrorist
groups, not to mention the silent threat posed by socalled lone wolves.
The relentless violence committed in recent times
by terrorist groups and non-State actors — through the
recruitment of children, abductions, the destruction of
the cultural heritage, slavery and sexual and genderbased violence as a weapon of war, as well as the use
of chemical weapons — has had a significant impact on
civilians, in particular ethnic and religious minorities
and the most vulnerable groups, whose human rights
have been systematically and deliberately trampled,
in violation of international humanitarian and human
rights law. In addition to unleashing an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis, such actions represent an evident
pattern of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide, all of which are clearly defined in the Rome
Statute. Consequently, those responsible for such acts
must be brought to justice.

Today we can observe that, as a result of the
escalation of conflicts in various regions of the world,
terrorism and the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters have enjoyed a rapid rise globally. Terrorism,
with its criminal methods, seeks to subjugate
societies, civilizations, religions and beliefs through
practices based on intolerance, violent extremism and
sectarianism. Nevertheless, we reaffirm that terrorism
should not be associated with any religion, civilization
or ethnic group.

In this crucial fight, we stress the importance
of employing a preventive approach; of adopting
initiatives aimed at undermining the clear strategy
behind these groups and the extremist ideologies
that have been promoting violence and intolerance;
of addressing the root causes that fuel this heinous
phenomenon; and of developing innovative and
effective strategies adapted to specific national
contexts to counter extremist and terrorist narratives
and generate critical thinking within societies, with a
view to preventing radicalization, recruitment and the
mobilization of resources through the inappropriate
use of communication and information technologies.
In this regard, we believe that empowering women
and young people and strengthening the potential role
played by victims of terrorism could be of great benefit.
We therefore welcome the balanced reference to these
elements in the resolution adopted today.

The most recent terrorist attacks perpetrated
in more than a dozen countries and claiming the
lives of hundreds of innocent civilians, particularly
those committed by ISIS, demonstrate that the entire
world is vulnerable to this terrible scourge. This is
evidenced by the unprecedented threat posed by the
self-styled Islamic State, which has been joined by at
least 34 terrorist organizations from different regions
of the world — not only the Middle East and North
Africa — and compounded by the sordid phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters. More than 30,000 individuals,
including women and young people, from at least 100

Venezuela reaffirms that an effective struggle
against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
does not allow for dichotomies. There is only one
terrorism and we must unequivocally prevent, combat
and eradicate it, while distinguishing it from the
legitimate struggle for self-determination of peoples
living under colonial domination. That is why we
believe that the role of the General Assembly as the
legitimate representative forum of the international
community will be decisive in the fight against this
unprecedented and significant threat, particularly
through the design, implementation and enhancement

16-2072621/28

A/70/PV.110

of strategies to counter the rise of terrorist groups and
non-State actors alike. It is time to stress the relevance
of our United Nations and revitalize our coordinated
efforts in the fight against terrorism.
My country is of the view that the fight against that
scourge, including its financing and the narratives and
ideologies that fuel it, must be waged in the framework
of enhanced international cooperation, in accordance
with relevant international and regional instruments,
including the aims and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the regulations of international law,
and with full respect for human rights, fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law, keeping in mind that
failing to do so would only contribute to radicalization.
Today more than ever, it is of vital importance that
States wage war against terrorism in earnest through
the full rather than selective implementation of the
provisions of international instruments and the relevant
resolutions of this multilateral forum that prohibit the
transfer of arms, including small and light weapons,
and the funding, training and hosting of terrorist
groups, and through the comprehensive and balanced
implementation of the four pillars of the Global Strategy
that we have renewed today.
Today more than ever, we must redouble our efforts
to achieve the political settlement of the conflicts in
Syria, Libya, Iraq and Palestine if we indeed wish to
combat terrorism in both the short and the long terms.
These protracted crises further exacerbate conflicts,
serve as a breeding ground for violent extremism,
terrorism and transnational organized crime, and
facilitate the flow, financing and training of foreign
terrorist fighters.
Finally, we believe that, today more than
ever, the international community must continue
working resolutely as one to coordinate the design,
implementation and enhancement of strategies, adapted
on a case-by-case basis to specific nations, to counter
the capacity for action of terrorist groups and non-State
actors. In this regard, we believe that the future adoption
of a international convention against terrorism would
complement the existing body of international legal
instruments by formulating a definition that would help
garner consensus.
Mrs. Özkan (Turkey): I would like to express our
thanks to the President of the General Assembly for
convening the fifth review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. I would also like to extend
22/28

01/07/2016

our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report
(A/70/826).
The adoption of the Strategy in 2006 has proven to
be a groundbreaking achievement. Ten years after its
adoption, the terrorist threat has not diminished; it has
proliferated ideologically and geographically, and has
become less predictable and more atrocious. Turkey,
like many others, has been targeted in the past year. The
latest attack in Istanbul claimed the lives of 44 innocent
people and injured 239. I would like to pay respect to
the memories of all the victims of terrorism, including
those of the recent terrorist attacks in Afghanistan,
Lebanon, Yemen and Somalia.
Associating terrorism with one religion or
ideology is wrong. Adopting a selective approach is
counterproductive. It weakens our collective stance
to defeat this scourge. For us, there is no good or
bad terrorist. Turkey is simultaneously fighting three
different terrorist groups: Da’esh, the Kurdish Workers
Party and the Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party.
Regarding Da’esh, we will decisively continue to fight
that terrorist organization and will give active support
to international efforts in this respect.
Since the fourth review in 2014, facilitated by
Turkey, important new steps have been taken at the
United Nations to address the threat of terrorism and
violent extremism, such as the adoption of Security
Council resolutions 2178 (2014), 2199 (2015) and 2253
(2015), which Turkey co-sponsored, the development
of the Foreign Terrorist Fighters Capacity-Building
Implementation Plan by the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), and the publication
of the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism (A/70/674). We welcome the efforts
of the CTITF to further enhance coordination and
coherence and to enhance the capabilities of the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre to better address
new challenges.
Turkey firmly believes that, by virtue of its universal
representation and capacity to interlink various
aspects in addressing terrorism, the United Nations
has a central role to play in combating terrorism. The
Global Strategy provides guidance for all. We attach
importance to its implementation across its four pillars.
We would like to acknowledge the work accomplished
on the outcome of the review by the facilitators of
resolution 70/291, the Permanent Representatives of
Argentina and Iceland, and their experts, as well as all
16-20726

01/07/2016

delegations that engaged constructively in this process.
There are many provisions of the text that we welcome,
yet we wish to register our misgivings regarding some
others.
We are pleased to note that the need to address the
continuing threat of foreign terrorist fighters is duly
reflected in the resolution, including with regard to
their return and repatriation. We welcome the emphasis
on a strong criminal justice response. It is important
to send terrorists the clear message that there is no
safe haven or immunity from justice, and we have to
ensure the implementation of the universal principle of
extradite-or-prosecute. We also welcome the growing
focus on the need to prevent the financing of terrorism,
including by recognizing that terrorist groups may
benefit from transnational organized crime.
In our joint effort, we must bear in mind that respect
for human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule
of law complements and mutually reinforces effective
counter-terrorism measures, and is an essential part of
a successful counter-terrorism strategy. On the other
hand, sustained conflicts provide terrorist groups
with an opportunity for recruitment and safe havens.
These facts compel us to enhance the coherence and
complementarity of our existing counter-terrorism
measures by developing new approaches and tools.
In that respect, violent extremism in all its forms and
manifestations is a growing source of concern for
Turkey and needs to be addressed with equal resolve.
While rule of law-based security measures remain
the fundamental pillar of counter-terrorism efforts,
a broader, balanced, holistic and comprehensive
approach, involving whole-of-society and whole-ofGovernment responses, is needed to make our societies
more resilient against extremism.
Since there is no one-size-fits-all approach to
preventing extremism, tailor-made approaches to
local and regional conditions that take into account a
complex mix of historical, political, ethnic, cultural,
economic and other factors, as well as the capacities,
legal systems and needs of States, are essential. The
role of civil society, women and youth is also vital in
this regard. It is possible to effectively prevent violent
extremism only when a genuine cooperative framework
at the global level can be established under the guidance
of the United Nations. The Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism is an important
document in that effort.

A/70/PV.110

The United Nations plays a role in leading
international efforts in countering terrorism and
addressing violent extremism at the global level,
and guiding and assisting Member States in their
own national efforts to counter terrorism and violent
extremism. In that regard, we look forward to further
engaging with the Secretary-General in the review of
the United Nations system’s capabilities, as called for
in the resolution.
Before I conclude, let me express our sincere
appreciation to all who have displayed solidarity with
us with regard to the recent attack in Istanbul. We have
also taken note of certain elements of the statement of
the representative of the Syrian regime. They are, if
nothing else, words of disrespect to the memories of
victims and to their family members.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): At the outset, I align
myself with the statement made by the representative of
Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (see A/70/PV.109).
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is a living document. The tenth anniversary of
its adoption is a sobering reminder of the challenges the
international community has encountered so far and
the ever-new threats that continue to engulf us across
our borders.
As I speak, a situation is unfolding in our capital,
where a number of armed assailants have reportedly
taken some local and foreign nationals hostage at a
restaurant. Our authorities are trying to resolve the
situation through combined law enforcement efforts and
to avoid any further bloodshed, to the extent possible.
It is still premature to make any comments about the
assailants’ real motives.
We echo the Secretary-General’s sentiments that
a show of our unity of purpose is a sine qua non to
defeat the global phenomenon of terrorism and violent
extremism. The consensus resolution 70/291 adopted
at this fifth review of the Global Strategy has indeed
allowed us to pass that test. My delegation joins others
in conveying our appreciation to Argentina and Iceland
for diligently steering us through the adoption of the
resolution. It will stand out as an important record,
as the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism (A/70/674) has been recognized
as part of the Global Strategy’s broader framework.
This should pave the way towards a further balanced
implementation of the Strategy across its four pillars.

16-2072623/28

A/70/PV.110

The resolution attempts to strike some balance in
identifying the local and external drivers of terrorism
and the violent extremism that is conducive to terrorism.
This is crucial, since a selective approach to the
underlying causes of terrorism and violent extremism
may serve political expediency, but it will hardly make
the counter-terrorism narrative holistic and credible.
The resolution also calls on the Secretary-General
to make concrete suggestions concerning the means
for enhancing coordination and coherence in United
Nations counter-terrorism activities. In that regard, my
delegation would like to see pragmatic and decisive
suggestions to address the institutional gaps that have
been noted. We share the Secretary-General’s concern
over the paucity of resources for capacity-building to
support the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. This needs to be addressed
in right earnest, starting with an analytical report from
the Secretary-General on a realistic assessment of the
resources required.
We appreciate the ongoing work of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and other
United Nations entities to contribute to Member States’
capacity-building, from which we have benefited in
many aspects. We need to map the United Nations
system in order to identify the available expertise within
various entities, in accordance with their respective
mandates. That could help us to avoid duplicating
our efforts and allow us to concentrate resources and
expertise within one or two specialized entities, thereby
ensuring sustainable and predictable capacity-building
support.
The Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism (A/70/674) would also benefit
from mobilizing additional resources that could be
complemented by public-private funding mechanisms,
such as the Global Community Engagement and
Resilience Fund. In Bangladesh, our authorities have
expressed interest in developing a national action plan
on preventing violent extremism within the framework
of our national counter-terrorism strategy. Our
society’s strides in women’s empowerment have been
critical to building resilience to the spread of violent
extremism and radicalization at the community level.
Our religious leaders have proven to be important allies
in disseminating counter-terrorist narratives from the
perspective of the holy scriptures. We are counting on a
whole-of-society approach to reverse the radicalization
24/28

01/07/2016

trend among certain segments of our youth, including
those who are motivated to act on their own or in small
splinter groups. We call for the sustained support of
our development partners to scale up our investment
in inclusive and transformative education and gainful
employment opportunities for our young people.
On the counter-terrorism front, we are working
to further develop our capacities in investigation and
prosecution, witness and victim protection, countering
online violent extremist narratives, tracking the linkage
between the diaspora and terrorist financing, ensuring
effective border management, aviation and maritime
security, and promulgating a comprehensive national list
of controlled dual-use and other materials. The recent
establishment of a counter-terrorism and transnational
crimes unit, with 600 police personnel, is aimed at
further strengthening our law enforcement capacity
to contain terrorist acts, cybercrimes, the financing of
terrorism and related transnational organized crimes.
We recognize the need for the regular orientation of law
enforcement agencies, the media and other stakeholders
on international human rights and rule-of-law standards
in counter-terrorism responses.
At the global level, Bangladesh supports carrying
forward the work on developing comprehensive
counter-terrorism legislation. We reiterate our call
for developing a shared understanding among law
enforcement and prosecution authorities and the
information and communication technologies industry
to facilitate an effective legal response to prevent
the abuse of the Internet and social media networks,
especially when used for terrorist purposes.
The Government of Bangladesh, under Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina’s leadership, remains committed
to a zero-tolerance approach to terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. Resolute actions taken to degrade
home-grown terrorist outifts and deny sanctuary to
any regional or international terrorist operative have
created an existential crisis for those elements. In their
desperate measures, they have found patronage from
certain political groups that have faced difficulty in
advancing their own vested agendas in an environment
of democracy, pluralism, diversity and tolerance. That
unholy nexus of terrorists and political extremists has
been mainly responsible for recent targeted attacks and
for making martyrs of intellectuals, religious leaders
of different denominations, rights activists and foreign
nationals.
16-20726

01/07/2016

In turn, the situation has attracted the attention
of certain international terrorist networks that are
evidently seeking to gain a foothold in the region
by making exaggerated claims about their presence
and involvement within our territory. In many
ways, this unfortunate episode is a reminder of the
struggle, during our War of Independence, to create a
democratic, secular, non-communal and multicultural
nation. Despite the current odds, we continue to draw
inspiration from that struggle and remain convinced
that we shall triumph over this phase, hopefully in a
conclusive manner, as we have done again and again.
We seek the international community’s continued
support and understanding for our efforts.
Mr. Holovka (Serbia): First of all, I wish to express
our condolences and sympathies to the families and
nations of the victims of the latest terrorist attacks.
I also wish to thank the two co-facilitators and their
teams for their outstanding work and tremendous
efforts in negotiating resolution 70/291.
The Republic of Serbia aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier today by the observer of the
European Union (see A/70/PV.109). I shall therefore
make some comments from my national perspective.
The growing threats of terrorism and violent
extremism are among the greatest perils of the
present day. Frequent and, regrettably, visible tragic
consequences are evident all over the world. The region
of South-East Europe is no exception in that regard.
In fighting terrorism, we need increased international
coordination and exchanges of experiences. Our
meeting today is another step in the right direction.
For 10 years now, the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy has been the cornerstone
of our joint efforts to eliminate terrorism. Counterterrorism activities within the United Nations system
are of priority importance to Serbia, and my country
has invested significant efforts to fully implement all
relevant documents of the United Nations, including
the Strategy and its principles. The activities and the
coordination of measures undertaken in the context of
the four pillars of the Strategy are of great importance
if we are to achieve the desired results. Addressing
the causes and preventive measures, strengthening
the capacities of countries and the role of the United
Nations, and the promotion of human rights and the
rule of law have been at the forefront of Serbia’s efforts
to fight terrorism.

A/70/PV.110

As a victim of terrorism and violent extremism,
Serbia considers a high level of cooperation, including
cooperation in prevention activities, to be the best
way to fight this scourge effectively. Intensifying
national, regional and international efforts in fighting
terrorism and extremism and preventing radicalization
is therefore of paramount importance. The number of
foreign terrorist fighters recruited in the region of the
Western Balkans is smaller than in other parts of the
world. As a sponsor of Security Council resolution
2178 (2014), my country has made significant efforts to
counter the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon. We
have taken preventive measures and measures to ensure
social inclusion. While recognizing the specific threat
posed by the phenomenon, our relevant Government
agencies have given appropriate attention to centres of
potential indoctrination and recruitment.
Recently, the Secretary-General presented his Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674).
In resolution 70/254 of 12 February 2016, the General
Assembly welcomed that initiative and announced that
new efforts would be taken in that field.
My country is well aware of the importance
of taking timely action, and its institutions are
actively engaged in preventing violent extremism and
radicalization, the all-important stepping stones that
lead to terrorism. The promotion of good governance,
respect for human rights and the rule of law are all
instrumental in decreasing the risks of terrorism and
creating conditions for its eradication. In that regard,
providing young people choices and offering them
support can also have a catalytic effect.
During its chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in
2015, Serbia launched, in cooperation with the OSCE
secretariat, the OSCE United in Countering Violent
Extremism initiative. At its meeting in Belgrade on
4 December 2015, the OSCE Ministerial Council
adopted the Declaration on Preventing and Countering
Violent Extremism and Radicalization that Lead to
Terrorism and the Declaration on Reinforcing OSCE
Efforts to Counter Terrorism in the Wake of Recent
Terrorist Attacks.
Today perhaps more than ever, we need joint
efforts as the United Nations and its Member States
continue to face an ever greater threat of terrorism.
We need to strengthen our capacities and take
comprehensive measures, including prevention, to fight

16-2072625/28

A/70/PV.110

01/07/2016

terrorism. Failure or lack of cooperation in that regard
is unacceptable.

dynamism of the challenges that we face. Along that
line, I wish to underscore the following pertinent points.

Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
the President of the General Assembly for convening
the fifth review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and the Secretary-General for
his report on the implementation of the Strategy
(A/70/826). I would also like to commend the Permanent
Representatives of Argentina and Iceland and their
respective teams for co-facilitating the consultations
on resolution 70/291, on the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

First, coordination and coherence must remain
fundamental to our global cooperation. The United
Nations system can assist Member countries in
achieving these objectives by reaching out to global
and regional organizations or frameworks on counterterrorism. This process should aim at connecting the
different efforts and promoting synergy to ensure
greater impacts on the ground. Such a process would
also improve networks among different regional
organizations or frameworks, and encourage them to
share relevant information pertaining to local dynamics
and their implications outside the region.

Indonesia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Saudi Arabia on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (see
A/70/PV.109).
Since the last review of the Strategy in 2014 (see
A/68/PV.94 et seq.), terrorism has continued to present
a great challenge to global peace and security. In certain
aspects, the challenges are even greater now than they
were in 2014. On the issue of foreign terrorist fighters,
for example, we have witnessed a growth in the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters entering conflict areas in
the Middle East. Their presence has complicated efforts
to start a political process to end the conflict. Further,
foreign terrorist fighters who return to their home
countries bring with them skills and experience in
planning attacks and pose the risk of spreading terrorist
narratives. We have seen frequent attacks by lone
terrorists, encouraged, inter alia, by the availability
of violent extremist materials on the Internet. There
is also a risk of terrorist groups exploiting the flow of
refugees and asylum seekers to send their members to
other countries.
Despite those tremendous challenges, however,
the international community remains committed to
strengthening efforts to counter terrorism and violent
extremism. The meeting that we are having today
is a testament to that steadfast commitment. Earlier
this year, the Secretary-General introduced his Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674),
which is intended to complement the Strategy. Outside
the United Nations system, countries and regional
organizations have continued working together to build
capacities and exchange knowledge and experiences.
Indonesia is of the view that the implementation of the
Strategy in the coming period should build upon those
promising developments and take into account the
26/28

Secondly, preventive measures must remain at
the forefront of our efforts. Taking into account the
complexity of challenges, it is well understood that
preventive measures must encompass a wide range of
aspects, including preventing the spread of terrorist
and violent extremist narratives, the travel of foreign
terrorist fighters, terrorist attacks from occurring and
terrorist financing, among others. Those daunting tasks
demand that States remain ahead of terrorist groups in
terms of capacity and information. Preventive measures
are also closely related to addressing the conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism. Poverty, injustice
and discrimination are among the conditions that
encourage people to embrace violent views. Meanwhile,
prolonged conflicts continue to provide safe havens to
terrorist groups and become magnets attracting foreign
terrorist fighters. Our common endeavours to end
conflicts are critical in that particular matter.
Third is the strengthening of United Nations
roles in building States’ capacity to prevent and
combat terrorism. Indonesia welcomes the efforts of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
and the Counter-Terrorism Centre to push for a more
coordinated approach in all United Nations capacitybuilding activities. Along the same line, we continue to
advocate for a more effective monitoring and evaluation
system to ensure that United Nations capacity-building
activities remain relevant to the needs of each State.
Critical in this area is the State’s capacity to devise
a national plan that optimizes soft measures to prevent
terrorism, such as education, instilling tolerance and
dialogue. States must also be able to assemble the
different but complementary capacities of relevant
stakeholders, including civil society organizations,
16-20726

01/07/2016

media, families, women, young people and victims of
terrorist attack. The capacity to protect human rights
while countering terrorism is also essential because the
violation of human rights may be used by terrorists to
support their narratives.
To conclude, Indonesia wishes to re-emphasize the
danger of associating terrorism and violent extremism
with a specific religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic
group. Such practices are incorrect and will only impede
all our efforts to establish coordinated approaches.
Mr. Garcia Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I should like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the progress of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(A/70/826) and the President of the General Assembly
for having convened this fifth review, which I have
had the honour to co-facilitate with my colleague and
friend, Ambassador Einar Gunnarsson, Permanent
Representative of Iceland.
On behalf of my country, I also wish to reiterate our
deepest condolences to the Government and the people
of Turkey with regard to the attack that took place at
Istanbul Atatürk Airport this week, and to reaffirm my
country’s condemnation of terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. Acts of terrorism not only threaten
international peace and security, but also threaten
human life and endanger the stability, the consolidation
of democracy and socioeconomic development of
nations.
The actions carried out by Argentina to prevent and
eradicate terrorism are based on the full respect for the
rule of law, fundamental guarantees, international law,
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law, international refugee law, and the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Terrorism undermines the values ​​
and principles
of States, democracy and freedoms. Accordingly,
countering terrorism requires an integrated and
multidimensional approach in order to act on the broadest
possible levels of cooperation with a view to addressing
the threat in all its forms and manifestations. Terrorism
cannot be addressed solely through the implementation
of measures of defence or security, but must be based
on a comprehensive approach, as reflected in the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, starting
with the balanced implementation of its four pillars,
in full respect for international law, international

A/70/PV.110

human rights law, international humanitarian law and
refugee law.
In the framework of pillar I of the Global Strategy,
Argentina attaches great importance to prevention.
The critical importance of education in combating
discrimination, xenophobia, racism and other forms of
intolerance, and in promoting a culture of tolerance,
dialogue and diversity can never be overemphasized.
In this context, too, the role of the media is essential.
Accordingly, we have given our support to the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism (A/70/674), whose importance we have
recognized in resolution 70/291, which we have just
adopted, in the light of its preventive nature, and which
seeks to set up a comprehensive framework for fighting
the violent extremism that leads to terrorism. I wish
to express the firmest commitment of my country
with the resolution because it reflects both the values
and principles of the United Nations that support
Argentina’s position in the fight against terrorism and
the new nuances leading to terrorist acts that terrorism
and violent extremism have acquired in recent years and
especially since its last Strategy review in June 2014.
In this regard, we welcome the spirit of the resolution
and the actions that it seeks to elicit from Member
States, in particular strengthening their performance
in multilateral contexts, especially the United Nations,
the Secretariat, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF), the Security Council, the CounterTerrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate,
as well as specialized organizations and regional and
subregional organizations. Argentina considers that
these are the most appropriate forums for coordinating
the necessary collaboration and cooperation among
States for the prevention and eradication of terrorism.
Internet use by terrorist groups and the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters are two other aspects
that the resolution addresses as a priority and which
Argentina considers to have gained importance in the
field of preventing and fighting terrorism, and which
can only be dealt with through sustained cooperation
that allows for the sharing of experience and best
practices at the international level. In this regard,
I wish to emphasize the importance for preventing
radicalization and resulting violent extremism of
the use by terrorist groups of new information and
communications technology, particularly the Internet,
to communicate their message through a seductive

16-2072627/28

A/70/PV.110

narrative oriented towards vulnerable groups that are
fertile ground for extremist ideologies, thereby opening
the way for recruitment.
While the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters
seems to be neither certain nor imminent, both at the
Argentine and regional levels, we cannot help but pay
due attention to the phenomenon today. Our country
is aware of the dual track in which radicalization
leading to violent extremism can be played out in the
case of already-radicalized fighters who in turn use
the opportunity of returning to their home countries or
going to other countries to spread extremist ideologies
which contribute to new recruitments.
Terrorist networks forged against the backdrop
of violent extremism could pose a serious threat for
decades to come. Argentina believes that the most
efficient way to combat this phenomenon is to maximize
international cooperation to find mechanisms for
exchanging information on the movements of potential
foreign terrorist fighters. I wish to emphasize the
fundamental role that the United Nations, the Global
Strategy and its biannual reviews play in the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism, due to their
holistic and cross-cutting approach at national, regional
or international levels, which supports the Strategy and
enables preventing and combating these threats through
a common front.
In conclusion, we appreciate the high responsibility
assigned to my country, together with Iceland, to
co-facilitate the fifth biennial Review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy on the
occasion of the tenth anniversary of the Strategy.
Throughout the process we have tried to maintain an
open, transparent and inclusive approach, in order to
reach a solid final result that renews the Organization’s
consensus in its counter-terrorist activities. I think I can
say with satisfaction that we have achieved that goal. I
therefore wish to reiterate, on behalf of the facilitators
and our teams, our deep and sincere gratitude to the
delegations of all Member States for the constructive
spirit and the ongoing collaboration which allowed,
despite the difficulties and sensitive nature of the
subject, reached a final outcome.

28/28

01/07/2016

I also have a special word of thanks for the
Secretariat, particularly the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management and the
CTITF, for their constant support of the facilitators.
And finally I wish to thank the President of the General
Assembly, and especially his team, which permanently
offered their effective and tireless support throughout
the entire process.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this agenda item for this
meeting.
One representative has asked to exercise the right
of reply. I remind him that statements in the exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and to five minutes for the second
intervention and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Althari (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I wish to tell the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic that the reality in Syria speaks for itself. The
whole world is witnessing what is happening in that
country. The representative of Syria said that certain
countries finance terrorism, but that remark is just a
way for the Syrian Government to draw attention away
from what it is doing at home.
As for Israel, we have also noticed that that country
has been killing Palestinians and that its Government
is trying to distract attention from all the killing, the
occupation of Palestine, and the fact that Gaza has
been turned into a place of death and destruction. All
these crimes have been perpetrated by Israel against
the Palestinians. In the light of Israel’s State terrorism,
none of the statements made by its representative should
carry any weight.
In terms of our efforts to combat terrorism, it is
clear how hard we have been working to that end.
Resolution 70/291, which we have adopted today, is the
best proof possible of the efforts made by the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia in these endeavours.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

16-20726
