United Nations

S/PV.5000

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

5000

th meeting
Wednesday, 30 June 2004, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Baja . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Philippines)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Zinsou
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Cheng Jingye
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Akram
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Konuzin
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Holliday

Agenda
Security Council mission
Briefing by the head of the Security Council mission to West Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-40859 (E)

*0440859*

S/PV.5000

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Briefing by the head of the Security Council
mission to West Africa
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Sir Emyr Jones Parry,
head of the Security Council mission to West Africa.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I would like to welcome the return of the
members of the Council and of the Secretariat who
took part in the mission to West Africa.
I would like now to give the floor to Sir Emyr
Jones Parry, head of the Security Council mission to
West Africa.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry: In September 2005, the
United Nations has an important rendezvous with the
Millennium Declaration, when a summit of the General
Assembly will review progress in implementing the
commitments we took on in 2000. The Millennium
Development Goals can be achieved in most of Asia
and Latin America, but we already know that Africa is
way off track, threatening us with an overall failure in
2015 if we do not start making real breakthroughs now.
Many African leaders have stepped up to the challenge
in establishing the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD).
It is in Africa that honouring our commitments
will affect most lives, and where failing to honour
them will cause the most despair. We have a moral duty
and a practical self-interest in helping their efforts to
build a prosperous and stable continent. Without
security in Africa, there will be no prosperity and
stability. In the Security Council, we spend some 50

2

per cent to 60 per cent of our time on Africa. The new
threat of weapons of mass destruction and terror
always risks being spread where instability and conflict
reign. Yet recent peace agreements offer millions of
Africans the chance of a fresh start, and through
structures like the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
Africans are building their own peacekeeping
capacities. It is the responsibility of the Council to give
them our fullest support.
Why West Africa? Because it is a region of key
interest where the United Nations is investing heavily,
where there is much promise, where there are vibrant
societies, where there is rich potential and yet where
there are fragile States that often lack infrastructure
and absorptive capacities. Problems are shared, and
often have contagious effects on neighbours. ECOWAS
has demonstrated political and military leadership in
the region and is striving today for increased economic
cooperation, as a contribution to greater prosperity.
Hence the simple aims of the mission: to identify
a coherent strategy for United Nations intervention
across the spectrum; to encourage and support the
efforts of ECOWAS; to identify how to build on
current cooperation among United Nations missions
and the United Nations bodies in the subregion; and to
determine how we should assess overall progress
towards the Council’s objectives to further peace and
regional security. All of those aims are set out in
greater detail in the letter which you, Mr. President,
sent to the Secretary-General on 15 June (S/2004/491).
During the visit, our focus was on underscoring
the regional aspects as we visited individual countries
and debated issues with their leaders.
Regional cooperation can clearly be a major
catalyst for economic growth. Yet what we see time
and time again is that legitimate free movement is
inhibited by restrictions and by racketeers. Yet porous
borders facilitate trafficking in arms, persons and illicit
items in general. It is also clear that tackling problems
successfully in one country sometimes only displaces
the problem to a neighbour. Fighters who are unable to
operate in one country and who have no apparent
allegiance just move next door. A graphic analogy was
used on one occasion: if you have got a cockroach in
one room, there is no point in just fumigating the room.
The only way to get rid of the cockroaches is to

S/PV.5000

fumigate the house. That is a simple analogy as to why
a regional approach is needed.
The problem of refugees is affecting the whole
region. Guinea, for example, has borne the burden of
Sierra Leonean and Liberian exiles.
We went beyond the simple issues. We
recognized that the horizontal aspects of concern to the
Council do not respect national borders. Throughout
the visit we tried to address the themes of human
rights; governance; child soldiers; peace-building;
small arms proliferation; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; the role of women; poverty;
HIV/AIDS; elections; and so forth. There is a raft of
such issues. But they have common themes affecting
all the countries and the region as a whole.
We were also keen to meet representatives of
civil society and the non-governmental organizations
working in the field. The briefing that we were given at
the Arria-style meeting beforehand proved very useful.
Of course, the raison d’être of the Security
Council is international peace and security. Without
security and peace, there can be no sustainable
development. But without development, stability and
security become even more difficult. So we come to
the self-evident truth: security and development tend to
be interdependent. As well as the broader interest, we
therefore looked at the situation in individual
countries, discussed the key issues with ministers and
demonstrated our support for the United Nations
missions active in the region and for the work of the
funds and specialized agencies.
We visited seven countries in eight days. It was
right to start in Ghana, which holds the current
chairmanship of ECOWAS. While there we also met
the ECOWAS secretariat. We moved on successively to
Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria, GuineaBissau and Guinea (Conakry). We were also briefed in
Dakar
by
Ahmedou
Ould-Abdallah,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa.
The formal written report should be circulated
later this week — initially in English, I think, with
translations to follow. Meanwhile, I would like to share
some quick impressions of the discussion in the
individual capitals.
In Accra, Mr. Chambas, Executive Secretary of
ECOWAS, set out the agenda for the work of

ECOWAS. Frankly, it is impressive and fits well with
the Council’s priorities. It is dominated by a political
and military role, with the intention now being to
prepare a standby force of 6,500. ECOWAS throughout
is playing a constructive role in the region, especially
through the Ghanaian-Nigerian efforts to facilitate
dialogue in Côte d’Ivoire. Economic aspects are less
advanced, but they offer considerable potential.
The visit to Abidjan was timely and important.
We expressed concern at the present political impasse
and the non-functioning of the Government, and we
delivered tough messages to all the parties, to the
Government, to President Gbagbo, to parliamentarians
and to civil society. We emphasized the cardinal
importance of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement and
brought together its signatories for the first time since
that Agreement was signed. We were given
commitments, and it is our view that we should
monitor them carefully and hold accountable anyone
who is obstructive. The goal is clear: it is to proceed
peacefully to elections in 2005 based on LinasMarcoussis.
In Monrovia, Liberia — a country starting afresh
and picking itself up from the devastation wreaked by
Taylor for so long — we were impressed by the
commitment of Chairman Bryant and his team and by
the improved security situation, thanks to the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). But progress is
clearly going to be a big challenge. In stressing the
need to build peace and institutions, we emphasized
that there could be no impunity for those who faced
indictment.
We spent 24 hours in Freetown — but I would
like to say that our first thoughts today must be
sympathy for the families of those who perished in
yesterday’s tragic helicopter accident, individuals who
were dedicating themselves to peace and to rebuilding
Sierra Leone, and our deepest sympathy must go to the
Government of Pakistan.
In Sierra Leone, there has been a lot of progress.
The military and police forces are gradually
strengthening, and we seem on course to drawn down
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) as previously agreed by the Council. But
getting Sierra Leone to point where it is capable of
managing its own security and defence is going to be
only a first challenge. The State is fragile, and building
its institutions, particularly developing a prosperous

3

S/PV.5000

economy, one which at the moment is heavily
dependent on the presence of the international
community, is going to be very difficult.
In Abuja, we had an outstanding meeting with
President Obasanjo and Foreign Minister Adenji. We
shared impressions on regional aspects and on the role
of ECOWAS. But we were also able to discuss the
positive developments in the Sudan and the
humanitarian crisis in Darfur. We are encouraged by
President Obasanjo’s commitment and his belief in the
role that the African Union could play.
The President also gave us a magisterial
presentation on the importance of NEPAD. He
emphasized the importance of the international
community’s supporting the initiative through a much
increased flow of resources, improved trade access and
debt relief. But he also set out a clear context of
development and security and stressed the need for a
partnership covering conflict, security, governance,
democracy and economic development. He also briefed
us on the useful progress made in the 25 June meeting,
which he chaired between Presidents Kabila and
Kagame.
We found Guinea-Bissau evidently the poorest
country which we visited, yet we were told that the
conditions were visibly better than when our
colleagues visited last year. We welcomed there the
presence of Ambassador Kumalo and of two colleagues
from the Economic and Social Council, who joined us
to underline the strength of United Nations support as a
whole for Guinea-Bissau.
The country is starting from the bottom, having
emerged from turmoil, and the Government has been in
office only for some 50 days. But there were
encouraging signs, with a President and a Government
committed to progress. The International Monetary
Fund (IMF) is likely to agree a special post-conflict
programme in September, so we encourage the positive
trends and underline to the military the importance of
political control and the need for substantial
restructuring and retirement within the military
establishment.
The challenge for the United Nations system and
for Guinea-Bissau’s development partners will be to
support these positive trends and facilitate an
absorptive capacity and administrative infrastructure,
both of which are, at the moment, cruelly lacking.

4

In Conakry, we spent an hour with President
Conté and discussed regional issues. The President
welcomed the dialogue, noted that Guinea had suffered
most from regional conflict, and expressed his personal
commitment to working for peace.
Throughout the visit, we were very impressed by
the dedication of United Nations peacekeepers and by
the United Nations country teams. We were able to
explore a range of issues with the different Special
Representatives. Coordination is in place to deliver
effective, coherent policies worked out in conjunction
with host Governments. The Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General have a key role in leadership and
direction and also in presenting the United Nations to
the host country. What is vital, it seems to us, is that
the United Nations be seen to be supporting policies of
which the Government has ownership and that it
should be perceived as a friend, as an enabler, and that
at the same time that it should do this without fostering
permanent dependency. We felt that the representatives
were achieving those goals.
I should like to thank my colleagues for their
contributions and for the tireless energy which they
displayed throughout a long mission, and our particular
thanks are due to the Secretariat.
If I may, I should now like to offer some
conclusions, starting with a statement of the blindingly
obvious: the United Nations and the international
community have to stay the course in West Africa. This
will require a sustained effort, but we cannot afford to
give up anywhere. We cannot afford the risk of failing
States, or even failure in parts of individual States.
But building peace, establishing institutions,
developing absorptive capacities, putting in place the
rule of law and holding free and fair elections are much
more difficult than trying to stop a conflict. The risk of
slipping back into conflict is always greater in the first
two years or so after the end of conflict, so vigilance
and sustained commitment by the United Nations and
its entire family, by the international financial
institutions, by ECOWAS and all the other elements of
the international community, will, in our view, remain
essential.
But to get there, economic development will also
be essential. It is essential to underpin, support and
harness the assets and economic potential of the region.
Some continuing degree of dependency culture is
natural and inevitable, but sovereign Governments

S/PV.5000

must exercise control and assume their responsibilities
quickly, so that sustainable development and peace go
hand in hand and are secured.
It seems to us that the regional approach is
absolutely essential, for the reasons I have tried to set
out. The countries and the different issues are so
intertwined that regional success is a prerequisite for
stability in one country. Therefore it also makes sense
for us to support those countries in the region which
demonstrate commitment to good governance and to
human rights. Sometimes they are overlooked in our
concentration on the problem cases. It was suggested to
us that, if there is another mission next year that we
ought to go and see more of the successful countries,
those not in conflict.
We should not be too shy in taking action to avert
conflict. If the warning signs are there, we should be
prepared to act, and be prepared to act sooner. The
Mixed Commission on Bakassi, for example, chaired
by Special Representative Ould-Abdallah, is a good
example of conflict prevention and of better value and
more effective use of funding in the long run than
peacekeeping.
Within the region, the Special Representatives
meet regularly, and it is important that the regional
synergies of individual peacekeeping operations are
better developed. But what we have to remember is
that the peacekeeping operations are very tightly
resourced indeed, with no reserves and little flexibility.
They are very much operating at the maximum of what
is possible.
More people are killed by small arms in Africa
than by any another type of weapon. The arms trade
causes instability. The present moratorium needs to
evolve into a more aggressive attack on all aspects of
this trade, something which I hope the Council can
come back to soon.
By necessity, most of our United Nations effort is
targeted at post-conflict situations. But clearly more
effective conflict-prevention policies are needed, and
that is not only in West Africa. Again, that is
something which I hope the Council could address
substantively, and soon.
In all this, we were struck that ECOWAS is a
force for good, and we should look to see how we can
give it further support.

Are there imaginative ways in which we can help
with the training and even the funding of a standby
force? It seems to me that we need a better definition
of the relationship between United Nations
peacekeeping and regional efforts. Perhaps the HighLevel Panel will help us on that. Certainly, the special
event which the incoming Romanian presidency
intends to hold on 20 July to look at the relationship
with regional organizations is a step in that direction.
Development, security and stability are essential
if peace is to endure in West Africa. That will demand
the sustained effort of the international community as a
whole and all the interventions that we can bring to
bear. By that, of course, I do not mean military
intervention; I am talking about the range of peaceful
support which can be given to Governments.
Sometimes in this city, perhaps in this country,
some dispute the role and the relevance of the United
Nations. Those of us who last week saw first-hand the
work of the United Nations in West Africa and who
now have a reinforced impression of the problems
which the United Nations is tackling there have no
doubts about the primary importance of the United
Nations and of its work in the field. It is a simple truth,
it seems to me, that we need to tackle these problems
in West Africa if only because, if neglected, they could
become problems for all of us.
That is my contribution, but the mission was very
much a team effort. If I may, Mr. President, I would
like to ask you to invite Ambassador De La Sablière
and Ambassador Gaspar Martins to add their personal
impressions, too.
The President: I thank Ambassador Jones Parry
for his briefing.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
have little to add to the briefing by Ambassador Jones
Parry, whom I wish to commend for the brilliant way
he led the mission.
Since I have been invited to take the floor, I shall
simply underline a few points, most of which have
already been raised. First, with respect to Security
Council missions, it is not easy for us to organize them
due to our schedules. However, based on my
experience, having now participated in three of them, I
think they are very useful, first of all, because they
promote better understanding of the Security Council’s
concerns and policies as defined in the Council’s

5

S/PV.5000

resolutions and statements. I think that referring to and
explaining those texts to concerned parties is a positive
contribution.
Secondly, I think the missions are useful for
communicating messages on the implementation of
those texts: whether we are satisfied, or, on the
contrary, concerned.
And finally, I believe that the missions —
perhaps not the least of their contributions — also
considerably enrich the Council, because in 10 days
one can acquire a great deal of information and get a
better idea of the situation on the ground. I think that,
following a mission, all of us are greatly enriched.
With that in mind, we are considering a mission to
Central Africa in the autumn. This has already been
agreed upon in principle.
With respect to the Council’s relationship with
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), which my colleague Ambassador Jones
Parry just referred to, I was struck by the similarity of
our analyses and the complementarity of our actions. I
think the Council has been right to cultivate that
relationship; we should continue to do so because our
approaches are fully complementary.
With respect to the regional approach, I shall
limit myself to noting that I am especially concerned
by the problem of the circulation of small arms and
former combatants. Different countries are not moving
towards the settlement of their crises at the same pace.
Take, for example, Sierra Leone, which has just
emerged from crisis. One of the concerns of the Sierra
Leonean authorities is that the process of settling the
conflict in the country should not be adversely affected
by transfers of weapons and combatants who might
come into Sierra Leone. It is a fact that the situation
there is not developing at the same pace, and there is
therefore a special concern at the regional level to try
to better deal with the problem of small arms and the
movement of former combatants. An arms moratorium
exists, but there is no doubt it is insufficient because
weapons are still in circulation. I do not know in what
framework, but the Security Council should, in
cooperation with ECOWAS, return to this issue. It is a
difficult issue because it is not easy to be effective in
this area. But I think that it is necessary to return to it,
as Ambassador Jones Parry suggested.
I shall comment only briefly on individual
situations. The report to be issued discusses them in

6

detail and makes recommendations. I would simply say
that on Côte d’Ivoire there are some encouraging signs,
but I think we have all come back rather concerned.
The Security Council has delivered its messages, which
are contained in its resolutions and statements. I think
the Council has done that clearly and firmly. It must
now follow the situation closely. Those who hinder
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement or
continue to attack the United Nations should bear their
responsibility, as the Security Council stated in its
presidential
statement
of
25
May
2004
(S/PRST/2004/17).
We shall follow the situation closely. Interesting
commitments have been made. We should monitor
them closely. Those commitments relate to the
restoration of the normal functioning of the
Government and to adopting by 28 July three texts
provided for in the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement: laws
on nationality, property and the electoral commission.
In the presence of the President of the National
Assembly and the Prime Minister, President Gbagbo
said that if those laws were not adopted by 28 July, a
special session would be held in August to do so. We
shall follow that situation very closely. Commitments
were made also regarding the possible establishment of
a United Nations radio station and the signing of a
headquarters agreement.
In Liberia, we saw an increase in the strength of
United Nations force in a country which has emerged
from a war that completely destroyed it. We can see the
vastness of the task. But as for me, what I saw rather
encouraged me.
In Sierra Leone, the real problem is the exit
problem and what will happen after the United Nations
force leaves. It should not destabilize or jeopardize
Sierra Leone. Clearly, the problem is economic in
nature. Thus, economic growth — a current goal —
which is due to the current United Nations presence,
should not be lost.
With respect to Guinea-Bissau, substantial efforts
are being made. Those efforts should continue, with the
assistance of the international community. In that
connection, the fact that in this specific case, we
conducted a mission together with our colleagues from
the Economic and Social Council, including
Ambassador Kumalo, has been very useful, and we
were able to work together in that country. I think that
in Burundi we could continue the experiment.

S/PV.5000

I, too, should like to conclude by thanking the
Secretariat for all its efforts and for having made the
mission possible. It was quite a difficult mission,
because we visited many countries in only a few days.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): The mission was
successful, and one of the main reasons is that we had
very good leadership in the person of Ambassador
Jones Parry. The mission was timely; we visited
countries where action was needed to break deadlocks
and to make peacekeeping or peace-building situations
more effective. We went to deliver messages from the
Security Council, which can be accomplished either
through our presidential statements or through direct
contacts with the main stakeholders — particularly
with the peoples of these countries. That is because
peacekeeping and peace-building must be carried out
principally by the main actors: the peoples of the
countries that we visited. I think we managed to deliver
those messages.
In the case of Côte d’Ivoire — where the
peacekeeping operation seemed to be more endangered
by the deadlock that persisted with the continuing lack
of dialogue between the Government of President
Gbagbo and his opposition — I think I can say that the
meeting we held with all the stakeholders with whom it
was possible to meet during a day-and-a-half-long
mission also attained that objective. Right now, some
results are beginning to emerge in Côte d’Ivoire.
Thanks to the messages and to the firmness with which
they were delivered, the deadlock has been broken and
United Nations Radio — which is very much needed to
pass on United Nations messages to the people of Côte
d’Ivoire — already seems to be back on the airwaves
since we left Côte d’Ivoire. Moreover, the dialogue
between President Gbagbo and his opposition seems to
be under way in Abidjan, which means that our
mission seems to have produced the results we had
intended: making the peacekeeping effort and our
investment in peace effective and making our results
tangible. That can be accomplished only through the
firmness we demonstrated in delivering the messages.
We went to West Africa to say that we needed a
different environment throughout the region. The
messages that were delivered — whether they
concerned child soldiers or the trafficking in small
arms and light weapons — were communicated in a
way that enabled us to express clearly the Council’s
concerns about those problems.

We had the opportunity to meet with the leaders
of the peacekeeping operations in both Liberia and
Sierra Leone. That was one of our key concerns, since
peacekeeping can be more seriously affected in those
two countries by the lack of progress in the first
country we visited, Côte d’Ivoire. The processes now
under way in both Sierra Leone and Liberia —
particularly the process of disarming former
combatants — seem quite well established. We hope
that we have sent the correct messages and that we can
continue to assess progress in the future when we look
at specific mandates.
There is a situation that is of some concern to us:
in Sierra Leone, the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) seems to be more or less ending its
mandate. We need to seriously consider this situation,
where the objectives that we defined have not yet been
fully attained. I am sure that it will be reviewed
properly in the Council at the appropriate time. The
current situation requires more peace-building in order
to complete the peacekeeping operation. Unless that is
handled properly, we may face a situation that we
could have avoided. But such a situation can still be
avoided.
The country we left with more hopes is GuineaBissau. The fact that, in a happy coincidence, the
Council mission visited Guinea-Bissau at the same
time as the Economic and Social Council served to
reinforce a message that peacekeeping and peacebuilding, or country-building, go together. In GuineaBissau, there has been very clear progress, judging
from the situation we saw there last year. That progress
can be reinforced only if there is commitment by the
international community; here, the way must be
pointed out by the Council.
It was also fortunate that, during the mission’s
stay in Guinea-Bissau, a mission of the International
Monetary Fund was reviewing the situation in the
country. The assessment — which was shared with
members of the Council — is that there is a clear effort
aimed at improving the governance of the country, and
that it is being taken seriously by the newly elected
Government. We had meetings with members of civil
society; with parliamentarians, particularly the
President of Parliament; and with the main political
parties. There is cohesion on what needs to be done. In
particular, there is hope that the Council, representing
the international community, will be prepared to
reward Guinea-Bissau if there is constancy and

7

S/PV.5000

perseverance in attaining the objectives that have been
defined.

respected the Constitution, and yet there was a coup
d’état a few months later.

Another important factor that was a key to our
success was that we had the opportunity to meet with
the leadership and the main stakeholders of these
countries, including — as already indicated by
Ambassador Jones Parry — the leaders of two of those
countries, President Obasanjo and President Kufuor,
and representatives of the Economic Community of
West African States, a subregional organization that
has been paying a very high level of attention to the
need to maintain peace and stability in the region in
order to enable its economies to develop. ECOWAS is
an organization that was created particularly to deal
with economic development, but it has taken peace and
stability seriously and is fully engaged with the
Council and with the international community to bring
about the solutions that are required either to break
deadlocks or to provide the right answers to problems
whenever they occur.

In Liberia, following thousands of murders, the
mass torture of women, and crimes committed in
connection with the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, did the mission feel that at least one criminal
may be punished in actual fact and not, as we have
seen thus far, with mere threats?

We will have the opportunity to discuss this, but
the report which has been eloquently presented here
this afternoon by Ambassador Jones Parry illustrates
very well what we did for seven days. Although we
spent just one day in each capital, in that one day quite
a bit was achieved that may make our Council more
effective and even more the key organ responsible for
peace and security in a region that very much needs it.
The Council is moving in that direction.
Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): My delegation thanks our colleagues,
Ambassadors Jones Parry, De La Sablière and Gaspar
Martins, for their briefing on the Security Council
mission to West Africa. I am sure that the visit was a
useful one. This year, unfortunately, my delegation was
unable to participate in the mission. Therefore,
following the oral briefing, I should like to ask a few
specific questions.
With respect to the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, did
the constitutional Government of the country ask for
assistance from the Security Council in settling the
conflict with the rebels? If so, what was the nature of
the request and how did the mission respond to it?
As to the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, what was
the mission’s impression of the military’s preparedness
for restraint and not to interfere in the country’s
constitutional regime? The mission met with the
military last year and was assured that the military

8

Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
think that the first thing to say is that there will be a
written report available very soon. I think it would be
rather good if we had an opportunity to consider that,
to have experts look at it, and perhaps to schedule
some sort of open discussion on it, which might
include the countries of the region. Let us have a
transparent debate — I would very much favour that.
The report, when you see it, goes into far greater
detail, obviously, than the three of us have sketched
out, but it does explain the extent of what we are doing
in Côte d’Ivoire. It raises some issues. Of course, what
the mission is doing in Côte d’Ivoire is with the full
agreement of the Government, and in everything we
were talking to the Government about it was all in the
best of atmospheres. We were very clear about what we
expected, but I detected — especially by the end of the
day — a very cooperative response and appreciation of
what the United Nations was trying to do and what the
Security Council mission actually intended.
In terms of Guinea-Bissau and the military, I
should say that, for those who have sat in briefings
with the military in other countries, it was a salutary
experience. We were in a fairly large room with lots of
strip lighting, only one of which worked. It was near
darkness. We had, I think, 12 military officers and the
chief of the defence staff of Guinea-Bissau, and by
agreement with the mission, I did a 10-minute
presentation on the importance of political control of
the military and the importance of restructuring, and
discussed aspects which all our military face in terms
of adaptation to tomorrow’s challenges. In a very frank
response, the chief of the defence staff explained why
there was a coup and made it clear that it was the last
thing they wished, but that they had got to the point
where, in their view, the interests of the country were
being put at risk.
What is significant about that coup is that the
Economic Community of West African States was on
the ground within 24 hours and that, within another 24
hours, a path for the restoration of civilian control had

S/PV.5000

been established. We did not get the impression, I
think, that this was a military that wanted to hang on to
power. Quite the opposite, there is a new Government
after elections and all that has happened in the space of
nine months. Thus, I think we came away believing in
the commitment to political control. I do not think we
were necessarily convinced that the steps that need to
be taken on restructuring are actually going to be easy
or rapid, but certainly we set out what we thought was
necessary.

On behalf of my team, I would like to thank all
delegations for their cooperation and for their support
of the Philippine presidency. We have enjoyed their
camaraderie and friendship. Despite some difficulties
and some differences among us, we have recognized
and appreciated one common thread among all of us,
and that is that all delegations have the singular goal of
making the Security Council work. That predisposition
by everyone is refreshing and enriching and is the key
to making the Council effective.

Child soldiers were a theme throughout and,
certainly in the case of Liberia, we hammered this
consistently. Thus, we addressed the horizontal themes,
as I said at the beginning, as best we could. That does
not mean that, on each of them, we got full satisfaction
in every place — of course not — but we did register
our total opposition to what had taken place, our wish
especially that the people who recruit child soldiers be
prosecuted, and our belief that the problems of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration for
child soldiers are particularly acute. Again, we
recognized in the case of Liberia that some 300
children had been reintegrated into schools and with
their families as a result of the United Nations effort,
but child soldiers are one of the abominations of West
Africa and it will require a substantial effort to tackle
them.

I would also like to express my profoundest
gratitude to the members of the highly motivated and
energetic team of the Security Council Secretariat
Branch. We thank them for their boundless
understanding and patience. They are the oil that has
lubricated the smooth running of the Philippine
presidency. Our thanks also go to our interpreters for
their patience in navigating between the rhyme and the
reason of our interventions, and to our verbatim
reporters for their skill in separating what is chaff from
what is grain.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
should like to express gratitude and appreciation to all
the members of the Security Council mission, which
was very ably led by Ambassador Jones Parry, for the
manner in which they discharged their important
responsibility on behalf of the Council.
Let me say a few words before we finally end this
meeting, as the Philippines ends its presidency today
for the month of June. I would say that June has been a
hectic, albeit undoubtedly historic month for the
Security Council. June is historically a significant
month, with events taking place which shape nations
all over the world. We have, over the past month,
reached important milestones, for which the Security
Council can be proud.
Also, today we have reached the plateau of the
five thousandth meeting of the Security Council, on a
topic that deserves great attention from the
international community: West Africa. This milestone
proves that the Security Council has been an effective
instrument for the preservation of international peace
and security over more than five decades of work.

Finally, I cannot end without relating a tale,
taking up the theme of Sir Emyr’s cockroaches. It may
be of some relevance in the Council. This is the story
of a precocious boy and his love of experiments. One
day the boy decided to perform an experiment. He got
the biggest and most robust frog, which he had
determined to be capable of leaping the farthest. First,
the boy cut off one front leg and then instructed the
frog to jump. It did. Next, he cut off the second front
leg. Again, he ordered the frog to leap, and it did. Then
he cut off one of the hind legs. He forthwith
commanded the frog to jump. The frog stumbled a bit,
but it was still able to make a short leap. Finally, the
boy severed the second hind leg. This time, when the
boy shouted at the frog to jump, it refused to leap in
any way. The boy even repeated the command several
times. Not even a feeble attempt to jump was elicited.
The young boy concluded that when you cut off the
four legs of a frog, it loses its sense of hearing. That
has threatened us in the Council.
I wish Ambassador Motoc and the Romanian
delegation all the best as they assume the presidency
tomorrow.
There are no further speakers. The Security
Council has thus concluded its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

9
