S/PV.7222

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7222nd meeting

Tuesday, 22 July 2014, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gasana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Rwanda)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Asselborn
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

14-47768 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1447768*

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.

Ramallah. I deeply apologize for being late, which was
due to my continuing engagement in Israel. I have only
just arrived. As you know, I am now well into my third
day of an ongoing mission throughout the region. I want
to thank the Security Council for its strong support for
my efforts.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: I wish to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General, the Ministers and other
representatives present here today. Their participation
is an affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite the representatives of
Algeria, Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Brazil, Canada, Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Japan, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mexico, Morocco, Namibia, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia, Turkey, Viet Nam, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Zimbabwe to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, and His Excellency
Mr. Abdou Salam Diallo, Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, who is joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Ramallah, and
to give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir, for
giving me the honour of briefing the Council from

2/70

22/07/2014

Ramallah is my fifth stop on a journey that has
so far included Qatar, Kuwait, Egypt and Israel. I will
continue on to Jordan, Saudi Arabia and other countries
of the region, if necessary. I have had intensive and
fruitful discussions with the leadership in all countries.
I also had a very meaningful meeting with Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas in Qatar and with United
States Secretary of State John Kerry, as well as the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States,
Mr. Nabil El-Arabi, in Cairo late last night. I have also
had the opportunity to meet the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Norway, who was visiting the region, and to
have a telephone conversation with President Hollande
of France. We exchanged our views and discussed the
current situation in the region. I am very grateful to
the many countries that have been engaging in the
diplomatic efforts to bring an end to this crisis.
I am sure that members of the Council will
understand that at this highly sensitive moment, I cannot
be expected to publicly reveal the details. Suffice it to
say that it is my hope and belief that these talks will
lead to results and an end to the fighting in the very
near future. Of course, there are many obstacles and
complexities. This is a mission of solidarity and peace.
But just as I landed in the region, I was greeted with
the news of the terrible fighting in Shejaiya, reflecting
the enormous human toll of the fighting and the scale
of the challenges before us. I have carried a three-part
message at every turn of my visit: first, stop the fighting;
secondly, start the dialogue; and thirdly, tackle the root
causes.
A ceasefire is essential, but without addressing
the deeper issues we will never solve the problem; we
will merely delay it for yet another time. The cycle will
continue, except the bitterness and hatred will become
that much more entrenched each time it comes around.
Quite simply, if a people are left with despair and
occupation, the problem will not disappear; it will only
grow.
The most promising prospect of a ceasefire comes
in the form of the initiative put forward by Egypt on the
basis of the November 2012 understanding on a ceasefire.
This effort has garnered the support of President Abbas
14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and the Arab League. Unfortunately, Hamas has yet to
respond positively. I encourage all those with influence
to urge constructive action. This is the most meaningful
path to peace. I have also discussed Israel’s legitimate
security concerns with Prime Minister Netanyahu and
Defense Minister Ya’alon, and I am going to continue
my meetings with President Peres and other ministers.
I once again strongly condemn the indiscriminate
rocket fire launched by Hamas and Islamic Jihad from
Gaza into Israel. I am also alarmed by Israel’s heavy
response and the corresponding high civilian death toll.
Since the Council was briefed on Sunday, the violence
has reached even more alarming levels. Yet again, too
many civilians, including many children, are paying
thè price for this latest escalation. I once again urge all
parties to rally behind a collective international effort
to end the fighting. There is no time to lose.
Immediately following this briefing, I will get the
latest update from our United Nations team in Gaza.
I want to stress how deeply proud I am of our many
United Nations colleagues, with the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) in the lead, courageously assisting
the people of Gaza in such difficult circumstances.
They are providing crucial relief and shelter to civilians
in imminent danger. The escalation of violence is now
acutely affecting UNRWA’s regular operations. Some
23 UNRWA installations are closed as a result of the
conflict. A total of 77 UNRWA installations have
been damaged since 1 June as a result of the conflict.
The premises have been used to store weapons. This
is unacceptable. Today, about 110,000 people — more
than 5 per cent of the population of Gaza — are seeking
shelter with UNRWA.
In the past, our premises in southern Lebanon
and Gaza have been hit with serious loss of life. I call
on Israel to exercise particular care to avoid another
unfortunate incident. I urge all present to respond to
UNWRA’s emergency flash appeal for $115 million to
address the most pressing humanitarian needs of the
people of Gaza. We must do all we can to alleviate
their suffering. I thank the many countries that have
already generous humanitarian assistance to the flash
appeal for UNRWA, including $47 million announced
by United States Secretary of State John Kerry. I also
thank United Nations staff, including my Special
Coordinator on the ground, Mr. Robert Serry, for their
relentless efforts to negotiate much-needed spaces to
respond to humanitarian needs.

S/PV.7222

The international community, including the
Council, as recently as Sunday evening has issued
numerous calls for an end to violence and for the
protection of civilians. We as the international
community have to assume responsibility for what is
the result of a collective failure to advance a political
solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We
cannot return to the status quo ante — a concern that
Palestinians and Israelis both share.
Core elements of resolution 1860 (2009) remain
unimplemented. They include an end to weapons
smuggling, the full opening of the crossings and
bringing Gaza back under one legitimate Palestinian
Government that accepts and adheres to the
commitments of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Sustainable peace and security will be achieved
only through a negotiated political settlement. Only
durable progress, including on socioeconomic and
governance issues, can permanently stabilize Gaza.
It is imperative to address the issue of governance.
Tens of thousands of employees hired after 2007 and
working in Gaza are not being paid, while more than
60,000 employees continue to receive salaries from
Ramallah without performing essential Government
functions in Gaza.
The United Nations remains prepared to help
coordinate and consult with all concerned parties.
This is the third time as Secretary-General that I
have had to come on an emergency mission to the region
to help end a crisis. That means that the children of
Gaza are now living through the third major assault in
the past five years of their young lives. The horror and
upheaval is beyond imagination. The cycle of suffering
must end. The parties must seize the opportunity not
only to renew a ceasefire, but also to support a durable
political, security, institutional and socioeconomic
progress that stabilizes Gaza. The parties must also
heed the Council’s call to return to negotiations in order
to find an end to this conflict through a viable twoState solution.
As I have repeatedly emphasized on my mission,
Israelis, but also Palestinians, need to feel a sense of
security. Palestinians, but also Israelis, need to see a
horizon of hope. Both sides need to be reassured that
international humanitarian law counts and that there
will be justice for all. Let us do our part for all the
peoples of this region.

14-477683/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Lastly, I hope the Council will understand that
I have a series of important meetings in Ramallah.
Therefore, I will be able to remain at this meeting until
6.50 p.m. here. I will be very happy to listen as much as
I can. I count on your continued support and leadership,
Sir.

22/07/2014

I now give the floor to the Observer of the Observer
State of Palestine.

densely populated civilian areas — has also resulted in
the destruction of more than 1,000 homes and damage
to more than 18,000 others. Fear and panic have gripped
the population, leading to the displacement of more than
100,000 people, who are now sheltering in UNRWA
schools, already double the number of Palestinians who
sought refuge in the Agency’s schools in the Israeli war
on Gaza of 2008 to 2009. We urgently appeal for efforts
to address the immense humanitarian needs of the
Palestinian civilians in Gaza, including through donor
support to UNRWA emergency appeals.

Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your skilled stewardship of the Security Council
this month and for the efforts to address the crisis being
faced by the Palestinian people, particularly due to the
Israeli military aggression in the Gaza Strip. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing
and convey our deep gratitude to him for undertaking
an emergency mission to the region in support of the
regional and international efforts to secure an urgent
ceasefire based on the Egyptian initiative and with the
active engagement of President Mahmoud Abbas and
other concerned parties. I also welcome Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg Asselborn, who is with
us today to attend this very important meeting.

With no regard for human life, Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to slaughter entire families. A family
of 26 people in Khan Younis, the Al-Jami family; a
family of 8 people in northern Gaza, the Abu Jarad
family; a family of 10 people in Shujaiya, the Ayyad
family; a family of 7 people in Shujaiya, the Al-Hallaq
family; a family of 6 people in Shujaiya, the Al-Sakafi
family; a family of 5 people, also in Shujaiya, the Sleem
family; a family of 4 people in Shujaiya, the Al-Hayyeh
family; and a family of 4 people in northern Gaza, the
Al-Zuweidi family, were among the many victims of
Israel’s heinous attacks in just the past three days, with
children and women constituting the majority of the
dead.

Today, we also recognize the efforts on the ground
of United Nations Special Coordinator Robert Serry,
including with regard to the calls for a humanitarian
pause, as well as the valiant efforts of United Nations
agencies on the ground, including the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA), under the leadership
of Commissioner-General Pierre Krähenbühl, and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, under the leadership of Under-SecretaryGeneral Valerie Amos, as well as other United Nations
agencies and humanitarian organizations, including
the International Committee of the Red Cross, that are
providing vital emergency assistance to the Palestinian
people at this time of crisis.

The casualties are mounting with every passing
minute. In one day alone, Sunday, 20 July, 95 Palestinians
were brutally killed, with at least 72 people, including
17 children, 14 women and 4 elderly persons, massacred
in Shujaiya by the occupying forces, who left the streets
of the area littered with bodies and with many victims
trapped under the rubble of homes, thereby ensuring
a rising death toll. Overwhelmed paramedics there
declared, “There are no injured in Shujaiya, only dead.”

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

Regrettably, in spite of all of those regional and
international efforts, hundreds more Palestinian
civilians have been killed, thousands have been injured
and tens of thousands have been displaced by the Israeli
military aggression in Gaza since we last appeared
before the Security Council last Friday (see S/PV.7220).
Israeli bombardment — including missile airstrikes,
bombs and artillery shelling by air, land and sea in

4/70

It is nearly impossible to keep up with the pace of
killing and injury caused by the occupying Power with all
means of heavy weaponry against a defenceless civilian
population. For instance, in a period of just two hours
following my letter to the Security Council yesterday,
another 23 Palestinians were killed, their names and
stories not yet included in the vast documentation of
the Israeli war crimes against the Palestinian people,
which we will continue to insist be officially recorded
by the United Nations in our tireless pursuit of justice
for the victims and our nation.
The death toll now stands at more than 600
Palestinians killed and more than 3,500 people injured.
We are haunted by the images of babies, boys, girls,

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

women and men murdered by the Israeli occupying
forces in their homes, in the streets and in refugee
camps; by the images of the thousands of wounded
people, their lives forever marred; and by the sight of
thousands of Palestinian families again dispossessed
and fleeing for safety from the Israeli assaults in this
endless Nakba against our people.
Let me just show Council members some of the
pictures of the victims. These are from Shujaiya. These
are the human faces of our victims and these are samples
of those who suffer the most and who are killed in the
greatest numbers — the children. We are not numbers.
We are human beings.
When hospital floors are drowning in the blood
of innocents, corridors are filled with the deafening
screams of pain of the wounded and the cries of grief
and anguish for loved ones killed, and doctors, with
barely any supplies and deprived of sleep and sustenance
struggle courageously to save human lives, despite
themselves being targeted for attack by the Israeli war
machine, we know that the international community has
failed — failed in its commitment to protect civilians
in armed conflict, failed to enforce the rule of law and
failed to uphold its promise to humankind.
I am therefore again compelled to at least read the
names of our many innocent children killed by the
Israeli occupying forces in the past days and to honour
their memories. We are wearing black ribbons today
to honour all of our children, women, men and all
Palestinians civilians killed in the genocide by Israel
against our people in the Gaza Strip. Tawfiq Ahmad
Abu Jami, age 5; Haifa Tawfiq Ahmad Abu Jami, age
9; Shahinaz Walid Muhammad Abu Jami, age 1; Rayan
Tayseer Abu Jami, age 8; Rozan Abu Jami, age 14;
Ahmad Ayman Mahrous Siyam, age 17; Mustafa Nabil
Mahrous Siyam, age 12; Ghayda Nabil Mahrous Siyam,
age 8; Dalal Nabil Mahrous Siyam, 8 months; Mayar
Nayif Al-Yaziji, age 2; Anas Al-Yaziji, age 5; Ibrahim
Ammar, age 13; Assem Ammar, age 4; Iman Ammar,
age 9; Saji Hasan Al-Hallaq, age 4; Kinan Al-Hallaq,
age 6; Mohammed Al-Hallaq, age 2; Shadi Isleem, age
15; Alaa Isleem, age 11; Fadi Isleem, age 10; Samia
Al-Sheikh Khalil, age 3; Hiba Khalil, age 13; Khalil
Al-Hayyeh, age 7; Umama Al-Hayyeh, age 9; Dima
Isleem, age 2; Mohamad Ayyad, age 2; Rahaf Abu
Jumaa, age 4; Tala Al-Attawi, age 7; Dina Hamada,
age 15; Omar Hamouda, age 10; Ghada Ayyad, age
9; Marah Al-Jammal, age 11; Marwa Al-Sirsawi, age
3; Ahmad Ismail Abu Musallam, age 10; Wala Abu

S/PV.7222

Musallam, age 12; Muhammad Abu Musallam, age 15;
Rahaf Khalil Al-Jbour, age 4; Yassin Al-Humaidi, age
4; Mohammad Shadi Natiz, age 15; Mohammed Salim
Natiz, age 4; Siham Mousa Abu Jarad, age 15; Ahlam
Na’im Abu Jarad, age 13; Haniyeh Abdelrahman Abu
Jarad, age 3; Samih Na’im Abu Jarad, 12 months old.
While Council members may be fatigued by our
repeated lists, we must bear witness to the despair of
our people and insist on their dignity. Those Palestinian
children, whose lives have been so cruelly taken by
the occupying Power, are not just figures; they had
names, dreams and mothers, fathers, sisters, brothers,
grandparents and friends, who are grieving their deaths
and devastated by the massive loss of human life for
which there can be no justification and no consolation.
On behalf of the Palestinian people, we ask: What is the
international community doing to stop the bloodletting,
to stop Israel’s atrocities? What is the Security Council
doing to uphold its commitment to protect civilians in
armed conflict and uphold the law and the Charter?
Without decisive action, the Council’s resolutions
and statements ring hollow as defenceless civilians find
no relief from the murderous Israeli war machine. In
Shujaiya and all of Gaza City, in Khan Younis, Beit
Hanoun, Jabaliya, Nuseirat, Beit Lahiya, Bureij, Rafah,
Deir Al-Balah and everywhere in Gaza, the Palestinian
people are suffering gravely. The ability to cope with
the humanitarian fallout is on the brink of collapse
under the impact of the Israeli aggression and eightyear blockade. As the obligation to ensure the safety
and well-being of the civilians under its occupation
is gravely breached by Israel, we reiterate our appeal
to the Security Council to uphold its duty to maintain
international peace and security, without conditions,
without exceptions and without delay. Even as efforts in
the region to secure a ceasefire continue, the Security
Council still has a responsibility to act to stop the
slaughter of innocent men, women and children.
Israeli impunity must be halted and the pretexts
for its crimes rejected. The world can no longer deny
that such crimes are being deliberately planned and
carried out to exact maximum loss and punishment
against an occupied people, whether via military
attacks and reprisals, colonization of the land,
imprisonment of thousands, blockade or humiliation
of the people and leadership. That is a fact verified by
the many declarations by Israel’s Prime Minister and
other Government officials and by settler leaders and
terror gangs, regarding the price they will make the

14-477685/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

22/07/2014

Palestinians pay for daring to demand their rights, and
it is a fact repeatedly proven by the violent, racist and
illegal actions of the occupying Power.

the sustained movement of persons and goods, the need
to ensure protection for the Palestinian people, and the
need for a political horizon forward.

Moreover, we reject the cynical Israeli arguments
labelling an entire people as terrorists. Our children,
women and men are not terrorists and no family would
allow their loved ones to be used as human shields. The
reality is that they have been held captive by Israel in an
open prison called Gaza, which remains under Israeli
occupation and control, regardless of the false Israeli
narrative regarding the 2005 redeployment.

Despite all the odds and the immeasurable loss
and grief, the Palestinian people hold firm to their
conviction in the United Nations and to the promises
and commitment to bring an end to their oppression
and achieve justice. We reaffirm that we continue to
strive for a peaceful political solution to this conflict,
to which there is no military solution. We appeal
once again to the international community to lend all
support possible to the long-running efforts to achieve
a just, lasting and peaceful settlement and the longoverdue realization by the Palestinian people of their
rights and national aspirations, including to freedom
and independence in their State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

We have never once heard the Israeli representative
mention before the Council the word “occupation”,
conveniently ignoring the fact that Israel is an occupier
yet somehow claiming the right to defend itself from the
people it is viciously occupying and repressing — an
Israeli-fabricated right certainly not ordained under
international law, as opposed to the legitimate right
to resist foreign occupation and the right to selfdetermination.
We reiterate that it is no coincidence that this latest
aggression was launched amid increased international
pressure on Israel in the peace process; international
acceptance of the Palestinian unity Government; the
intensifying world condemnation of the settlements;
settler terror; provocations in East Jerusalem; the
Gaza blockade; the crisis of Palestinian prisoners and
detainees; Israel’s destruction of the two-State solution;
and the growing global calls for boycott, divestment
and sanctions against Israel.
The Council must live up to the demands of
the Charter, as well as to the expectations of the
international community, where the injustices being
endured by the Palestinian people under this depraved
Israeli occupation have again rallied millions of
people — of every race, colour and creed — in the
streets of capitals all over the world demanding an end
to the Israeli aggression, colonization and collective
punishment in occupied Palestine, including East
Jerusalem, and demanding accountability for Israeli
war crimes, including at the International Criminal
Court.
The Council must play its rightful role and
contribute to the urgent efforts to secure a ceasefire.
Moreover, it must exert efforts to ensure that the
ceasefire is sustainable, preventing the recurrence of
such crises and addressing the core issues, including
the need to end the Israeli blockade of Gaza and ensure

6/70

In conclusion, I reiterate my call for the adoption of
a resolution by the Security Council condemning this
Israeli aggression against the State of Palestine so as
to stop this aggression immediately, lift the blockade
against the Gaza Strip, and to provide the Palestinian
people with international protection.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): Before I begin, I should like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
for his efforts in the region, and to also thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this debate.
Two centuries ago, the great German writer and
statesman Goethe said: “The hardest thing to see is
what is in front of your eyes”.
Look around the world today and you will see
that the primary threat to global peace and security is
staring the Council right in the face. From Buenos Aires
to Brussels and from Benghazi to Boston, no nation is
immune to the threat of radical Islamist terrorism.
Armed with dangerous ideologies and deadly
weapons, violent radicals are waging a war to destroy
lives and destroy our way of life. We have, unfortunately,
become all too familiar with their names — ISIS,
Al-Qaida, Boko Haram, Hizbullah and Hamas.
These violent factions share a disdain for
democracies, contempt for modernity and a willingness
to target innocent civilians. It is no accident that most
of these extremist groups operate in the Middle East, a

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

region plagued by instability and intolerance, dictators
and disorder, tyranny and terrorism.
Within the region, one nation stands apart. The
State of Israel is the only liberal democracy between
the Red Sea and the Caspian Sea. We are on the front
line, fighting radical Islamist terrorism. The struggle
that we face today is a preview of the struggle that the
rest of the civilized world will likely face tomorrow.
Even as we speak, the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) are fighting to rid Gaza of the Hamas military
infrastructure, which has terrorized the Israeli people
and devastated the Palestinian people for well over a
decade. Trust me when I say that Gaza is the very last
place we want our soldiers to be — the very last place.
This is not a war we chose. It was our last resort.
Hamas has sent suicide bombers into our cafes and
onto our buses. It has sent armed terrorists through
tunnels into our homes and schools, and it has launched
over 12,000 missiles and rockets towards our towns and
cities in the last 10 years.
Israel is a small country, and every single person
has been affected by terrorism. Israelis may have grown
up with this threat in our backyard, but we have never
and will never grow used to it. We will never grow used
to the sound of sirens or the roar of rockets overhead.
We will never grow used to seeing our children in
army uniforms, and we will never, ever — we refuse
to — become accustomed to burying our sons and
daughters, as too many Israelis have had to do since
Hamas dragged us into this conflict.
Israel did not want this war. Three times — three
different times — Israel agreed to accept a ceasefire,
and every single time Hamas refused and launched even
more rockets. Each of those rockets sends a message
loud and clear: Hamas is determined to wage war.
Even when the United Nations and the Red Cross
asked Hamas to hold its fire so they could assist its
own Palestinian civilians, Hamas refused. Once again,
Hamas proved that it has no regard for the well-being of
the Palestinian people. The Egyptian Foreign Minister,
Sameh Hassan Shokry Selim, stated: “Had Hamas
accepted the Egyptian proposal, it could have saved the
lives of … Palestinians”.
Let me make the picture very, very clear. Palestinian
civilian casualties are a direct result of Hamas’s decision
to continue to send rockets and terrorists towards Israel
while putting their civilians up front to protect their

S/PV.7222

so-called leaders and their terrorists. The leaders of
the Palestinian Authority and their delegations today
refused to stand up and say to Hamas, “Stop!”.
In the past month alone, Israel has been attacked
on four fronts. Rockets have been fired from Lebanon,
from Syria, from Sinai, and Hamas has launched an
all-out assault from Gaza. In addition to firing rockets,
Hamas has now developed a new strategy to wage war
against Israel. In Gaza, there are two cities: a city above
ground, and a city below ground. Eighteen metres
below the Strip are kilometres of dense terror tunnels
crisscrossing like a giant web. Hamas has built a vast
underground terror network, reinforced with thousands
of tons of concrete and supported by massive beams.
Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh recently declared
that the tunnels opened “a new strategy in confronting
… the enemy from underground”.
Since entering Gaza, the IDF has uncovered
23 tunnels with over 66 different entry points, many
of which are under homes and schools. No site is offlimits for Hamas. One of the tunnels exposed over the
weekend began under a family home and was packed
with explosives. Hamas is using its extensive tunnel
system to carry out a series of deadly attacks. In the
past week, dozens of heavily armed terrorists have used
those very tunnels to infiltrate Israel.
What do you expect Israel to do when terrorists
in Shujaiya are as close to Kibbutz Nahal Oz as this
Chamber is to the Metropolitan Museum of Art?
Imagine what it is like for Israelis living near Gaza to
know that there are dozens of hidden tunnels leading to
the doorstep of their communities. Imagine what it is
like to fall asleep wondering if a terrorist is tunnelling
under your home or to wake up and wonder if your
children will be safe on their way to school. Just
yesterday, heavily armed Hamas terrorists emerged
from a tunnel only 200 metres from a kindergarten.
Over the weekend, eight Palestinian terrorists
emerged from a tunnel almost 300 metres inside Israel,
armed with automatic weapons and wearing Israeli
military uniforms. They fired a rocket-propelled
grenade at Israeli military jeeps, killing two soldiers
before retreating back underground. A few hours later,
two more terrorists entered Israel using a tunnel. They
were carrying tranquillizers and handcuffs and were on
a mission to kidnap Israelis.
For years, the international community has
criticized Israel for restricting the entry of construction

14-477687/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

materials into Gaza. Now we know what those building
materials are actually being used for. All this time,
the international community thought that it was
sending money to develop social services or political
institutions or economic structures. In truth, the aid
dollars that were sent were only aiding Hamas to build
its terror stronghold. The fact that Hamas directs its
budget underground rather than above ground proves
that it is more interested in warfare than in the welfare
of the Palestinian people. Hamas violates international
law and brutally abuses the people of Gaza. It sends
innocent men, women and children to stand on the
roofs of their homes so as to shield the terrorists firing
rockets from their living rooms and bedrooms below. It
builds bunkers for its leaders, but refuses to build bomb
shelters for civilians. It fires rockets from mosques and
schools deep inside densely populated neighbourhoods.
And it has set up its headquarters inside a Gaza hospital,
where Hamas leaders can be seen walking through the
hallways.
Rather than taking steps to avoid civilian casualties,
Hamas has stepped up its attacks in the hopes of creating
even more casualties. Hamas’s strategy is clear. It sees
every Palestinian victim of this conflict as fuel for a
propaganda machine. The purpose of that machine is
to push the international community into pressuring
Israel to grant Hamas’s demands. Sadly, many people
have fallen for that cynical campaign.
All those who argue that both sides are equally
to blame are playing into Hamas’s hand and inviting
a ruthless radical group to continue its campaign of
terror. I want to remind the Council that that terror
organization sits in the Palestinian unity Government.
President Abbas has a choice to make. He can continue
to remain silent and stand in support of Hamas. Or he
can assume the mantle of leadership by dissolving the
unity Government. The choice is his — to be a part of
the problem or to be part of the solution.
Israel is doing its utmost to avoid harming civilians
because we believe that every innocent life lost is a
tragedy. We deeply regret the losses, but the blame
lies with Hamas for hiding behind civilians and using
them as human shields. The IDF is fully committed to
upholding the rule of law and is operating only against
terrorist targets. It is taking steps that no other nation
at any time in history has taken. What other nation
supplies millions of tons of humanitarian aid or sets up
a field hospital to treat the wounded on the other side,
even as its enemy fires on it indiscriminately? What

8/70

22/07/2014

other nation sends messages to warn exactly where it
will strike, giving the enemy time to set booby traps
and deploy snipers?
Israel spent four days warning Palestinians in
northern Gaza that the military would soon enter their
neighbourhoods to uproot Hamas. That gave Hamas
four days to prepare an assault on our troops. Every
time we drop a leaflet or make a phone call or send a
text message warning of an imminent attack, we are
endangering our own children so that we may keep
their children safe. As we have said before, Israel has
no interest in being in Gaza. We are fighting in Gaza,
but we are not fighting the people of Gaza.
The equation is simple — when it is quiet in Israel,
it will be quiet in Gaza. The goal of our operation is to
eliminate the rockets, shut down the terror tunnels and
demilitarize Gaza in order to restore sustained quiet
to the people of Israel. Members of the international
community have said that Israel has the right to defend
its citizens, but when we exercise that right we are
criticized. What do they expect us to do when terrorists
are tunnelling into our communities? What do they
expect us to do when our children are being kidnapped
and murdered? What do you expect us to do when
rockets are fired at our cities and our citizens cannot
spend a single day without running to a bomb shelter?
Iran is exerting its influence to attack Israel from
the land, the sea and the air on every front. It is supplying
Hamas with rockets in Gaza, it is standing by Al-Assad
in Syria, and it is supplying Hizbullah with missiles
in Lebanon. Some of those terrorist groups are now
teaming up to form a terror dream team that is intent
on making life a nightmare for millions of Israelis.
Hizbullah leader Hassan Nasrallah called Hamas leader
Khaled Meshal to say:
“Hizbullah and the Lebanese resistance ...
support Hamas’s strategy and the just conditions it
has set for an end to the conflict”.
For years, we have warned the international
community that Hizbullah was amassing tens of
thousands of rockets and missiles. We were met with
silence. Will you continue to remain silent? For years,
we have told the international community that Hamas
was building a terror stronghold in Gaza, and we have
called on the international community to condemn
the rocket fire. We were met with silence. For years,
we have warned of the impending escalation, and the
international community ignored us.

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Goethe was right. The hardest thing to see is what
is before one’s eyes. Israel is on the frontline of the
global war against radical Islamist terrorism. The entire
civilized world has a stake in the outcome and must
therefore support Israel’s right to defend its citizens.
Israel’s fight against terrorism today will determine
how we all live tomorrow. To do nothing and to say
nothing in support of our efforts is to invite tyranny
and terror into our own backyards. The international
community must stand together, speak together and
prevail together, so that all people everywhere can live
in freedom.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
I thank the Secretary-General for his live presentation
from the Middle East, as well as the representative of
the non-member Observer State of Palestine and the
Deputy Representative of Israel for their statements.
Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement
that will be made shortly by the representative of the
European Union.
The Middle East today seems farther away than
ever from peace, so much so that to speak of the Middle
East means to speak of the conflicts there, as if the
identity of the region has become inseparable from
the wars tearing it apart. At its heart lies the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, which has, for seven decades,
reflected the impotence of the international community.
For two weeks, that conflict has once again tragically
reminded us of our responsibilities. As we meet, the
Israeli offensive against Gaza has claimed more than
600 lives and more than 3,500 wounded, the majority
of whom are civilians.
Already an open-air prison, Gaza is literally
becoming a graveyard for its inhabitants. Can there be
any conceivable argument to justify such blood-letting
and such disproportionate use of armed force against
civilians? No, there is none. Clearly, the right of Israel
to defend itself and protect its people is not disputed.
We condemn in the strongest terms the rocket fire
showered on Israeli cities. But Israel’s right does not
justify the despicable suffering inflicted on the civilian
population of Gaza.
More than 100,000 Palestinians are now living as
displaced persons. That has plunged the Gaza Strip into
an unprecedented humanitarian and public health crisis
without precedent, with even more tragic consequences
than operation Cast Lead in 2009. All in all, the toll on
children is perhaps the most terrifying. According to
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine

S/PV.7222

Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), 30 per cent of
those killed are children. The fact that, as indicated
by organizations on the ground, children die under
Israeli fire than Palestinian combatants is yet a further
reason for outrage. Under international humanitarian
law, all parties have an absolute obligation to safeguard
the lives of civilians caught up in the cross-hairs of a
conflict. Of course, that obligation applies to Hamas
and other armed groups that indiscriminately targeting
Israeli civilians.
The absolute priority today is to immediately halt
the suffering of Palestinian civilians on the ground.
That requires the prompt conclusion of a humanitarian
truce so as to care for the wounded, the displaced people
and those trapped in the ruins. We place great hope in
the mediation efforts headed by Egypt with the support
of the Secretary-General and United States Secretary
of State John Kerry. Those efforts will receive our full
support. We also reiterate our support to UNRWA and
its crucial work to lessen the suffering of the Palestinian
people.
Once a humanitarian truce is agreed to, a
comprehensive and lasting cessation of hostilities will
need to be negotiated. There is no other solution. The
violence must stop. Actions that fuel hate and discord
must be stopped as well. Suffering and humiliation
must be halted. The Palestinian people deserve to live
in a dignified manner. The blockade draining life from
Gaza for years must be lifted as an imperative. No
one can live in the conditions imposed on the people
in Gaza. For seven years, these people have lived
besieged between three walls and the sea. They have
survived solely thanks to UNRWA’s aid and that of
the international community. That is the only way that
Israel can afford to subject 1.7 million Palestinians to
those appalling conditions.
Finally, there is a need to tackle the root causes of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The stronger of the two,
Israel, has to choose to accept the only possible way
to live in peace, that is, the two-State solution, halting
provocation and the expansion of settlements, or getting
increasingly carried away in repeated military actions,
which only exacerbate the conflict. As the Ambassador
said, it is true: the truth and reality need to be seen
as they are. We need to be forward-looking. For now,
we hope that the Security Council will play its role to
support efforts to put an end to the spiral of violence.
After taking up the carnage in Gaza, I now turn to
the Syrian tragedy.

14-477689/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The conflict in Syria has claimed at least 160,000
lives and forced more than 3 million Syrians to flee their
country. That reflects on the international community
as a sad reminder of its limits and divisions. As for facts,
the Bashar Al-Assad regime has been allowed to bomb
schools and hospitals, to attack humanitarian convoys
as well as medical personnel and to use starvation as a
weapon of war against besieged people. The situation
is most concerning for the 10.8 million Syrians, half of
them children, who are in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance. More than 4.5 million Syrians are trapped
in combat areas that are difficult for humanitarian
workers to reach.
Resolution 2139 (2014) was adopted by the Security
Council in February. It has changed nothing. On the
ground, humanitarian access continues to worsen,
given the systematic obstruction by the Syrian
Government. We hoped that resolution 2165 (2014),
adopted unanimously by the Security Council in the
past week upon the initiative of Australia, Jordan and
Luxembourg, would serve as a turning point. Pursuant
to the resolution, humanitarian agencies of the United
Nations are authorized to transport humanitarian aid
in a cross-border manner by the most direct routes
to those in need all over Syria. The consent of the
Syrian Government is no longer necessary. Aid is
to be distributed on the basis of needs assessments
carried out by the United Nations, not by Damascus.
Should resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) not be
complied with, the Security Council should undertake
supplementary measures, which is an essential element.
We hope that this innovative resolution will allow for
a true breakthrough on the ground. Its implementation
should allow for assistance to flow to between 1.4 and
2 million people in Syria who are to date still out of
reach for humanitarian workers. That being the case,
the implementation of Security Council resolutions
will not be enough in itself to resolve the humanitarian
crisis. The only lasting solution is the resolution of the
Syrian conflict, which implies a political process that is
Syrian-lead, along the lines of the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) of June 2012.
In that regard, Luxembourg welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Staffan de Mistura as the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria. That could
breathe new life into seeking a political solution to the
Syrian conflict.
In conclusion, just a few words about the effect
of the Syrian crisis on the countries of the region,
10/70

22/07/2014

particularly Lebanon and Iraq. Over the past month,
deadly attacks have increased in Lebanon. That is the
most worrying sign of the growing impact of the Syrian
conflict on Lebanon. The effects of the presence and
influx of Syrian refugees on the political, economic
and social stability of the country are also significant,
which is to be expected.
Since April, the number of refugees from Syria
officially registered in Lebanon crossed the threshold of
1 million people: one fourth of the Lebanese population.
To grapple with those challenges, it is crucial for the
Lebanese political players to elect as swiftly as possible
a President to succeed Mr. Michel Suleiman. The
election would bolster Lebanese institutions and help
stabilize the country. The election would also facilitate
the implementation of the disassociation policy in line
with the Baabda Declaration.
I turn now to Iraq.
We would like to condemn in the strongest terms
the systematic persecution of ethnic and religious
minorities by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
and by armed groups associated with it. In particular,
we are deeply concerned by reports of the treatment of
the Christian population in Mosul. Those individuals
are subject to unacceptable threats. We therefore fully
support the press statement on the persecution of
minorities in Mosul, adopted yesterday by the Security
Council. The unity and stability of the region are
threatened by the onward march of Islamic State of
Iraq and the Levant. Thus, a swift establishment of a
new Government is of crucial importance. We have no
doubt that Iraqi political stakeholders will rise above
their partisan interests to tackle the challenges before
the country and that, i a spirit of unity, they will swiftly
form a Government that reflects the will of the Iraqi
people.
There is no miracle solution to resolve the numerous
conflicts impacting the Middle East, but every chance
we get we must do everything in our power to bring
diplomacy back to centre stage. First and foremost,
we must demonstrate to whom the international
community’s heart goes out. That is to the weakest, the
victims, be they in Aleppo, Mosul or Gaza.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to welcome Mr. Asselborn, Minister of Foreign and
European Affairs of Luxembourg.
Today, I will not describe the scenes of carnage and
destruction in the Gaza Strip. Words cannot describe
14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7222

the lifeless bodies of the children of Gaza, or their
limbs spread across its streets of Gaza and in what is
left of hospitals. Words cannot describe the feelings
of the mourning mothers in Gaza, or the situation of
the impoverished families or of those families who do
not know if one day the future will come. The least the
Security Council could do for to the people of Gaza
today is to assume its moral and legal responsibilities to
uphold international peace and security and to work for
an immediate cessation of the unjust Israeli aggression.

The dangerous Israeli escalation distracts the
attention of the international community from Israel’s
daily ongoing efforts, condemned by everyone, and
from the aggression targeting East Jerusalem and holy
Muslim and Christian sites, in particular the sacred
Al-Aqsa Mosque. We in Jordan are fighting daily
against that type of aggression and unilateral measures
and violations. We do so by safeguarding Hashemite
authority in East Jerusalem, which is carried out by the
Hashemite King Abdullah II ibn Al-Hussein.

Jordan refutes and condemns in the strongest
terms the savage aggression against the Gaza Strip. in
particular the atrocious carnage exacted by the Israeli
occupying force in the area of Shujaya. Jordan condemns
the disproportionate and unjustified use of excessive
force, which has in no measure, small or large, to do
with the right of self-defence. The events under way
in Gaza represent a deliberate targeting of Palestinian
civilians and a policy of collective punishment adopted
by Israel against the Palestinian people.

Israel must end its discriminatory measures,
not only against the Palestinians in the occupied
territories but also against its Arab citizens. In that
regard, I wish to refer to the unprecedented draft law
on citizenship. Even though it is legal discrimination,
Israel nevertheless calls itself the only democracy in the
Middle East — as again repeated by the representative
of Israel just a few minutes ago.

The current Israeli actions serve to expose the
deeply held belief on the part of the Israeli Government
that human life has no value if the victim is a Palestinian,
or even if the victim is a Palestinian civilian. Israel must
realize that military force cannot bring about peace
and security, nor can a policy of humiliation bring the
Palestinian people to its knees.
The international community must take a look
at the far-reaching human suffering and dangerous
situation in Gaza. The international community
should work to rapidly provide humanitarian aid to
those people. Jordan has sent military personnel to
the hospitals in Gaza, as well as emergency medical
aid to the Gaza Strip. We also continue to receive an
influx of wounded Palestinians. United Nations reports
and those of emergency relief organizations speak to
the emergency needs of the people of Gaza in the areas
of medication and vital supplies. The international
community needs to swiftly respond to the appeals of
the United Nations and the humanitarian agencies on
the ground, in particular the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
We reiterate our call for a total ceasefire and for
a halt to the targeting of civilians, wherever they may
be, as well as for compliance with international law. In
that framework, Jordan supports the Egyptian initiative
for a ceasefire and will also support efforts made by
the Secretary-General and by United States Secretary
of State John Kerry.

Jordan, under the direction of its King, is working
intensively in close cooperation with the leaders of the
region to achieve a ceasefire. We reiterate that the only
solution is one that ensures that there is no repetition
of the Israeli attacks and aggression. That would be a
political solution achieved through the resumption of
serious, comprehensive negotiations on the basis of the
two-State solution, the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State on Palestinian national soil with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and on the basis of the relevant
international resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative
to achieve security and stability for all the States and
peoples of the region.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I would
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing and for his efforts to secure peace and protect
civilians in the Middle East.
My remarks today will address two areas, Israel
and Gaza, and Syria.
First, in Gaza, the United States is working
intensively to secure an immediate cessation of
hostilities based on the return to the November 2012
ceasefire agreement between Israel and Hamas. That
is the message President Obama gave in his public
remarks yesterday. It is the purpose of United States
Secretary of State Kerry’s trip to Cairo, where he met
with Egyptian leaders and the Secretary-General, and
is conferring regularly with other allies and partners.
It is a goal that the President of the Security Council
embraced on behalf of all of the Council’s members
when we met this past Sunday.

14-4776811/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We also recognize that, as we work towards the
short-term goal of a ceasefire, we also have to resolve
the underlying issues that led to this conflict and
ultimately build long-term peace through a two-State
solution. Throughout the hostilities we have consistently
recognized Israel’s right to defend itself against attacks
by rockets overhead or through tunnels below. No
country in the world would tolerate a relentless of
barrage of attacks on its citizens. Yesterday, in a single
day, militants fired 155 rockets into Israel. In the two
weeks of fighting more than 2,000 rockets have been
launched at Israel. On Sunday, Israel foiled another
attempt by armed militants to use tunnels to sneak into
the country and launch an attack. Again yesterday,
militants from Gaza entered Israel and killed four
Israeli soldiers.
In Gaza the toll of the violence has been devastating.
More than 600 Palestinian people have been killed, the
large majority civilians, including at least 59 women
and more than 121 children. More than 3,700 more have
been injured. Thousands of homes have been damaged,
many totally destroyed, and more than 100,000 people
have been displaced. As the destruction mounts, some
35,000 Palestinians who need food have not yet been
reached, and 1.2 million people have little or no access
to water and sanitation. Behind every number is a real
person, perhaps even a child. The suffering is immense.
Yet even the most determined efforts to reach
those in need have fallen short. The United Nations
is near its capacity to take in those without shelter.
Relief services are overwhelmed. In short, the situation
is unsustainable. That is why a ceasefire, as soon as
possible, is essential, as both Secretary Kerry and
Secretary-General Ban have emphasized from Cairo.
When we convened on Sunday, the President
expressed our shared concern about the growing
number of casualties and underscored the need to
protect civilians. Yet the violence continues to rise, as
does the number of people who suffer from it. Yesterday,
Secretary Kerry announced that the United States is
providing $47 million to help address the immediate
humanitarian emergency in Gaza. Those funds will
provide critical humanitarian aid, including shelter,
food and medical supplies for Palestinians in Gaza.
We encourage all of our partners in the international
community to respond to the humanitarian needs of
the people in Gaza and the appeal issued by the United
Nations.

12/70

22/07/2014

All parties to the conflict must comply with
international humanitarian law; that means respecting
and protecting civilians and humanitarian and medical
facilities. By the most recent tally, 77 United Nations
structures have been damaged so far in the fighting.
Militants in Gaza have repeatedly used civilian
facilities for military purposes. Yesterday, a hospital in
Gaza was struck by a tank shell, killing at least four
people inside.
The humanitarian ceasefires brokered by the
United Nations and the International Committee of
the Red Cross on 18 and 20 July had the potential to
provide a reprieve from the violence and enable those in
need of food, water and medicine to receive assistance.
And yet, given a chance to help alleviate the suffering
of Palestinian civilians, Hamas balked. During both
ceasefires, rockets and mortars were launched from
Gaza at Israel, and Hamas has so far refused to agree
to an Egyptian-brokered ceasefire that could halt the
fighting and ease the suffering of innocent people on
both sides.
The United Nations supports Egypt’s initiative.
As grave as the situation is now — and it is indeed
grave — it can get worse. If the fighting persists, it will.
Humanitarian conditions will continue to deteriorate,
more civilians will suffer, and more innocent lives will
be lost. The only solution is an immediate ceasefire.
This could not be more urgent or more important,
given the devastating consequences of the violence for
civilian populations. That is why the United States will
not rest until a ceasefire is achieved and the underlying
issues fueling the conflict are addressed.
On Syria, last week the Council adopted resolution
2165 (2014) in an effort to address the humanitarian
devastation and suffering of the Syrian people. United
Nations humanitarian agencies will be delivering
humanitarian assistance through four additional border
crossings and across conflict lines, without the approval
of the Syrian regime. United Nations agencies have to
be able to reach people in desperate need of assistance
in all parts of the country — including those controlled
by the opposition — as the Al-Assad regime denies
such basic assistance in order to further its military and
political goals. We hope that it will make a difference
in the lives of several million Syrians who have been
without food, medicine and other forms of assistance
for more than a year.

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

As the Council is well aware, the resolution
was necessary because of the regime’s cynical use
of starve-or-surrender tactics and other deliberate
strategies to deprive and punish people, particularly
those living in contested and opposition-controlled
areas. The denial of basic humanitarian aid continues to
be one of the deadly weapons in the Al-Assad regime’s
deadly arsenal. Among the others are chemical and
conventional weapons, including air power, tanks,
mines and snipers.
We have seen the devastation inflicted when the
regime unleashes this arsenal on innocent civilians, as
it did in Homs. In recent weeks, we have once again
watched in horror as the Al-Assad regime has exercised
a stranglehold on the people of Aleppo. Roughly half
a million Syrians remain in the city, which has been
encircled and slowly asphyxiated by Al-Assad’s forces,
which have obstructed the flow of basic humanitarian
assistance such as food, water and medicine. In addition,
the regime has dropped roughly 15 to 20 barrel bombs
a day on the city and a similar number on a suburb
surrounding it.
As disturbing as the absolute number of bombs
dropped is when and where they have been dropped.
People in the Aleppo provincial council report that the
regime has increasingly concentrated its bombings at
the time of day when Muslims are breaking their daily
fast — the iftar — and that they have chosen to target
the places where people are most likely to congregate.
This is obscene. The Al-Assad regime has taken Islam’s
holiest month and used it to calibrate its bombing runs.
It has taken advantage of people’s rituals of faith to
maximize suffering.
Even by the horrific bar that this regime has set,
the malevolence of that pattern is shocking. And
Aleppo is not the only place where Al-Assad is using
that tactic. In Yarmouk, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East was only recently allowed to resume distributing
food and other aid to Palestinian refugees after several
months of being denied access by the regime. Anyone
who has seen photos of the Yarmouk refugees knows
that this population’s survival hangs by a thread. We
are monitoring the situation there, in Aleppo and in
other sites closely, and we call on the regime to fully
implement resolution 2139 (2014) and to comply with
its obligations under resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165
(2014), as well as its basic obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights law.

S/PV.7222

This is a snapshot of two places in the home of
the worst humanitarian crisis in the world. Yet as the
cases of Aleppo and Yarmouk demonstrate, these
humanitarian problems arise from a political crisis
and the barbaric tactics of a regime that has lost the
legitimacy to lead. Fixing that crisis will ultimately
demand a political solution that Syrians can embrace.
To that end, we welcome newly appointed Special Envoy
for Syria Staffan de Mistura and Deputy Special Envoy
for Syria Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy. They have agreed
to take on the daunting task of providing good offices
towards bringing an end to the violence and human
rights violations that plague Syria and promoting a
peaceful solution to that longstanding crisis. They have
our full support.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea thanks and supports the Secretary-General
in his efforts to mediate the ongoing confrontation.
We appreciate his video-linked briefing today, taking
the time from his hectic trip crisscrossing the Middle
East region. We also welcome the participation of the
Foreign Minister of Luxembourg.
As we gather in the Council today, the Middle
East continues to be marked by expanding conflict
and intensifying violence. We are concerned that the
ongoing clashes in Israel and Gaza have the potential
to further jeopardize regional dynamics, with other
non-State actors joining the fray. In that context, we
note with concern that rockets have been fired into
Israel from Lebanon and Syria.
More than 500 Palestinians and 20 Israelis have
now died, and yet there is no sign of a ceasefire to
be agreed upon. Hamas has not so far accepted any
ceasefire proposals, consequently aggravating the pain
and sorrow of the hundreds of thousands of Palestinian
people under its influence. We are also alarmed that
the ground operation of the Israeli forces is resulting in
an unprecedented level of casualties and displacement
throughout the Gaza Strip. Such results do not match
Israel’s stated goal of a limited operation.
While
acknowledging
Israel’s
legitimate
security concerns, we emphasize that the current
situation illustrates the urgent need for a more
fundamental solution of the situation related to
Gaza. We are particularly concerned about the
devastating humanitarian conditions in the Gaza Strip.
Unfortunately, Israel’s warnings before its attacks
do not seem to provide much help to the population,
because most of them have nowhere else to go. With

14-4776813/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

more than 84,000 people seeking shelter, the facilities
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East are already beyond
capacity. Many homes in the safer areas are already
full.
The current situation is not sustainable and an
immediate ceasefire should enter into force. We urge all
parties to exercise restraint and heed the international
community’s call for peace. We sincerely hope that
the unremitting diplomatic efforts of the SecretaryGeneral will soon bear fruit. We support the role of the
mediators in the region, including Egypt, in brokering
a ceasefire deal.
Turning to the situation in Syria, we are deeply
concerned about the unprecedented scale of death and
destruction as the conflict, which is now in its fourth
year, shows no signs of abating. With nearly 11 million
Syrians in urgent need of assistance, resolution 2165
(2014) must be immediately and fully implemented so
as to enable long overdue cross-border aid deliveries to
those in desperate need of food and medicine.
The Republic of Korea welcomes the appointments
of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and Deputy
Special Envoy Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy. We hope that
the Special Envoy will soon start working closely with
the key stakeholders and will cooperate with the League
of Arab States. We look forward to his sustained efforts
to revive the stalled peace negotiations, which is the
only way to resolve the crisis.
The Republic of Korea is deeply alarmed about
the increase in terrorism and regional instability
arising from the situation in Syria. The Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIS) now controls broad
areas of territory in both Syria and Iraq and poses a
threat to Lebanon and Turkey, as well as Jordan. We
strongly condemn the egregious war crimes, including
the mass executions committed by ISIS. We also note
the destructive humanitarian dimensions inherent
in such developments. The Security Council must
remain vigilant with regard to that issue. We call on
Iraq’s leaders to swiftly form a new Government that
can govern in an inclusive manner and promote the
participation of all religious and ethnic minorities.
Despite the seemingly unsurmountable regional
situation facing us, we must not lose hope or remain
deadlocked in our collective international actions. The
Security Council must continue to actively work to
ensure peace and security for the people in the region
and in the whole world.
14/70

22/07/2014

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his statement and
associate myself with the statement to be delivered by
the observer of the European Union. I will talk about
the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, the situation in
Syria and, finally, Lebanon and Iraq.
On the fifteenth day of open war between Israel
and Hamas, the conclusion of a ceasefire can no longer
wait and must allow the resumption of efforts to achieve
a fundamental solution. The toll is overwhelming. On
the Israeli side, there is a population that lives in fear of
rocket fire. On the Palestinian side, there are hundreds
of dead and more than 100,000 displaced persons.
Neighbourhoods such as Shujaiya have become symbols
of the intense Israeli operations.
It is the third offensive waged by Israel on the Gaza
Strip since 2008. As on the previous occasions, in the
current situation no one can win. Hamas cannot win
because, by choosing to continue the escalation, it has
achieved only one thing — the triggering of Israeli fire
on Gaza. It did so deliberately, since Hamas knew what
Israel’s response to hundreds of rockets fired towards its
territory would be. Israel cannot win because the ground
offensive launched last week will only weaken but not
dismantle the capability of Hamas or discredit it. It may
even emerge stronger from the show of force in the
eyes of a population that knows only Israel’s missiles,
soldiers and tanks. Finally, the civilian population of
Gaza, in particular and once again, is the main victim
with heavier casualties every day and the subsequent
insecurity, exacerbated by the ongoing destruction.
As the President of the French Republic underscored,
everything must be done to put an immediate end to the
suffering of the civilian population in Gaza.
As the Secretary-General has said, our immediate
priority is the conclusion of a ceasefire on the basis
of the Egyptian proposal, supported by the League of
Arab States. Intense diplomatic efforts are under way in
many regional capitals, led by several senior officials.
The regional mediation efforts should be united. The
Secretary-General, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
France, this weekend, and now Secretary of State Kerry
are in or have visited the region. We hope that their
efforts will quickly succeed. That will mean, first, an
immediate end to the firing of rockets by Hamas on
Israel, whose security is an absolute right, and, secondly,
an immediate cessation of the Israeli offensive. Israel is
indeed targeting Hamas — an organization that France
and its European partners has recognized as terrorists.

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

However, the facts are clear. There are now more
than 580 dead, 75 per cent of whom were civilians,
according to the United Nations, many of whom were
children. That violates the legal imperative to protect
civilians. Yet we know that a ceasefire will not suffice.
A lasting truce that addresses the root causes of the
conflict and the legitimate concerns of the parties
and allows a relaunching of the peace process must be
concluded. Israel’s security must be guaranteed, which,
in particular, means a more effective fight against
arms trafficking. Gaza must be able to resume its way
of life, since poverty, despair and inactivity swell the
ranks of Hamas more than they weaken it. It is therefore
important to work towards lifting the blockade and the
full implementation of the Agreement on Movement
and Access of 2005, endorsed by resolution 1860 (2009).
The European Union could contribute to that by
reactivating the European Union Border Assistance
Mission at Rafah, as France has proposed. It is clearly
important to involve the Palestinian Authority in a
way out of the crisis. The reconstruction efforts and
the lifting of the blockade must be coordinated with
Mr. Abbas. Finally, most importantly, it is necessary to
work for a political settlement, which is the only way to
stop what we have seen on three occasions since 2008,
that is, a tragic repetition of outbreaks of violence.
Today is the last open debate on the Middle East
in which I shall participate. Allow me to move for a
moment from the bloody turbulence of a somewhat
repetitive situation to recall the basic facts of the
conflict. For 20 years, with infinite patience, resolve
and imagination, we have tried to put an end to the
conflict by convincing the two parties to negotiate
directly without international intervention. God alone
knows the number of initiatives and formulas that have
been tried and proposed in vain.
The time has therefore come to conclude that such
laudable efforts have failed because the method was
wrong. Israelis and Palestinians will never achieve
peace by themselves. The reasons are too numerous
and, I would say, too evident for me to list. It is not
a question, and I underscore this point, of resorting
to some kind of pressure on the parties. That will not
work.
On the contrary, it is a matter of the entire
international community proposing a positive agenda
to the two parties to encourage them to move towards
the path of peace. One side fears for its security and

S/PV.7222

the other for its national existence. The Americans,
Europeans and Arabs can all address those concerns.
Integration, joining regional bodies, financial
assistance, the guarantee of security and opening
full diplomatic relations are all proposals to explore.
However, there are others. We must convince the man
in the street in Tel Aviv and Gaza that peace is not a leap
into the unknown or capitulation but entering a new
world. Rather than endlessly mending the engine of the
same vehicle, as the negotiators — who, moreover, are
often the same — have been doing for the past 20 years,
we must change the vehicle. We need new ideas that
seek, first, to break down the wall of fear, distrust and
hatred that prevents any progress and leave a way out
for the extremists on both sides. Until the man in the
street demands peace, there will be no peace. It may be
too late, I fear, but the entire international community
will then shoulder the responsibility of the long tragedy
that will be the future of the Holy Land.
In Syria, the tragedy continues in a country that
disappears a little more every day under the regime’s
bombardment. All reports on the implementation of
resolution 2139 (2014) are unequivocal. The situation
of the civilian population has not improved. The sieges
of towns, three-quarters of which have not stopped or
even reduced owing to the regime, the indiscriminate
bombing, including by barrel bombs, which is a direct
and flagrant violation of resolution 2139 (2014), the
torture, the policy of terror against civilians and the
obstacles to humanitarian access continue.
The adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) should
improve the delivery of humanitarian aid, which must
be sent by the most direct routes, whether through the
frontlines or across borders from the neighbouring
countries. However, only a political solution will bring
an end to the conflict. France welcomes the appointment
of Mr. de Mistura to succeed Mr. Brahimi, whom we
thank for his efforts.
Our collective political objective remains the
same, namely, a political transition that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian peopl, based on the
full implementation of the Geneva final communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
Finally, France emphasizes that the thousands of
crimes committed in Syria must not go unpunished.
The Council was unable to agree on the French proposal
to refer the matter to the International Criminal Court;
nevertheless, those who are responsible for crimes in

14-4776815/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Syria, whoever they are and whatever side they are on,
should know that they will be judged.
In that context, we must also send a message of
support for Lebanon, which should not be dragged into
the spiral of the Syrian crisis. The dissociation policy
and the 2012 Baabda Declaration provide the framework
within which all Lebanese forces must operate.
Faced with the Syrian crisis, France welcomes
the generosity of Lebanon and underlines the burden
that hosting more than 1 million refugees represents.
Lebanon needs the support of its international partners.
We also call on Lebanon to meet its internal
constitutional deadlines. We recall the importance of
the fight against impunity and welcome in that respect
the role of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, which is
expected to resume its activities on 18 June 2015.
I conclude with a word on Iraq, on which the
Security Council issued a statement to the press
yesterday at the initiative of France. France is obviously
deeply concerned about the progress of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which constitutes a threat
to the integrity of Iraq and to the stability of the entire
region. That progress could also further strengthen
the attractiveness of the Syrian-Iraqi theatre for jihad
candidates, who pose a threat to the international
community as a whole.
France condemns in the strongest terms the
atrocities committed by ISIL against ethnic and
religious minorities and those who do not adhere
to its barbaric ideology, including, specifically, the
ultimatum given to Christians in Mosul, one of the
oldest Christian communities of the world, with which
France has maintained relations for several centuries.
The ultimatum is a further illustration of the true nature
of that terrorist organization. France supports the State
of Iraq in its fight against terrorism and believes that
a sustainable response to the crisis must be primarily
political.
It is urgent today that conditions be created in Iraq
for an inclusive political dialogue that brings together
all communities in order to meet the challenges facing
the country. The alternative is clear. Either there is
no change in the governance of the country and we
will then likely see the breakup of Iraq, or a national
unity Government is promptly formed involving all
communities and a political solution will prevail.
The election of the new Speaker of the Parliament
is a positive development, but much remains to be done to
16/70

22/07/2014

see a way out of the crisis. It is essential that the process
provided for by the Constitution be pursued and that it
lead as soon as possible to a coalition Government, if
we are to expect Iraq to recover.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. China
appreciates and supports his good offices. I have also
listened very carefully to the statements made by the
Observer of the State of Palestine and the representative
of Israel.
Israel’s military operation in Gaza has lasted for
half a month. In spite of repeated appeals by the Security
Council and the international community, the Israeli
military operation has continued to expand in scope,
resulting in a serious deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. China is deeply concerned and
saddened by the situation.
China is resolutely opposed to any use of force
against civilians and is particularly opposed to
targeting residential areas and hospitals. Such actions,
which violate international humanitarian law, are
unacceptable.
China urges the parties concerned to stop firing
rockets into Israel. The vicious cycle of violence for
violence between Israel and Palestine must stop. China
urges Israel, Palestine and other parties to respond in
good faith to the appeals of the international community
and cooperate with international good offices, achieve
an immediate unconditional ceasefire and refrain from
taking any actions that might escalate tensions, so that
calm can be achieved as soon as possible.
China urges the international community to step up
its humanitarian assistance and calls for the opening of
all crossings in Gaza and the provision of all facilities
for humanitarian relief in order to ease the humanitarian
crisis in Gaza.
The negative effect of the conflict in Gaza has begun
to spill over into Syria, with security implications for the
borders between Lebanon and Israel and between Syria
and Israel. That has seriously threatened regional peace
and security. The Security Council and the international
community should take action to change that situation.
China supports the continued constructive role played
by Egypt and other countries in pushing for a ceasefire.
China’s Special Envoy for the Middle East is now
visiting several countries in the region and is bringing
influence to bear on the parties concerned, with a view

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to bringing about a ceasefire, a cessation of violence
and peace talks. China is actively following up on the
new delivery of humanitarian relief to Palestine.
China hopes that the relevant players of the
international community will enhance coordination and
work in synergy to achieve a ceasefire and the easing of
tension. China has always believed that the coexistence
of the two countries, Israel and Palestine — to be
achieved through peace talks — is the only and correct
way to resolve the Palestinian issue. It is also in the
fundamental interests of both sides.
We hope that Israel and Palestine will end their
conflict soon and make efforts to address the deepseated problems in their bilateral relations in order to
avoid a repetition of tragedies. We urge Israel to stop its
settlement activities and release detained Palestinians
so as to create conditions for the restarting of the
peace talks. We are ready to join with the international
community to work unremittingly for a comprehensive,
fair and lasting solution of the problems in the Middle
East.
China is following closely the situation in Syria. We
feel deeply for the suffering of its people. We welcome
resolution 2165 (2014), adopted not long ago by the
Security Council, on the humanitarian issue in Syria.
China has always believed that a political solution is the
only way out of the Syrian problem. The international
community should stay the course to work out a political
settlement on the question of Syria, continue to engage
in coordination and cooperation and sustain its positive
efforts. China calls on all parties in Syria to implement
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) as soon as
possible, start an inclusive political transition and find
a middle path that takes into account the interests of all
sides and which is based on the country’s conditions, so
as to achieve a political solution of the Syrian problem.

S/PV.7222

killed and injured in the current crisis in Gaza. We urge
both sides to do their utmost to de-escalate the situation
and avoid further injury and loss of innocent life. The
people of Israel have the right to live without constant
fear for their security, but the people of Gaza also have
the right to live safely in peace.
We condemn the rocket attacks on Israel targeting
civilians in contravention of all humanitarian law and
norms. We deplore Hamas’s rejection of ceasefire
efforts to date. All those with influence over Hamas
must use it to get Hamas to agree to end rocket fire and
join an immediate ceasefire.
We fully support Israel’s right to take proportionate
action to defend itself from indiscriminate rocket
attacks and attempts to infiltrate Israel through
tunnels, but it is vital that Gaza’s civilian population
be protected. The number of civilian casualties is now
above 600. In particular, the military action in Shujaiya
on Sunday exacted a terrible human cost. Israel must
do everything it can to avoid civilian casualties, to
exercise restraint and to bring this situation to an end.
We welcome Egyptian efforts to secure a ceasefire
agreement. We encourage Egypt to persist with its
efforts, and others to work closely together with them.
We also applaud the Secretary-General’s commitment
to helping to secure a ceasefire, including through his
visit to the region, and the United Nations efforts to
broker humanitarian pauses. We also welcome President
Abbas’ support for an immediate ceasefire.

China welcomes the appointment by the SecretaryGeneral of Mr. Staffan de Mistura as the new Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria and
Ambassador Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy as the Deputy
Special Envoy. We will continue to enhance cooperation
with the relevant players of the international community
to work towards a proper solution of the Syrian problem.

Hundreds of thousands of vulnerable civilians in
Gaza are suffering acutely in this crisis and bear no
responsibility for the rocket fire. At least 100,000
Gazans have been displaced by the conflict. Hundreds
of thousands are suffering shortages of water, sanitation
and electricity. The United Kingdom will provide
$3 million in new funding to help the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East supply immediate emergency assistance
for over 84,000 people who are seeking shelter in its
schools. We are also bringing forward over $4 million
in funding to the International Committee of the Red
Cross to provide emergency health care and to repair
water wells and pipelines damaged by the air strikes.

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
situation across the Middle East gives us all cause for
grave concern. Violence and humanitarian crises have
escalated and engulfed millions of innocent people in
the region. It is deeply tragic that so many have been

This situation is grimly familiar. It is the third
major military operation in Gaza in six years. The
priority must be to achieve a durable ceasefire that
ends this cycle of violence. A ceasefire agreement must
address the underlying causes of the crisis. It needs to

14-4776817/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

secure the full implementation of both resolution 1860
(2009) and the November 2012 ceasefire agreement.
There will need to be concerted action to get a grip on
the security situation and open up Gaza’s economy. The
Palestinian Authority must return to Gaza. None of this
will be easy, but without it we are bound to see another
repeat of this crisis.
We cannot forget the appalling violence that
continues elsewhere in the Middle East. The Syrian
regime’s relentless brutality has created an environment
where violent extremism is taking hold. What is
happening in Syria is not and has never been about
terrorism. It is about the legitimate demands of the
Syrian people and their desire for the basic rights of
freedom and dignity. But Al-Assad’s regime responds
to demands with horrendous brutality. Now, Syria is
the number one destination for jihadists anywhere in
the world, and the violence is spreading beyond Syria’s
borders. Let us be clear. Al-Assad is not the answer to
the terrorist threat; he is the cause of it. The advance
of such violent extremists in the region underscores
the need to support moderate groups in Syria. These
moderate groups are the only forces fighting extremists
and Al-Assad’s tyranny.
The Council has taken a major step forward to help
alleviate some of the horrors facing ordinary Syrians.
With the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014), many
Syrians will soon receive the food and medical supplies
they desperately need. It is vital that the United Nations
rapidly deploy its monitoring mission so that aid can
begin to flow through the additional crossings. We
welcome assurances from the Syrian National Coalition
and the Free Syrian Army that they will implement
resolution 2165 (2014) in order to help aid reach those
in urgent need of assistance.
We know that a lasting solution to the Syrian
crisis will come from a political solution. We welcome
newly appointed United Nations Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura and urge all parties to work closely
towards a Syrian-led political transition. We commend
the Syrian National Coalition on the recent election
of its President, Mr. Hadi Al-Bahra. Along with our
partners, we will continue to provide practical technical
and political support to the Syrian National Coalition.
Syria will know a stable peace only when those
responsible for atrocities are held to account. In that
context, we welcome the recent resolution of the
Human Rights Council, and we will continue to work

18/70

22/07/2014

ensure that victims receive justice, including at the
International Criminal Court.
Finally, we utterly condemn the reported atrocities
committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), which has advanced through western and
northern Iraq, displacing an estimated 650,000 people.
We note with grave concern the events in Mosul this
past weekend. ISIL’s threats against the Christian
community in particular, which has been in Mosul
for nearly 2,000 years, are horrific. As the SecretaryGeneral has said, systematic attacks on civilians
because of their faith or religious beliefs may constitute
crimes against humanity. ISIL poses a grave threat
to the local population, to the security, stability and
territorial integrity of the State, and to the wider region.
The single most important factor that will determine
whether Iraq overcomes this challenge is political unity.
It is therefore vital that a new, inclusive Government be
formed as soon as possible.
I commend the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Iraq, Nikolay Mladenov,
and urge Iraq’s politicians to ensure that a President
and Prime Minister are appointed as soon as possible.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our meeting today underscores the fact that it
is unacceptable, against the backdrop of the upheavals
in the Middle East, to relegate the Israeli-Palestinian,
and the Arab-Israeli settlement more generally, to
the back burner. They are key to the stability, wellbeing, prosperity and flourishing of all people and
Governments of the Middle East.
The international community is shocked by the
scale of the human tragedy in the Gaza Strip. The
dead number in the hundreds and the wounded in
the thousands. The majority are peaceful Palestinian
civilians killed as a result of the disproportionate use of
force by Israel. There is also continuous rocket fire from
Gaza into Israel, and civilians there — Israelis — are
also targeted. These actions are inadmissible and cannot
be justified. There must now be a speedy end to the
suffering of peaceful Palestinians and Israelis and to
the destruction of State infrastructure. The scale of loss
and destruction requires urgent action on the part of the
international community.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s mission to
the Middle East. We support Egypt’s efforts to achieve
a ceasefire between Gaza and Israel. We thank the
United Nations agencies in the Gaza Strip for their

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

activities to minimize the humanitarian impacts of
the current dangerous spike in confrontation. For our
part, we continue to work actively through all channels
with the parties to the conflict and representatives
of the international Quartet of mediators to end all
violence in a timely manner, de-escalate the situation,
lay the foundation for a subsequent ceasefire, and
facilitate the establishment of conditions necessary to a
comprehensive negotiating process between Palestinian
and Israel. Consultations are currently ongoing in the
region with the special representative of the Russian
Minister for Foreign Affairs, who plans to engage in
contacts with Israel and Palestinian, as well as with
United Nations personnel.
Two days ago, the President of the Security Council
called for a swift cessation of military confrontation
on the basis of a return to the agreement of November
2012. We are convinced that a swift and viable
ceasefire would ensure the security of Israel and all its
citizens, the security of the people of the Gaza Strip,
an improvement in the humanitarian situation there,
and the possible lifting of the blockade of Palestinian
territory.
We feel that the appeal of Palestinian President
Mahmoud Abbas to the Secretary-General for Palestine
to be made an international protectorate should be
accorded serious attention. We are ready to consider the
proposals being prepared by the League of Arab States
regarding the role to be played by the Security Council
in the current situation. We are frankly surprised
that we heard no reference to those proposals in the
statement made today by the representative of Jordan.
There is a need to move forward towards resolving
the issue of a lasting Palestinian-Israeli settlement,
which should be based on the concept of two States
living side by side in peace and cooperation and the
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, and with close international support
for the peace process from the Middle East Quartet, in
close cooperation with the League of Arab States. The
task of intra-Palestinian reconciliation is of particular
importance in that regard, especially to establish
an integral, sustainable and properly functioning
Government of national unity. That would be in line
with the interests of Israel’s security concerns.
We welcome the appointment of Staffan de Mistura
as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria.
We hope that he will make a significant contribution
to the Syrian political process. Unfortunately, however,

S/PV.7222

the situation on the ground continues to be of great
concern. We are especially concerned about terrorist
activity gaining ground in Syria and in the region as
whole. We condemn last week’s abduction by fighters
of the Islamic State of a large gas field in Shaar, Homs
governorate. That was accompanied by a massive attack
on soldiers and rebels guarding the facility, as well as
staff. According to various sources, approximately
300 people were killed. The incident once again serves
to underscore the imperative need to adopt Russia’s
draft presidential statement on the inadmissibility of
engaging in oil transactions with terrorist organizations
in Syria and Iraq.
We are insulted by the odious threat of acts of
terrorism against United Nations staff in the Golan
Heights. We call on those who sponsor or train
terrorist fighters in the region, first and foremost the
Jabhat Al-Nusra, to rein in their subordinates and to
make it absolutely clear to them that threats against
United Nations peacekeepers are brazen threats to the
international community.
Recent events underscore the worrying trend of
the region becoming an epicentre for terrorist activity.
Extremists of various types are attempting to capitalize
on the turbulent events in the Middle East, which are
rooted in social problems, in people not having a choice
of lifestyle other than crime, and the fanning of the
flames of inter-ethnic and inter-religious conflict. The
fabric of terrorism is being woven at breakneck speed
in areas of conflict. Terrorism is spilling over beyond
State borders, including extremist organizations and
foreign fighters. The so-called management of terrorist
flows has demonstrated its fallacy when organizations
such as Jabhat Al-Nusra or the Islamic State are banned
in one country but it is felt that it is possible to live with
their activities in other countries, such as in Syria, or
even to fuel them. A business approach to the issue is
unacceptable.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I believe we owe the
Secretary-General a debt of gratitude, not only for
his efforts in the Middle East but especially for his
briefing this morning. We also want to thank Minister
Asselborn for his presence and for labouring with the
Security Council for a second consecutive day.
My comments will focus on the questions of
Palestine, Yemen, Lebanon and Syria.
The death toll in the war between Hamas and Israel
is mounting at an alarming rate. The humanitarian

14-4776819/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

dimension of the conflict on the Palestinian side has
reached crisis levels; thousands have been displaced.
Health facilities have been stretched beyond their
capacities and medicines are in short supply. Those
problems have been compounded by acute shortages of
water and electricity, as well as the massive destruction
of infrastructure and residential buildings. The net
result is that residents of Gaza face untold hardship.
As with every sovereign State, Israel has an
inherent right to defend itself and to keep its citizens
safe. However, we view its military response in Gaza
as needlessly excessive and in violation of international
humanitarian law. There can be no justification
whatever for the wanton and unrelenting killing
of civilians, including women, children and senior
citizens. We call for an immediate withdrawal of Israeli
forces from Gaza.
The immediate cause-and-effect relationship of
this conflict cannot be ignored. The indiscriminate
rocket attacks by Hamas amount to a violation of
international humanitarian law. Firing rockets against
non-military targets serves no purpose other than to
terrorize civilians. That is unacceptable, and we urge
Hamas to put an immediate halt to those attacks.
The cycle of violence will not solve any problem;
it can lead only to a hardening of positions, which
will not serve the long-term interests of either party.
We call for an urgent de-escalation of the conflict and
a cessation of hostilities. Leaders on both sides must
demonstrate maximum restraint, both in their actions
and utterances. There must be an intensification of
diplomatic efforts to end the conflict. We therefore
urge leaders around the world to bring their influence
to bear on the situation, in the hope that such efforts
will facilitate a return to the November 2012 ceasefire.
The Secretary-General’s shuttle diplomacy and
engagement with leaders in the region provides for
us a ray of hope. We express our full support for his
relentless efforts. We also welcome the Egyptian
proposal for a ceasefire and note that Israel has
accepted it. We urge Hamas also to accept it. In the
current circumstances, a ceasefire represents the best
opportunity for a cessation of hostilities and a return
to dialogue. Indeed, the Secretary-General’s summary
constitutes the guidelines for the contending parties.
He said, in summary, stop the fighting, start a dialogue
and address the root causes.

20/70

22/07/2014

The situation in Yemen is part of the Middle East
calculus. Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups continue
to pose a challenge to the efforts of the Government to
restore stability. In addition to the attacks by terrorists
on civilians and security forces, the country is
embroiled in a conflict with separatists in the south and
Houthi militias in the north. We strongly condemn the
activities of the armed groups in Amran, which have
left scores dead and displaced families. According to
the Yemeni Red Crescent, 15,000 families have already
fled the fighting. That situation underscores the need
for the Yemeni authorities to expedite action in the
implementation of the recommendations of the National
Dialogue Conference, which have clearly addressed the
roots of the conflict.
We see a silver lining in the cloud, that is, the
political transition process, which has remained
on course in spite of the security challenges. The
confidence-building measures being undertaken by the
Government are commendable. We take particular note
of the steps to implement the 20 points recommended
by the National Dialogue Conference preparatory
technical committee, as well as the 11 points appoint
recommended by the Conference on the the southern
and Sa’ada issues. We welcome the Government’s
designation of a competent authority to implement
the recommendations of the Conference. That is a
reassuring sign that the Government is committed to
building a united, peaceful and prosperous Yemen.
We take positive note of the two-day regional
conference on transitional justice held in June jointly by
Yemen’s Ministry for Legal Affairs, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. The
conference was designed to discuss transitional justice
law and its implementation. According to various
reports, the topics addressed were the outcomes of the
National Dialogue Conference and their relationship
with immunity laws, transitional justice, democratic
transition and the role of international actors and civil
society.
Transitional justice is a very important aspect
of Yemen’s political process. We commend the
Government for its involvement in organizing the
Conference, and the United Nations agencies for
collaborating with the Government to hold the event.
We acknowledge the support provided by Japan, the
Netherlands, Sweden, the European Union and the

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

United Nations Peacebuilding Fund to the transitional
justice project in Yemen.
Turning to the situation in Lebanon, we note that the
political situation remains very delicate. We are deeply
concerned by the current presidential crisis, which
could, if not urgently resolved, threaten the stability of
the country. As the attention of the world is focused
on more dramatic developments in other parts of the
Middle East, including the war in Syria, the insurgency
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in Iraq and
the escalation of tension between Israel and Palestine,
the potential dangers of the Lebanese situation could
be ignored.
The presidency of Lebanon has traditionally
been considered as one that should unify the country,
building bridges between the various communities.
That is why it is very important for political actors to
agree on who takes the mantle of the presidency. So
far, eight sessions of Parliament have been held without
a President being elected. That has created a political
vacuum since 25 May, when President Suleiman ended
his term as President. We understand that the Speaker of
Parliament has scheduled a ninth session of Parliament
for 23 July. It is our hope that consensus will have been
reached on who will become President before that date.
We urge the leaders of Lebanon to walk together in
the interests of their country and to elect a successor
without delay.
Nigeria remains deeply concerned about the
conflict in Syria, which has caused the deaths of
thousands and displaced many more. We welcome
the unanimous adoption by the Council of resolution
2165 (2014), on humanitarian access in Syria. That
indeed is a true reflection of the determination of the
Council to address the humanitarian crisis in Syria.
The resolution requires both sides to the conflict to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance by
United Nations humanitarian agencies. We expect
that, in the process of carrying out relief activities,
humanitarian agencies, including the United Nations,
will respect the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria. We hope that the
relevant parties in Syria will work closely with United
Nations humanitarian institutions and take effective
and concrete measures to implement resolutions 2139
(2014) and 2165 (2014).
We have been very unequivocal in our position
that a military solution in Syria is unattainable.
Comprehensive negotiations remain the most viable

S/PV.7222

means to a sustainable resolution of the Syrian crisis.
The international community must continue to work
towards a political settlement through dialogue and avoid
a militarization of the conflict in Syria. In the current
circumstances, the 30 June 2012 Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) offers the best way forward. We
urge all parties to work towards its implementation.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. de Mistura as the
new Special Envoy for Syria, and call on the parties to
utilize his good offices and his wealth of experience to
achieve an amicable solution to the crisis.
The Middle East today must retreat from the very
dangerous precipice on which it has been standing for
too long. The time is now, and we are all summoned to
united collective action for durable peace.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and for his
efforts. I also welcome the Permanent Representative
of Israel and the Permanent Observer of the State of
Palestine, who are present in hre in the Hall, and thank
them for their statements.
I shall make some brief remarks about Syria and
then focus on the Middle East and the question of
Palestine.
With regard to Syria, Argentina deeply regrets
that we have had to adopt a new resolution on the
humanitarian crisis. That was the result of the
non-compliance with resolution 2139 (2014) and the
increase in the suffering of the Syrian people. However,
we value in particular the fact that the Council assumed
its responsibilities with regard to a situation that has
undermined its credibility and cast a doubt over its
authority. We hope and demand that this time the voice
of the Council be heard.
We would like to take this opportunity to underscore
the fact that, despite the profound differences among its
members, the Security Council has been able to speak
with one voice in dealing with the effects of the crisis:
demanding access for assistance, reacting quickly each
time incidents occurred in the area of operations of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and
recognizing and strongly supporting the Government
and the people of Lebanon and the countries that are
receiving refugees. No less important is the fact that
the Security Council has been able to be at the forefront
of the complex process of eliminating Syria’s chemical
weapons programme, which is already in its final
stages.

14-4776821/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

While we recognize that it is not easy, we hope
those elements can lay the foundation for a common
vision so that the Council can contribute not only to
addressing the consequences of the crisis, but also
to understanding its causes and offering solutions,
thereby concretely and effectively assisting the new
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, to whom we offer our support. His success
will not only make it possible to contribute towards the
building of a better future for Syria, but will be key
for the achievement of peace and security in the entire
region.
This open debate undoubtedly comes at a time of
great upheaval in the Middle East, which is being torn
apart by violence, the exacerbation of sectarian tension,
the indiscriminate abuse of militarism and the increase
in various types of extremism. In that environment of
uncertainty, for the third time in less than six years
Gaza has again been plunged into violence. Once
again, it is civilians who are paying the price for the
disproportionate use of military force by Israel. Once
again, there are unacceptable acts by Hamas. And once
again, there is despair and death. Sooner or later, there
will once again be calm. And once again, there will be
the certainty that violence will return unless the causes
that made it possible are eradicated and the eternal
cycle of a pattern of abuse and intolerance, which is
repeated all too often, is broken.
Despite the calls by the Council and other voices
of the international community, instead of moderation,
all that we have seen has been an intensification in
the fighting and an open defiance of the obligations
incumbent by way of international humanitarian law,
human rights law and the protection civilians.
As it could not be any other way, the immediate
result of Israel’s ground offensive in Gaza and the
bombing that accompanied it, was the sharp increase
in the number of fatalities, the vast majority of whom
were civilians, including an intolerable number of
children. What happened in Shujaiya on Sunday cannot
be described as anything other than a massacre — one
more in the long history of Palestine — which we
condemn in the strongest terms. That and all allegations
of excesses, abuses and violations of international law
must be investigated and the perpetrators must be held
accountable. We must ensure that there is justice for all.
The incursion has also increased the number of
displaced people, has had repercussions throughout
the region and has deepened the humanitarian crisis,
22/70

22/07/2014

which exceeds the international community’s ability to
respond. More than 1 million people are affected by a
lack of adequate access to water and sanitation services,
while 80 per cent of the people in Gaza have electricity
only four hours per day. United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
schools have stopped being centres for learning in order
to become improvised refugee camps.
It is therefore clear that our responsibility is to
demand an immediate cessation of hostilities, strict
respect for international humanitarian law and human
rights, and the protection of civilians. That means that
Israel must put an end to its military operations and
the disproportionate use of force in Gaza, and it also
means that both Hamas and the Islamic Jihad must
put an end to the indiscriminate launching of rockets
against Israel.
We therefore reiterate our support for the peace
initiatives currently under way. History and geography
have assigned to Egypt a key role in these efforts, but it
is clear that other regional and international actors with
influence on the parties should be prepared to use that
influence in order to find a way out.
We welcome in this respect the decision of the
Secretary-General to travel to the region, and we hope
that his efforts will yield favourable results and make
it possible to move towards what both the General
Assembly and the Council have presented as not only a
possible but also a desirable and necessary way out in
order to put this long-standing conflict behind us.
Our priority objective here is to restore calm, and
yet we cannot allow ourselves to consent to a return to
things as they were before the crisis. It is neither viable
nor sustainable for Gaza to continue to be an economic
and political shut-in, with 40 per cent of its people
without work or income and subject to food insecurity,
a sanitary and energy crisis, and a lack of conditions
conducive to promoting economic development with
full social inclusion and human rights.
Given that the horizon is receding due to the
frustrating path that has been tread over and over,
the question is not if there will be another outbreak
of violence, but when there will be one. This renewed
crisis should be a strong wake-up call to address,
comprehensively, the root causes that led to the outbreak
of the conflict. The paths to this goal were already
laid out by the Security Council in its resolution 1860
(2009). The time has come to support its implementation

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in all its dimensions, that is, allow the unimpeded
access of humanitarian assistance; ensure the sustained
and regular flow of goods and persons through the
borders; and prevent the illicit trafficking of arms and
ammunition.
Learning from recent experience and in order to
guarantee effective compliance, it will also be key to
establish an international mechanism to monitor these
and other measures that may be agreed on as part of the
initiatives under way.
No less important will be achieving a single
Palestinian Authority, so that it can govern effectively
also in Gaza, because while our objective remains a
two-State solution, reunification of the Palestinian
political system is in that context not a problem but part
of the solution. It would be unfortunate, therefore, if one
of the fatalities of the tragedy we are experiencing were
to be the incipient process of Palestinian reconciliation,
which we have so strongly stressed and on which we
have so intensively laboured.
As we clamour for an active role on the part of
countries, leaders and organizations to resolve this
crisis, we expect the same from the Security Council.
We have said it every single time we have met in order
to address this situation, and we reiterate it again today.
We believe that the Security Council, assuming the
responsibilities assigned to it by the Charter, can and
should more firmly support the efforts undertaken to
achieve a ceasefire, ensure compliance with it and,
finally, to help to create the necessary conditions so
that both sides can renew their dialogue with a view to
bringing about a two-State solution based on the 1967
borders, which is the only guarantee for lasting peace
and security.
In this regard, we should ask ourselves the
question: what is the point of the Security Council if
the maintenance of international peace and security
becomes a mere matter of a few ad hoc mechanisms?
We are far from opposing bilateral diplomacy or the
diplomacy of groups of States or other organizations,
but it should not be at the cost of rendering the Security
Council an institution devoid of meaning and incapable
of having on impact on conflict resolution. It is about
finding complementary, convergent and effective
strategies, based on strategic solidarity.
Argentina believes in real multilateralism that is
most truly represented in our Organization. It cannot
be conceived of as an obstacle to achieving a more just

S/PV.7222

and peaceful world. It is not a case of multilateralism
versus bilateral relations, nor is it multilateralism versus
regional organizations. Each of these dimensions and
strategies must be brought together and coordinated
with a common goal, but as the same time it should be
recognized that it is multilateralism that ensures that all
States and peoples, without exception, can be heard and
recognized as equal in dignity and in rights.
In this context, since the press statement issued on
12 July by the Council had no impact, perhaps we should
speak more loudly and with a single voice in order to
demand, along with the other tools at our disposal, a
ceasefire, that international law be respected, that an
end be put to violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights, and that civilians be protected.
Argentina is prepared to comply with this goal. In
that context, given the tools available to us, Argentina
would here respectfully address the members of the
Security Council to propose that the Council use
all the tools available to it. As it has the lofty task of
maintaining international peace and security, it should
consider the possibility of conducting a mission to
the countries of the region in order to support, and
give a renewed impetus to, the efforts to bring about
a ceasefire, including a visit to Gaza in order to see
first-hand the ravages of the armed conflict. We must
support all who are working towards a lasting peace
in two States living in reciprocal mutual respect, in
security, safety and prosperity.
I would ask that the Security Council consider this
proposal. Argentina wishes to honour the commitments
it undertook when it was elected to this body. We
believe that the ethics of conviction and responsibility
are not two different things; they are two sides of the
same coin, so we must be consistent.
Ms. King (Ausralia): I thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing this morning.
The major escalation in hostilities between Israel
and militant groups in Gaza in recent days is of course
deeply troubling and reminds us of the urgency of all
the efforts that are currenty directed towards stopping
the violence.
We are seriously concerned about the growing
number of casualties on both sides, including many
Palestinian civilians, a significant number of Israeli
soldiers and several Israeli civilians. Everything
possible should be done to prevent civilian casualties
and to limit the suffering of innocent people, including

14-4776823/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

those displaced by the fighting. All sides must respect
international humanitarian law.
We strongly condemn Hamas and other militants’
continued rocket attacks on Israel, with the total number
of such rocket launches now numbering over 1,850.
The decision of Hamas to reject the Egyptian-brokered
ceasefire proposals, and its use of civilian facilities
such as United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
schools to launch attacks on Israel, are inexcusable. We
recognize the increased burden on UNRWA as a result
of the current crisis.
We support Israel’s right to defend itself in the face
of such attacks. No country can be expected to stand by
and tolerate such sustained attacks directed at civilian
areas. In doing so, Israel needs to take all the necessary
steps to prevent civilian casualties.
Australia strongly supports efforts to secure an
immediate ceasefire. We endorse and welcom the
personal efforts of the Secretary-General in travelling
to the region and seeking an end to the violence. We
also welcome the efforts of United States Secretary of
State Kerry in seeking to broker a ceasefire, as well
as the efforts of French Foreign Minister Fabius and
others. The sustained high-level engagement reflects
the international community’s deep distress at the
violence, its absolute determination to assist in ending
it and to build the conditions for a sustainable peace.
Hamas must engage with those international efforts
to resolve the crisis. Once a ceasefire is achieved, the
international community needs to find a way to help
the Israelis and the Palestinians return to negotiations
on the two-State solution. The absence of a political
dialogue runs the serious risk of further deterioration
in security conditions in future.
Australia welcomes the Council’s adoption last
week of resolution 2165 (2014), on the worsening
humanitarian crisis in Syria. That outcome reflects the
extent of the Council’s determination to alleviate the
human suffering in Syria despite the political obstacles
that have hampered the Council’s ability to act decisively
to prevent the crisis. By making it clear that United
Nations agencies and their partners are authorized
to deliver humanitarian assistance across the four
nominated border crossings, and across conflict lines,
we hope the estimated additional 2.9 million people can
be reached with life-saving assistance. We commend
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

24/70

22/07/2014

and the United Nations system for their quick action
in operationalizing resolution 2165 (2014), in difficult
circumstances. All parties are obliged to respect and
protect the safety and security of humanitarian workers
in accordance with the resolution.
That resolution was necessary, however, only
because of the immeasurable failure of the parties
to the Syrian conflict — and the Assad regime in
particular — to adhere to the decisions of the Council,
to uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law and to protect the lives of Syrian
civilians. The continued violations of human rights
by regime forces and terrorist groups like the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), are abhorrent. The
international community’s determination to see this
turned around was expressed in resolution 2165 (2014).
There can be no excuses for continued non-compliance.
This month the last of Syria’s declared precursor
chemicals were removed for destruction. We applaud
the efforts of the United Nations-Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) monitoring
mission and those States that have contributed to that
outcome. We urge the Syrian regime to complete its
declaration and finalize plans for the destruction of its
chemical facilities with the OPCW.
A political solution to the crisis is urgently needed.
The presidential elections in June, from which many
Syrians citizens were excluded, lacked credibility and,
as former Joint Special Representative Brahimi told us,
have taken us further away from a political solution
to the crisis. That is a significant challenge that the
Secretary-General’s new Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, will need to address. Australia welcomes
Mr. de Mistura’s appointment, along with that of
Deputy Special Envoy Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy, and
looks forward to supporting their efforts to find a way
to end the violence in Syria. We urge States in the
region to offer them their full support, which will be
crucial to the success of any future political track.
It is deeply concerning that large parts of Syria and
Iraq are now ungoverned and controlled by a terrorist
organization, namely, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. That will continue to be a major security and
political challenge for the international community
as well as for the peoples of Syria and Iraq, who have
suffered appalling atrocities at the hands of those
terrorists. All United Nations States Members must
adhere to their obligations under resolution 1267 (1999),

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

which established the A1-Qaida sanctions regime, and
must cut off funding and weapons to ISIL.
The displacement of close to 1 million Iraqis, in
addition to those fleeing from Syria as a result of the
conflict, represents a significant humanitarian crisis.
In order to respond effectively to those challenges, it
is important that a new Iraqi Government be formed
as soon as possible and that it adopt a unified, national
approach. Australia welcomes the nomination of a
Speaker of the Iraqi Council of Representatives, a
constructive first step towards that objective. The
United Nations is uniquely placed to provide assistance
to Iraq’s political leaders as they work towards the
formation of an inclusive new national Government.
We strongly support the Secretary-General and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mladenov in
their efforts to assist Iraqis in addressing their current
security and political challenges and building a unified
and secure country.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like first of all to thank the Secretary-General
for the information he presented to us this morning,
as well as the statements made by my colleagues from
Palestine and Israel.
In less than two weeks we have met urgently more
than three times to address the latest developments
in Gaza. Despite our urgent calls for an immediatee
ceasefire, and despite the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and the diplomatic pressure that has been
brought to bear, instead of establishing a truce, the
parties have decided to escalate the conflict. Chile
condemns the escalation of violence affecting the
Middle East, Israel’s disproportionate use of force in
densely populated areas and the indiscriminate use of
rockets by Hamas. This is a conflict in which neither of
the parties will achieve its goals, but one that will exact
a high cost in innocent victims.
We urgently call on all the parties to fulfil their
international obligations with respect to the protection
of the civilian population. As we indicated last Friday
(see S/PV.7220), we believe that attacks on civilians,
in Gaza or in Israel, violate international humanitarian
law and may constitute war crimes. We also noted the
need for United Nations personnel on the ground to
have proper protection.
Given the recent discovery by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East of some 20 rockets being housed in a school

S/PV.7222

and yesterday’s attack on a hospital in the city of Deir
Al-Balah, we reiterate our call for the parties to take
urgent measures to halt attacks on schools and hospitals
and their military use, in accordance with resolution
2134 (2014).
My country is particularly concerned by the
growing number of civilian victims and by the grave
humanitarian situation that affects the residents of
the Gaza Strip. For that reason, in order to assist the
innocent victims of the conflict, we have made available
$150,000 to the United Nations agencies working in the
area under the umbrella of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East.
Chile believes that it is critically important to open
all the border crossings in the Gaza Strip, including
Rafah. It has been interesting to hear members of
the Council express the view that, once a ceasefire
is achieved, there needs to be adequate measures to
ensure its implementation, which could also be used to
guarantee the peaceful use of the border crossings.
As the Secretary-General has observed, once a
ceasefire is achieved, it would be unacceptable to return
to the status quo. We insist that it is absolutely vital that
the Council address the root causes of the conflict.
Chile notes the letter sent by President Abbas to the
Secretary-General, which requests that Palestine be put
under an international protection system administered
by the United Nations. There is a broad consensus in the
international community regarding the main obstacles
to peace, including the construction and expansion
of settlements in the West Bank and Jerusalem,
considered illegal according to the provisions of the
Geneva Conventions and the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. That and other elements
have led to an environment of extreme hostility, which
makes dialogue difficult, isolating moderate voices
who promote peace in Israel and Palestine and pushing
farther away the desired two-State solution.
The region cannot withstand more conflict. Along
those lines, Chile values the fact that the Lebanese
Government has condemned the launching of rockets
by fundamentalist groups from its territory against
Israel. We appreciate all efforts aimed at neutralizing
the actions of radical groups, and we highlight the
commitment of the Lebanese Armed Forces and the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, which have
increased their control in the area.

14-4776825/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Turning now to Syria, Chile welcomes the adoption
of resolution 2165 (2014) on humanitarian access, which
we hope will help alleviate the suffering of millions of
Syrians and result in the delivery of more effective,
efficient and timely assistance in keeping with
humanitarian principles. We emphasize the binding
nature of the resolution, as well as the fact that it
complements resolution 2139 (2014) and the presidential
statement of 2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15).
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Staffan de
Mistura as the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, whose mission contributes to the quest for
a peaceful solution to the conflict based on dialogue
and reconciliation. The Government of Chile wishes
him every success in that task and offers him its strong
support in building more appropriate channels for
dialogue.
Finally, I would like to consider Iraq. Chile
expresses its deep concern for the grave humanitarian
and security situation in Iraq resulting from to the
military advance of terrorist groups, especially the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, which has resulted
in a high number of civilian victims and over 1 million
displaced persons. We are alarmed by the persecution
of ethnic and religious minorities in the region.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Sir, for having convened
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and
mediation efforts. I also thank the representatives of
Palestine and Israel for their statements.
Today’s debate comes at a particularly sensitive
time for the consideration of the situation in the
Middle East, in particular in Gaza, where violence
has reached an unacceptable level. Chad follows with
great concern and consternation the spike of violence
hitherto unseen in Gaza, which since 8 July has been
subjected to a full-scale Israeli assault, leading to more
than 600 deaths; more than 350 wounded, the majority
of whom are civilians, including women, children and
the elderly; and more than 100,000 displaced persons,
all of which has been compounded by the destruction
of civilian infrastructure — housing, hospitals, clinics
and schools.
Chad vociferously condemns the massacre of
Shujaiya, a city where many civilian lives were
lost on the Palestinian side as a result of the Israeli

26/70

22/07/2014

bombardment. We also condemn any attacks targeting
innocent civilians or civilian infrastructure. We are all
aware that such acts of violence against civilians are
serious violations of the most fundamental principles of
international humanitarian law and could constitute war
crimes. The perpetrators of such crimes and atrocities
should be held to account. The principle of payback and
justice cannot be used as a pretext.
Chad deplores the growing number of civilian
casualties and regrets the approving silence or impotence
of the international community and the resulting failure
to put an end to the escalation of violence in Gaza.
Israel’s legitimate right to self-defence cannot justify
such a high number of civilian casualties. The right to
self-defence is defined with respect to the threat and to
the right to life and security of innocent civilians. In
that regard, Israel has the obligation to act in line with
international humanitarian law and to protect the lives
of the civilian population.
We call upon Israel to immediately halt its air raids
and ground offensive, which have already claimed far
too many lives and caused destruction and material
damage. Along the same lines, we call upon the
Palestinians to halt attacks on Israel from the Gaza
Strip, particularly through rocket fire. We call upon
the international community to act with solidarity to
provide emergency humanitarian aid to the people in
Gaza and to support the efforts of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East.
The 2 million people in the Gaza Strip, under a
blockade since 2007, are cut off from the rest of the
world, stripped of the minimum of necessities and
subjected to periodic collective punishment. They
are experiencing a tragedy that is an affront to the
human conscience. The Security Council, as the
body exclusively responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, has an obligation
to persuade Israel to put an end to its attacks against
civilians and to its disproportionate offensive.
Chad supports all the good offices of the international
community, including those of the Secretary-General
and the Egyptian initiative, supported by the League
of Arab States, to bring about a cessation of hostilities
and a resumption of peace talks. In that regard, it is of
utmost importance to take on board the concerns of all
parties so as to find a fair, comprehensive and definitive
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis
of the well-known parameters, chiefly, the two-State
14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

solution, living side by side in peace and security with
the pre-1967 borders.
The Middle East region is increasingly fragile.
The wars in Iraq and Syria, the collapse of security
in Yemen and the ongoing fragility of Lebanon are
all worrisome signs that call attention to genuine and
imminent threats looming over the Middle East and
undermining peace and security, which are increasingly
called into question. The international community
should make tireless efforts and be firm in its policy
so as to extinguish the fires in the various areas of
the region and thereby ensure that they do not spread
further to threaten international peace and security on
a yet broader scale.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): Lithuania thanks
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his efforts to
protect civilians and reach a sustainable ceasefire in
Gaza. Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union later
on.
Our eyes are riveted upon Gaza. We condemn the
loss of hundreds of civilian lives, many of them children,
and the 100,000 people displaced. The magnitude of the
humanitarian crisis is breathtaking. This is the moment
for the international community, regional Powers and
the Israeli and Palestinian leadership to respond to
the cry of civilians for peace. Violence has no place in
addressing the ongoing situation. The actions of Hamas
and military groups in Gaza — including the firing
of rockets into Israel, developing rockets and tunnels,
using civilians as human shields — cannot be tolerated.
We recognize Israel’s legitimate right to defend itself.
Israel must act in a proportionate manner, in line with
international humanitarian law, to ensure the protection
of civilians.
Lithuania is alarmed by the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. We condemn the shelling of a third
hospital. The humanitarian situation requires urgent
attention. Humanitarian causes should be respected
and immediate access for humanitarian assistance
must be unconditionally allowed. All parties are
obligated to protect schools and hospitals, respect their
civilian character, and ensure safe passage for medical
personnel and ambulances. We sincerely appreciate the
tireless work and efforts of doctors, paramedics, United
Nations personnel, the International Committee of the
Red Cross and other humanitarian organizations in
saving human lives in Gaza.

S/PV.7222

We strongly support the ongoing diplomatic efforts
of the Secretary-General, together with regional
Powers — including Egypt, Turkey, Qatar and the
League of Arab States — to convince Hamas and other
militant groups to cease all rocket attacks and agree on
a complete, immediate ceasefire. We hope that it will
lead to a genuine dialogue with Israel and Palestine.
The tragic escalation of hostilities once again confirms
the unsustainable nature of the status quo and the need
for a comprehensive solution with regard to the situation
in Gaza, Palestine and the entire region.
Lithuania reiterates that a two-State solution
remains the only way to achieve a lasting peace and
security for Israelis and Palestinians. My country
is willing to work with the United States and other
partners on an initiative to relaunch peace negotiations.
The Middle East is gripped by bouts of extreme
violence. There is no breakthrough in sight for Syria.
The shocking levels of human suffering today, we
know, will pale against those of tomorrow. We welcome
resolution 2165 (2014), which we hope will facilitate
the delivery of aid to all Syrians in need. In case of
non-compliance with resolutions 2139 (2014) and
2165 (2014) by any Syrian party, the Council has the
responsibility to act by taking measures under Article
41 of the Charter of the United Nations and referring the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
The ultimate goal remains a political solution to the
conflict in Syria and we welcome the appointment of
the new United Nations Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral to Syria, Staffan de Mistura.
The Syrian crisis has become a regional crisis with
potential international security threats. A political
settlement in Syria could play a decisive role in fighting
the growing terrorism and insurgency in and around
regional flashpoints, mainly Iraq. Terrorists of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) already control
a large swathe of the Middle East, a chunk of Iraq, and
oil wells in Syria. They undermine the stability, unity
and territorial integrity of States. ISIS fuels the worst
kind of extremism. Mosul is just the latest example.
The systematic discrimination, assassination and
killing of Shia, Christians, Turkmen, Shabaks, Yazidis
and other religious and ethnic groups by ISIS are a
serious cause of concern. The grievances of religious
and ethnic groups against the central Iraqi Government
are one of the reasons behind the dramatic rise of
insurgency. We call on all Iraqis to pursue an inclusive

14-4776827/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

national dialogue. We urge all actors in the region to
continue contributing to the stabilization of the political
and security situation in the country.
A failure to implement resolution 1701 (2006)
may have further dramatic political, security and
humanitarian consequences for Lebanon. By increasing
its presence in the south of the country, the Lebanese
Armed Forces will contribute to regional peace and
security. We commend the Lebanese Government
for keeping Lebanon’s doors open to refugees, for
upholding the Baabda Declaration and for pursuing the
national dialogue. We urge the Lebanese Parliament to
elect a new President as soon as possible. Lebanon needs
the political support and assistance of the international
community.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Rwanda.
I want to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing on the situation in the Middle East,
especially on the conflict related to Gaza. I also wish
to thank Ambassador Riyad Mansour, Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine, and the
representative of Israel to the United Nations, David
Roet, for their respective statements.
The current trend regarding the security situation
in the Middle East, from Gaza to Iraq through Syria
and Yemen, is concerning. The level of human loss
and destruction in the region as a result of recurring
violence is unspeakable. In just two weeks of the crisis
in Gaza, more than 600 lives have been lost and more
than 3,700 people wounded, in addition to over 100,000
people displaced. In this regard, we also strongly
condemn the indiscriminate rocket fire by Hamas into
Israel and call for an immediate end to these attacks.
We recognize the right of Israel to self-defence, as no
country on Earth would accept daily rocket attacks on
its cities and its people.
Nonetheless, we are deeply disturbed by the level
of civilian victims of this war, including an increasing
number of children, as demonstrated by the recent
fighting in Shujaiya. We call for the protection of
civilians and respect for international humanitarian
and human rights law. Above all, the parties to this
conflict must heed the call for an immediate cessation
of hostilities based on a return to the November 2012
ceasefire agreement, as expressed last Sunday by
the Council. Rwanda further supports the proposed
ceasefire to be brokered by Egypt, which would give a

28/70

22/07/2014

chance for a long-term political and economic solution
for Gaza.
We further believe that the proposal put forward
in the Council to establish a viable verification
and monitoring mission, which would ensure the
implementation of any ceasefire agreement, should be
supported by the concerned parties and stakeholders.
There is do doubt that our collective failure to advance
a political solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
will continue to lead to cyclical violence in the Middle
East.
We welcome the visit to the region of the SecretaryGeneral and the United States Secretary of State, who
emphasized the need for an immediate ceasefire as
well as the importance of taking concrete action in
addressing the underlying causes of this crisis. Indeed,
only a political solution based on a two-State solution
with two peoples living side by side in peace and
security will provide a sustainable settlement to the sixdecade conflict.
For the past three years now, the conflict in Syria
has been destroying a people, with massive violations of
human rights and a worsening humanitarian situation.
Over 150,000 have died and more than 10 million
are in dire need of humanitarian assistance. It is the
responsibility of the Syrian parties, supported by those
countries that have influence on them, to end that war.
In that regard, Rwanda welcomes the appointment
of the new United Nations Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. We are convinced that he will
use his experience to jump-start the Geneva II peace
process, with the support of all stakeholders.
Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation has
continued to deteriorate in Syria, mainly due to the
continued hostilities, but also to the failure of the
parties to implement resolution 2139 (2014). Rwanda
welcomed the unanimous adoption of resolution 2165
(2014), which authorized United Nations humanitarian
agencies to use four additional border crossings. We
hope that the new resolution will enable humanitarian
actors to assist up to 2 million hard-to-reach people.
However, Rwanda believes that the Council should
be vigilant as well as fully prepared to take concrete
measures under the Charter of the United Nations in
the event of non-compliance with both humanitarian
resolutions in Syria.
On a more positive note, Rwanda commends
Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Special Coordinator of the joint
14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the United Nations, together
with her team, for their tremendous achievements in
the elimination and destruction of all declared chemical
weapons of the Syrian Government, as requested by
resolution 2118 (2013).
Although we hope that no chemical material was
left behind, we cannot forget that, last August, hundreds
of innocent people, including women and children, lost
their lives following horrendous suffering. Now more
than ever, the perpetrators must be held accountable.
In conclusion, Rwanda expresses its firm belief
that only an inclusive moderate and responsible
approach will restore stability in the Middle East and
achieve permanent peace in the region. It is therefore
our collective responsibility to support the SecretaryGeneral and other stakeholders in their tireless efforts
to work for a peaceful resolution of conflicts throughout
the Middle East.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of Jordan has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan): I want to respond to the
inquiry by the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation and to assure him that Jordan will
be discussing with Council members proposals by
the League of Arab States to end the conflict and the
attack on the Palestinian people in Gaza. The League
has given the mandate to Jordan to do so, as well as
the discretion on when to present the proposals. The
goal should be to ensure effective action and fruitful
efforts on the ground to end the conflict. It is in that
context that we will confer with Council members and
circulate a draft document later today for members’
views. I thank Ambassador Churkin for his concern
and attention to the matter.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.

S/PV.7222

I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): Allow me, Mr. President, to
congratulate you and your team, for your leadership of
the Security Council this month. I would also like to
commend the members of the Permanent Mission of
the Russian Federation for a job well done during their
presidency last month. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
While the sun was setting and many Palestinians
were readying themselves for prayers and breaking
their fast, Israeli jetfighters and frigates and tanks
broke the peacefulness and pounded the Gaza Strip.
Over the past 15 days, more than 600 Palestinians have
been killed, more than 3,600 injured and more than
100,000 displaced. Sixty-four mosques, eight medical
centres and hundreds of houses have been destroyed.
Apparently, that is how Israel chooses life for the
Palestinian civilians in Gaza.
Time and again, we have heard about the so-called
right to self-defence. Based on the figures I have just
mentioned, it looks like self-help. Some might ask:
Who will defend the helpless in Gaza?
The territory of the State of Palestine is being
devastated by the continuing occupation and, more
particularly, by the growing illegal settlement activity.
Jerusalem is being deprived of its inclusiveness and
diversity.
The civilians in the West Bank are being subjected
to systematic security searches, massive arrest, the
illegal demolition of homes and collective punishment,
in blatant violation of Israel’s obligations under
international law, human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
How many mothers should be bereaved and how
many more youngsters should be assassinated? How
much longer should the Gaza Strip and its civilian
population be punished by the imposed blockade, the
rainfall of shelling and the repetitive punitive Israeli
military strikes in order for the Council to condemn
and put an end to those barbaric actions?
The atrocities on the ground should serve to
summon the political will in all Council members to
adopt a draft resolution to immediately end the violence
against civilians. In that context, Lebanon hopes that
the efforts led by Egypt and supported by the SecretaryGeneral and other officials in the region or visiting the

14-4776829/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

region will yield the much needed ceasefire that ends
the suffering of thousands of civilians.
We also support the call by President Mahmoud
Abbas to ensure international protection for the people
and territory of the State of Palestine. We agree with
the Secretary-General on the need to address the root
causes of the conflict. In that regard, we think that
the international community should finally translate
its commitment to the peace process into action,
in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference and the
integral provisions of the Arab Peace Initiative.
Since the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), my
Government has reaffirmed its commitment to the full
implementation of said resolution. Today, and in light
of the latest developments in the south of Lebanon,
my Government stands firm against any attempt to
destabilize the situation. Need I recall that the Lebanese
Minister of Foreign Affairs clearly rejected the rockets
launched by outlaw individuals and marginal groups?
Need I recall that the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF)
arrested their perpetrators? Need I also recall that the
LAF and the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) continue to work relentlessly to maintain
stability?
Notwithstanding these endeavours, Israel launched
more than 100 shells into the south of Lebanon,
undermining the joint efforts of the LAF and UNIFIL
and endangering their safety. We therefore lodged a
complaint, asking the Security Council to condemn
in the strongest term the Israeli bombardments, which
constitute a blatant breach of resolution 1701 (2006)
and a clear violation of the sovereignty of my country.
Furthermore, more needs to be done to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). Indeed,
Israel should immediately end its occupation of the
northern part of Al-Ghajar, the Sheba’a Farms and the
Kfar Shouba hills. Israel should end its almost daily
violation of Lebanon’s airspace, and Israel should
refrain from any unilateral action that could lead to
escalation.
Ross Mountain, the United Nations Humanitarian
Coordinator in Lebanon, has said:
“When you have 50,000 or 100,000 refugees in
the country, it is a refugee emergency. When you
have a quarter of the population of the country now
arising and one-third estimated by the end of this
year ... it is a national calamity.”

30/70

22/07/2014

Moreover, my country cannot cope alone with this
situation, particularly since the host communities
have reached their breaking point. The international
community should do more through the provision of
direct assistance to the Government agencies and by
fulfilling the pledges made at the donors conference. It
is alarming that only 29 per cent of the response plan
for Syrian refugees living in Lebanon has been funded.
Furthermore, burden-sharing is a principle that we
collectively need to uphold, and we reiterate our call
for the intensification of efforts to increase the number
of refugees included in resettlement programmes. Most
importantly, serious efforts should be made to widen the
humanitarian space to accommodate Syrian refugees
in safe zones in Syria or in camps along the border.
In this context, my Government will remain engaged
with the international community to ensure a wellcalibrated approach to the issue of the Syrian refugees
in Lebanon, based on the principles of international law
and the need to maintain stability in the country.
We commend the Security Council for adopting
resolution 2165 (2014) and welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s appointment of Mr. Staffan de Mistura. We
hope that similar consensus will emerge around a
much-needed mission of the Security Council to the
neighbouring countries hosting refugees from Syria.
Said mission would allow a first-hand account of the dire
situation of those refugees and their host community,
and highlight the urgent need to find a political solution
to the conflict in Syria. Maybe during that mission, the
members of this body will meet Ahmad, a 10-year-old
boy who fled Syria to Lebanon in 2013. Ahmad dreams
of building a time machine that would take him to a
time when there will be a solution to the conflict and
peace in his country — a time that will allow him and
many other Syrian children to go back to their homes
and schools and regain their lost childhood. It is time to
heed the call of Ahmad and millions of Syrian people.
The President: I wish to remind speakers to limit
their statements to no more than four minutes, since
many speakers remain on the list for this meeting.
I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency. We trust that you, Sir, will steer the Council
in addressing this very serious situation. We would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. We
express our support for his efforts in support of our

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

initiative to achieve an immediate ceasefire and for
the three points that he mentioned, namely, stopping
the fighting, starting dialogue and addressing the root
casues. I would like to welcome the presence earlier
today of Minister Asselborn. We pay tribute to his
commitment and courage.
In our most recent open debate on the Middle East
(see S/PV.7164), we assessed the situation following
nine months of unfruitful negotiations between
Israel and Palestine. The negotiations failed because
Israel, the occupying Power, refused to abide by the
agreed rules of the game. It continued to build illegal
settlements and refused to release the last batch of
pre-Oslo Palestinian prisoners. It called off the talks
when the Palestinian Government had the audacity to
respond to those illegal measures by exercising its fully
legitimate right under international law to adhere to a
number of human rights conventions.
We all concluded that the situation was not
sustainable. We predicted that it could explode at any
time. Unfortunately, our forecast was all too accurate.
It took less than three months for the entire situation
to explode. The collapse of the peace talks and,
since then, the deplorable kidnapping and killing of
teenagers from both sides, the exaggerated retaliatory
measures of Israel, the escalation of the racist price-tag
attacks against Arabs, Muslims and Christians alike,
the continuous provocation and attempts to change the
status quo with regard to the Holy Mosque in Jerusalem,
the launching of rockets and projectiles towards Israel
and the many other events that we have witnessed during
the past three months, leading to the current war being
waged on Gaza, are all painful symptoms of a chronic
and deadly disease called occupation. That has led to
the current tragic cycle of violence and will continue to
give rise to similar tragedies until it is eradicated.
No matter how strong Israel’s denial, the occupation
remains the principal cause of the instability for both
Israelis and Palestinians. The solution is simple. Once
there is no occupation, there will be no violence from
either side. Once there are two States living side by side
within the defined and recognized borders of 4 June
1967, peace will be achieved. How many more lives
must be lost and how many more children, women
and men must be killed, maimed or pyschologically
destroyed for life before Israel recognizes that
occupation is not sustainable? How many times has it
tried the same policies and how many times has it seen
the same results? Instead of achieving the security of its

S/PV.7222

citizens, Israel still feels threatened despite its military
might, which exceeds the military capabilities of all its
neighbours combined.
Egypt therefore commends the recent warnings
issued by more than a dozen European countries about
the possible repercussions of investment in entities
involved in settlement activities. We believe that such
moves, in addition to the steps taken by civil society to
divest from activities directly linked to the occupation
or to grave breaches of international law, such as the
decision taken by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
to divest from a British company linked to the Israeli
prison system, can contribute to convincing Israel that
occupation has a price.
Egypt condemns the indiscriminate killing of
civilians in Gaza. The horrible scenes of death and
destruction in Shujaiya and the fatally wounded bodies
of the four innocent boys who were playing soccer
in an open area on a beach two days before that call
into serious question the logic of the Israeli army. It is
not credible to pretend that children were mistakenly
identified as terrorists.
More than 600 Palestinians have been killed. At
least 20 per cent of them were children, and the death
count is rising. We condemn the disproportionate use
of force. The Torah mandates an eye for an eye; it never
called for taking 100 eyes for only 1.
Egypt has spared no effort to help in stopping the
atrocities in Gaza. We have launched the only serious
ceasefire initiative aimed at stopping the hostilities
and negotiating the terms of a sustainable solution that
can bring the Palestinians and the Israelis back to the
negotiating table. The clear and broad support for the
initiative expressed by the Secretary-General and the
members of the Security Council reflects the fact that
the proposed approach might be the only opportunity
available to stop the fighting and restore normal life for
the civilian population in Gaza.
We call on all those who have not accepted the
initiative to reconsider their positions. Today the
Secretary-General was in Egypt. United States Secretary
of State John Kerry was also in Cairo. We hope that our
common efforts will result in an immediate ceasefire
followed by negotiations to address the root causes
of the ever-repeating, never-ending conflict, first and
foremost by ending the illegal blockade imposed on
Gaza and opening the crossings administered by the
occupying Power.

14-4776831/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Meanwhile, we support in full the request by the
Palestinian President to provide international protection
for the Palestinian people, which was endorsed by the
League of Arab States. We look forward to concrete
and creative steps on the part of the Secretary-General
and the Security Council to deliver the much-needed
protection for the Palestinians.
I would like to end my statement by reading out
excerpts from articles written by an independent Israeli
journalist, Noam Sheizaf on 10 July, before the ground
campaign against Gaza started. He wrote,
“Even today, when rockets are exploding above
the city I love most in the world, even when we
rush into ... a makeshift bomb shelter, even now, I
oppose this military operation wholeheartedly. The
sight of the [Israeli Air Force’s] attack helicopters
... going south ... does not fill me with pride or
gratitude — it horrifies and depresses me;
“[I]f I had to explain the whole thing briefly,
I would use the following metaphor: we have built
two giant prisons —‘West Bank Prison’ and ‘Gaza
Prison’. The West Bank Prison is similar to a
minimum security facility, where prisoners get to
run their own affairs as long as they behave;
“Gaza, on the other hand, is a maximum
security facility. It is difficult to visit and impossible
to leave;
“I believe the prisoners will never love those
who have locked them up, but there is a good chance
that their children might be able to forgive — if for
no other reason than a desire to move on with their
lives;
“Hold your fire. Tear down the prison walls.
Set the prisoners free.”
I hope Israel will listen to that voice of reason.
I hope one day the Israelis will be convinced that
occupation will never bring security; on the contrary, it
will only bring instability, death and war crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia, hoping that he will be a
little generous with us.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia): I hope you
will be equally generous, Mr. President, with the
57 countries of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
that I represent here today.

32/70

22/07/2014

(spoke in Arabic)
Allow me, at the outset, to express my
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Allow me also to thank you, Sir, for
your wise leadership of the Council, which is reflected
first and foremost in three meetings recently held by
the Security Council to consider the Israeli aggression
against the Palestinian people in Gaza (see S/PV.7220,
S/PV.7216 and S/PV.7204). It is also my pleasure to
speak to the Security Council on behalf of the States
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
We heard from the Permanent Representative of
Israel a long series of unfounded claims and flimsy
pretexts, as well as dramatic expressions intended to
give the impression that Israel was the aggrieved party
in the current battles, or indeed in years past. Do not be
fooled, Sir.
We should not be fooled when Israel says that it
defends itself against missile attacks launched by
Palestinians against it. The fact of the matter is that
Israel has a defence system against missiles that has so
far effectively destroyed most of the rockets launched
against the country. What Israel is doing is not selfdefence, it is a widespread attack replete with war
crimes. Do not be fooled, Sir.
We must not be fooled when Israel says that
Palestinian attacks threaten its security and that of its
citizens. The fact of the matter is that the number of
victims of those rockets in Israel throughout the years
of occupation does not rise to the level of the number
of those killed in traffic accidents in Israel in just one
year — indeed, even in one month or in a single city.
Israel is using those attacks as a pretext for a genocidal
war against the Palestinian people. Do not be fooled,
Mr. President.
We should not be fooled when Israel says that no
Government in the world would stand idly by as its
cities, villages and citizens were threatened. The fact
of the matter is that no other Government in the world
practices what Israel practices, namely, the occupation
of the land of another State, the repression of that State’s
people, laying siege to those people and starving them
in an attempt to make them bend to its will. Do not be
fooled, Mr. President.
We should not be fooled when Israel says that it
accepts peace initiatives and ceasefires, while the other

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

party rejects them. The fact of the matter is that Israel
is the party that withdrew from peace negotiations. It
was Israel that reneged on its commitments by refusing
to release the last tranche of Palestinian detainees.
It was Israel that re-arrested and re-detained those
already released in prisoner-exchange agreements,
in flagrant violation of those agreements. It is Israel
that has unrelentingly persisted in building occupation
settlements on Palestinian land.
It is Israel that desecrates Islamic and Christian
holy sites, day in and day out. It is Israel that prevents
and denies the faithful access to such sites during the
holy month of Ramadan. It is Israel that continues to
besiege the Palestinian people in Gaza by land, sea and
air.
Mr. President, did you not hear Prime Minister
Netanyahu fully reject any Palestinian sovereignty
under any agreement? Did you not hear, Mr. President,
a member of Mr. Netanyahu’s ruling Likud
party — Knesset Vice-President Moshe Feiglin — call
for ethnic cleansing in Gaza and for the expulsion of
all Palestinians therefrom, or indeed Knesset member
Ayelet Shaked, of the HaBayit HaYehudi party, call for
the massacre of all Palestinian mothers because they
only gave birth to snakes?
Finally, Mr. President, do not be fooled if Israel says
that the starting point of the events we are witnessing
today is the kidnapping of three Israeli settlers from
the West Bank. The fact is that the starting point is
the very presence of settlers on occupied Palestinian
land. The starting point is the occupation itself and its
perpetuation. The starting point is the unjust siege of
Gaza and the fact that it has been transformed into a
large open-air prison for Palestinians. That led to the
major deterioration in humanitarian conditions, in
violation of resolution 1860 (2009).
The end point can be reached only by putting an
end to the occupation an to the settlements, by lifting
the siege on Gaza, by guaranteeing the protection of the
Palestinian people and by giving them an opportunity
to determine their own future and live in peace and
security in accordance with international law and the
initiative put forward by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and adopted by Arab States, which became the Arab
Peace Initiative supported by the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
The Palestinian people have appealed to the
Security Council three times this month to seek its

S/PV.7222

protection and to call on it to assume its responsibility
to end the aggression and the killing. The first time
was before the martyrdom of the four Bakr children
on the beach of Gaza. They were killed in cold
blood as they exercised their right to childhood and
soccer. The second time was before their 80-year-old
grandmother and a 5-month-old infant were killed
under the rubble caused by an Israeli raid. The third
time was following the Israeli massacre in Shujaiya,
where dozens of Palestinian civilians were martyred.
This is now the fourth time that the Palestinian people
appeal to the Security Council since the Israeli war
machine promised to intensify its aggression and
expand its criminal operations in Gaza — after the
killing of 25 people under the rubble of their homes in
Khan Younis, including 24 members of one family; the
killing of 10 members of the Siyam family in Rafah,
including four children and a nine-month old; as well as
the killing of a mother and her four children.
How many tragedies must this aggrieved people
bear as it seeks the Council’s protection and an end to
the aggression? The death toll has reached and exceeded
600 martyrs. There are more than 4,000 wounded, most
of whom are children, civilians and women. More than
100 Palestinians have been made homeless. The Israeli
aggression has gone beyond destroying the homes of the
inhabitants of Gaza and attacking hospitals — indeed,
even centres for the handicapped — let alone the barbaric
aggression against mosques. When will the Security
Council intervene? Where and when will the Council
exercise its role in protecting international peace and
security? Has it decided to shirk that responsibility?
Will its role now merely be to document and provide
testimonials and statements to the press in support of
whatever agreement the different parties reach? As has
been said, what is the point of the Security Council if it
does not take action?
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation renews
its appeal to the international community, in particular
to the Security Council, given the urgent need, in
accordance with itsvresponsibilities, to swiftly take
a firm position to put an immediate end to the Israeli
aggression and violence and an end to the occupation and
the violations of international law. The Security Council
must ensure accountability for all the perpetrators of
crimes against humanity and war crimes. The Security
Council must enable the Palestinian people to enjoy
their legitimate rights and aspirations, as provided for
in United Nations resolutions.

14-4776833/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The tragedy of the Syrian people continues as
they struggle to achieve their aspirations of freedom
and dignity in the face of a stubborn authority that
refuses to face the facts and is living in illusions. In
that regard, we welcome the appointment of the new
international envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and his
deputy, Mr. Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy. We wish them
success and express the hope that they will begin
where their predecessors left off, namely, with the
need to work to implement the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex), based on the establishment of a
transitional authority with broad executive powers to
undertake a transition to a new dawn in Syria and on
the establishment of a modern State built on justice and
equality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Today is a sad day.
The killings in Gaza during the past 15 days have been
taking place under the media spotlight. The collective
punishment of the citizens of Gaza is being recorded
live. Innocent, non-combatant and unarmed Palestinian
men, women and children are being mowed down. One
quarter of those killed are children, and three quarters
civilians. Death is coming to them from the sky, from
the water and from land. Their chastisement is complete
and definitive. Nobody can help them.
The world street is appalled and angry. It cannot
believe that neither the Security Council, nor the most
powerful nations on Earth nor influential regional
organizations cannot stop the carnage in Gaza.
It is not really war, because one side is mighty and
well-armed and the other side is ill-equipped and using
some projectiles. The Palestinians, who do not have a
standing army, are being pummelled by one of the most
modern and sophisticated military machines. There is
no proportionality. The asymmetry could not be more
glaring. And yet, military muscle offers no solution.
All sides must overcome their existential fears and
build trust. The parties must cease fire and move to the
negotiating chambers.
We understand the complexity of the situation
and the political and strategic rebalancing involved.
And yet, the human mind cannot reconcile itself to
the continuation of killings that could be stopped. The
Council has acted swiftly, and also decisively, from time
to time on Syria, Libya, Yemen, the Central African
Republic, Mali and Ukraine. People all around the

34/70

22/07/2014

world wonder why on Gaza it has been able to produce
only a press statement or elements for the press.
The people of Gaza are in an open prison in the best
of circumstances. Now they are getting killed in their
prison. Violence begets violence, and peace engenders
peace. The relentless bloodshed must be stopped and
peace talks initiated. Both sides should cease fire and
give diplomatic efforts a chance to succeed. No initiative
for a ceasefire should be spurned, because a cessation of
hostilities will save lives instantly, although the recent
trauma will haunt the region for years. Missiles and
rockets should go silent. Let people start talking and
listening to each other. This spiral must be arrested.
Pakistan condemns the Israeli aggression. People
in Pakistan have expressed their solidarity with the
entrapped and embattled people of Gaza through
protests, rallies and resolutions. Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif has said that Israeli atrocities amount to genocide
and has demanded that the world stop that aggression.
President Barack Obama has said, “we do not want to see
any more civilians killed”. The international diplomacy
initiated by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Secretary
of State John Kerry and the Egyptian leadership must be
intensified. One of the reasons for the recent escalation
of violence is the collapse of the peace process. We
endorse the Secretary-General’s message to Israelis
and Palestinians: stop fighting, start talking and take
on the root causes of the conflict.
As we work for an end to the hostilities, efforts
must also be made to revive the peace talks. The Middle
East cannot have enduring peace without a two-State
solution. An independent, viable and geographically
contiguous Palestinian State, on the basis of the pre1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
living side by side with Israel, is the only way to
guarantee peace and stability in the region.
We call on the Security Council to act by adopting
a resolution that would call for an immediate and
unconditional ceasefire, halt Israeli air, ground and
naval offensives, and remove Israeli forces from Gaza.
The Security Council should play its role in ending the
blockade of Gaza and opening its border and in the
release of Palestinian prisoners. As diplomatic efforts
continue, we call for humanitarian pauses to help
those who are badly wounded and those stranded in
temporary shelters. The children and women of Gaza
are crying for help. The Council must listen to their
wails and heed their cries.

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I thank the representative
of Pakistan for the improvement. I hope that the
representative of Morocco will also be a little generous.
I now call on the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing on his visit to the Middle East, as well as for
his efforts towards a ceasefire in Gaza. We wish him
all the best.
The Security Council is meeting today at a time
when the Middle East has witnessed grave developments
and setbacks that have caused an unprecedented level
of deterioration in the tragic situation in the region. For
years now, the unjustified and unacceptable escalation
by Israel targeting unarmed civilians in Gaza has led
only to more hatred and more violence, with grave
consequences that undermine all of the efforts that have
been made so far to push the peace process forward.
The Kingdom of Morocco denounces and deplores
this Israeli military escalation against the Palestinian
people, which violates all international conventions.
We call on the international community to fully
shoulder its responsibilities and to urgently intervene to
bring about an immediate cessation of this aggression
targeting unarmed civilians; protect the Palestinian
people and preserve their rights; and call on Israel to
respect international legitimacy.
Hundreds of victims have fallen since the beginning
of the aggression, including many children, women and
elderly persons. Their homes were demolished over
their heads, their families dispersed and their property
destroyed. This represents a grave deterioration of the
already terrible humanitarian situation, caused by the
premeditated actions carried out by Israel against the
Palestinian people.
His Highness King Mohammed VI has provided
urgent humanitarian assistance to the people of Gaza
and to the victims of Israeli aggression. They will
receive medical assistance in Moroccan hospitals.
His Majesty, as Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee,
who is keenly following the situation in Palestine,
spoke with His Excellency the President of Palestine,
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas Abu Mazen, in order to follow
up the unprecedented situation resulting from the
indiscriminate Israeli aggression against the unarmed
Palestinian people. His Royal Majesty expressed his
sincere condolences to the familites of Palestinian

S/PV.7222

martyrs and his sympathy with the wounded. He
denounced once again the premeditated Israeli attacks
against the Palestinian people, their land and their
property, and expressed the full solidarity of Morocco
with those people.
The continuing military operations will lead only to
further bloodshed among innocents. It will complicate
the situation and will lead to more violence and enmity.
We therefore call for an immediate end to the aggression
against Gaza. Morocco supports all of the efforts under
way to bring about an immediate ceasefire, which
are being undertaken by a number of Arab and other
countries as well as the Secretary-General.
We support the Secretary-General’s call on
both parties to immediately cease fire. We also urge
the international community to fully shoulder its
responsibilities and provide the necessary humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people to overcome this
crisis and provide all forms of assistance and protection
in order to enable the Palestinians to exercise their right
to self-determination.
The only way to resolve the Palestinian question
is not by war or bloodshed or the killing of innocent
civilians. It is through a return to negotiations towards
a two-State solution, where two peoples can live side
by side in peace and security. We will remain fully
supportive of the peace negotiations, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the two-State solution, with a State
of Palestine within the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I will make a short
statement here; the full text will be circulated.
As we have heard, the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory remains grim, perpetuated by the
disproportionate use of force and aggression by Israel,
the occupying Power, with complete disregard for the
lives of civilians. Malaysia condemns in the strongest
terms the acts of aggression and the ground invasion
launched by the occupying Power, and we demand the
immediate cessation of these illegal acts.
Since the start of the military airstrikes by Israel
on 8 July 2014, followed by the ground invasion, more
than 600 Palestinians have been killed and over 3,500
injured. Over 80,000 Palestinians have been displaced,
stretching the capacity of the United Nations Relief

14-4776835/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

22/07/2014

and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs stated earlier that 80 per cent of the Palestinians
killed were civilians.

Syrian Golan regarding human rights and humanitarian
violations perpetrated by the occupying Power. It pains
us to see that all the warning signs that went unheeded
are being manifested in the violence we see today.

This includes the brutal killings of four Palestinian
boys last week who were doing what kids do, playing
by the beach, and who posed no threat whatsoever to
Israel. Over the weekend, a 6-year-old girl was badly
injured when eight of her family members were killed
by Israeli forces in their own home. Four of them
were children, including a seven-month-old baby. We
strongly deplore the senseless loss of innocent lives in
the conflict, and we take this opportunity to convey our
deepest condolences to the families of the victims.

With complete disregard for the 2004 advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice, settlement
expansion throughout Israel’s occupied territories has
continued at an alarming pace and on an alarming
scale, with new policies and procedures allowing for
the confiscation of Palestinian land and property. My
delegation notes that settler violence has become a
natural consequence of those illegal sites, especially
the destruction of Palestinian property, agriculture and
livestock with impunity, in the absence of protection by
the occupying Power.

The grotesquely disproportionate nature of the
Israeli-Palestinian situation means that Israel’s claim
that its action was based on self-defence is simply
fallacious. Israel’s assertion that the Palestinians were
using civilians as human shields is similarly perverse.
As Gaza is one of the most densely populated areas in
the world, civilians there cannot but be affected when
faced with a barrage of bombardments and military
aggression by Israel. These are not human shields; they
are simply civilians, in their own homes, going about
their daily lives. Israeli attacks on and bombardments
of civilians’ homes, hospitals and schools constitute a
gross violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention that
amount to war crimes.
Malaysia urges the international community,
especially the Security Council, to act swiftly
and decisively to demand that Israel cease its
disproportionate and atrocious aggression against
Palestine. It is imperative that both sides immediately
restore calm to avoid greater destruction and further loss
of life, especially among the civilian population in the
Gaza Strip. In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
call by the Security Council for an immediate ceasefire
in Gaza. We urge all parties to commit themselves to
that end.
As a member of the Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the
Occupied Territories, we participated in a fact-finding
mission to Amman and Cairo last month. We heard
disturbing testimony from a number of witnesses,
non-governmental
organizations,
Palestinian
Government officials and United Nations agencies
operating in Palestinian territory and in the occupied

36/70

To those who would condone Israel’s action in
flagrant violation of the law, especially international
humanitarian law, and who have allowed Israel to
escape with impunity for the past six decades, I ask:
Where is their conscience? For far too long, the Council
has been quiet and paralysed in the face of aggression,
expansion and the lack of accountability on the part
of the occupying Power. The silence is deafening. The
Security Council should redeem itself and uphold the
responsibilities entrusted to it with respect to Israel’s
failure to implement the numerous resolutions before
it and should take immediate measures to address that
great injustice.
As the occupying Power, Israel is responsible for
protecting the people under its occupation. Clearly,
Israel has failed to do so for the past six decades.
Regrettably, the United Nations remains paralysed. Its
key members, who are in a position and have the power
to act to rectify the situation, choose self-interest rather
than humanity and the rule of law, turning a blind eye
on Israeli aggression. That situation simply cannot
be allowed to continue in perpetuity. In that regard,
Malaysia supports the call by the State of Palestine
to place Palestine under the international protection
system of the United Nations. We also reiterate the
call to convene a conference of the High Contracting
Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to address
Israel’s continued noncompliance with the provisions
of that instrument.
In conclusion, Israel’s ruthless military attacks
on civilians are unwarranted and are a crime against
humanity. Malaysia therefore calls on the United
Nations, especially the Security Council, and on the

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

international community to take immediate action to
halt Israel’s atrocities against the Palestinian people of
Gaza and to work to bring calm to Israel and Palestine.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. I would like to draw
delegations’ attention to the written statement that is
being distributed and to the conclusions on the Middle
East peace process that the European Union Foreign
Affairs Council adopted just a few hours ago. In the
interests of time, I will deliver an abridged version of
my statement.
The European Union is extremely concerned at
the continued escalation of violence in Gaza and calls
for an immediate cessation of the hostilities, based on
a return to the November 2012 ceasefire agreement.
We welcome ongoing efforts to that end by regional
partners, in particular by Egypt, and reiterate our
readiness to provide the necessary support.
We strongly condemn the indiscriminate firing of
rockets into Israel by Hamas and militant groups in the
Gaza Strip, which directly harm civilians. Those are
criminal and unjustifiable acts. We call on Hamas to
immediately put an end to those acts and to renounce
violence. All terrorist groups in Gaza must disarm. We
strongly condemn calls on the civilian population of
Gaza to provide themselves as human shields.
We condemn the loss of hundreds of civilian
lives, among them many women and children. While
recognizing Israel’s legitimate right to defend itself
against any attacks, we underline that the Israeli
military operation must be proportionate and in line
with international humanitarian law. The European
Union stresses the need to protect civilians at all times.
We are particularly appalled by the human cost of the
Israeli military operation in Shujaiya, and are deeply
concerned at the rapidly deteriorating humanitarian
situation. All sides must meet their obligations and
immediately allow safe and full humanitarian access
in Gaza for the urgent distribution of assistance. We
call on all sides to implement an immediate ceasefire
in good faith.
The tragic escalation of hostilities confirms again
the unsustainable nature of the status quo with regard to
the situation in the Gaza Strip. While fully recognizing

S/PV.7222

Israel’s legitimate security needs, the European Union
underlines that the humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation in Gaza must be addressed. We reiterate our
call for the immediate, sustained and unconditional
opening of crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons to and from the Gaza
Strip, in line with resolution 1860 (2009).
We stand ready, including through the reactivation
of our European Union Border Assistance Mission
for the Rafah crossing point, if conditions allow, to
contribute to a comprehensive and sustainable solution
that meets the legitimate security, economic and
humanitarian needs of Israelis and Palestinians.
Recent events in the broader Middle East pose
serious threats to the European Union and its immediate
neighbours. We reiterate our fundamental commitment
to the security of Israel, including with regard to current
and emerging threats in the region. The European Union
has fully supported United States-led peace efforts. We
urge the parties to resume meaningful negotiations with
the aim of achieving a comprehensive peace agreement
based on a two-State solution. Clear parameters are key
elements for a successful outcome. We are willing to
work with the United States and other partners on an
initiative to relaunch the peace negotiations, based on
the following parameters.
First, there must be an agreement on the borders
of the two States based on the 4 June 1967 lines, with
equivalent land swaps as may be agreed between the
parties. The European Union will recognize changes
to the pre-1967 borders, including with regard to
Jerusalem, only when agreed by the parties.
Secondly, there must be security arrangements
that, for the Palestinians, respect their sovereignty and
show that the occupation is over, and which, for the
Israelis, protect their security, prevent the resurgence
of terrorism and deal effectively with security threats,
including new and vital threats in the region.
Thirdly, there must be a just, fair, agreed and
realistic solution to the refugee question.
Fourthly, the aspirations of both parties for
Jerusalem must be fulfilled. A way must be found
through negotiations to resolve the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of both States.
We call on Israel to halt continued settlement
expansion, especially in sensitive areas such as Har
Homa, Givat Hamatos and E-l, and to put an end to

14-4776837/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

settler violence, to the worsening of living conditions
for Palestinians in Area C, to demolitions — including
of European Union-funded projects — to evictions
and forced transfers and to increasing tensions and
challenges to the status quo on the Temple Mount/
Haram Al-Sharif. A fundamental change of policy on
those negative developments is necessary to prevent the
irreversible loss of the two-State solution.
The European Union has welcomed the appointment
of a Palestinian Government of independent personalities
and the declaration by President Abbas that the new
Government is committed to the Quartet principles. Our
engagement with the new Palestinian Government is
based on its continued adherence, in words and actions,
to those policies and commitments. The Palestinian
Government needs to take charge of Gaza and end the
internal division. We call on it to work towards genuine
democratic elections for all Palestinians. We reiterate
our call on the Palestinian leadership to use its United
Nations status constructively and not to undertake steps
that would lead farther away from a negotiated solution.
The further development of our relations with both
Israeli and Palestinian partners will also depend on their
engagement towards a lasting peace based on a twoState solution. We reiterate our offer to both parties of
a package of European political, economic and security
support and of a special privileged partnership with the
European Union in the event of a final peace agreement.
The human catastrophe is now proliferating to reach
Syria’s neighbours, most dramatically Iraq, which are
facing an extremely difficult situation. The European
Union welcomes their efforts to cope with the growing
crisis and will continue to support them.
There can only be a political solution to the conflict
in Syria. We support efforts to resume an inclusive
political dialogue among all Syrians on the basis of
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). Stronger
international efforts, including among regional
countries, will be of crucial importance.
We fully support Mr. de Mistura and Deputy
Special Envoy for Syria Ramzy’s difficult and
urgent mission, as well as the priorities set out by the
Secretary-General in his speech “Crisis in Syria: Civil
War, Global Threat”, of 20 June, at the Asia Society in
New York.
The European Union welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014). We note the binding nature of
the obligations set out in the resolution, as well as the
38/70

22/07/2014

Council’s commitment to take further measures in the
event of noncompliance.
We reaffirm the urgent need to hold accountable all
those responsible for grave violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. We regret
that the Council has so far not been able to effectively
address that issue.
The European Union is deeply concerned about
the rapidly deteriorating situation in Iraq and strongly
condemns the armed assault conducted by terrorist and
other armed groups. We are particularly concerned
about reports of grave violations of international
humanitarian law committed by those groups. All those
responsible for such acts must be held accountable.
Military operations should respect human rights
and international humanitarian law. All parties must
facilitate unimpeded access for humanitarian workers.
We remain firmly committed to Iraq’s unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and we insist
on respect for the democratic process in the country.
We welcome the appointment of a new Speaker of
the Council of Representatives, and we call on all the
political leaders to step up efforts towards the speedy
formation of a new inclusive Government that will steer
Iraq in a process of national reconciliation.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Abdou Salam Diallo, Chair of the
Committee on the Exercise of Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People.
Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the able
manner in which you have been directing the work
of the Council. I would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive briefing.
We welcome his intensive diplomatic efforts to achieve
an immediate ceasefire, as well as those by Special
Coordinator Robert Serry, United States Secretary of
State John Kerry and other regional leaders.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People condemns, in
the strongest possible terms, the excessive and
disproportionate use of force during the Israeli
onslaught in the occupied Gaza Strip, including in the
district of Shujaiya, which has caused many deaths and
injuries among Palestinian civilians, including women
and children. The casualty figures we heard during the
Secretary-General’s briefing are truly appalling. The

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Committee also condemns the indiscriminate rocket
fire emanating from Gaza, which has resulted in two
Israeli deaths and several injuries so far.
We are appalled by the disproportionate use of
force by a trained and well-equipped army, which has
resulted in the high number of Palestinian civilian
casualties, estimated at 77 per cent of the total fatalities.
On 16 July, the shelling of a Gaza beach where four
innocent boys, ages 9 to 11 years old, were killed while
playing football is an event emblematic of the type of
senseless violence that has annihilated entire families
and destroyed hundreds of homes.
The situation took a dramatic turn for the worse
with the beginning of the Israeli ground invasion.
The casualty numbers, the photos and the survivor
stories from the Shujaiya neighbourhood, which was
carpet-bombed by Israel, speak for themselves. An
international investigation should be considered by the
Human Rights Council to determine accountability for
those heinous acts.
Israeli attacks on Palestinian civilian infrastructure,
namely, hospitals, water and sewage systems, as well as
on mosques, are equally appalling. Thousands of homes
have been destroyed or severely damaged, displacing
over 100,000 people. Up to half of the population is
without a water supply today.
Those acts are direct violations of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which obligates the occupying Power to
protect the civilian population under its occupation.
Article 33 of the Convention states, “[n]o protected
person may be punished for an offence he or she has not
personally committed” and “[c]ollective penalties and
likewise all measures of intimidation or of terrorism
are prohibited”.
The Israeli rhetoric that it no longer occupies Gaza
after the 2005 withdrawal of illegal settlers and soldiers
denies the reality, which is that Israel controls access
through border crossings, airspace and waters, and
Gaza is an integral part of the occupied Palestinian
territory.
The Committee welcomes and fully supports the
request by the State of Palestine to the Government
of Switzerland to convene a conference of the High
Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention
to address the continuing violations of its provisions
by the occupying Power, Israel. It is the responsibility
of the High Contracting Parties, under article 1 of the
Convention, to “undertake to respect and to ensure

S/PV.7222

respect for the present Convention in all circumstances”.
Moreover, and as has been stated before, the Committee
will fully support the State of Palestine if it decides to
sign and ratify the Rome Statute, in order to establish
full accountability for the targeting, wounding and
killing of all innocent civilians.
The Committee calls upon the international
community to adopt concerted measures to halt
all violations of international humanitarian law,
including the collective punishment of the Palestinian
people. Only serious, resolute collective action by the
international community will compel Israel to abide by
its obligations as the occupying Power as defined under
international humanitarian law.
In the meantime, the United Nations humanitarian
agencies on the ground in Gaza have stretched their
resources very thin, and were underfunded to begin
with in the face of such military actions. Those
organizations are struggling to respond to the massive
humanitarian needs of more than 150,000 affected
Gazans as a result of the attacks. We urge donors to
respond generously to the latest emergency appeal for
$115 million launched by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
The Committee welcomes the convening of the
Security Council’s emergency consultations on Sunday,
20 July to consider the ongoing crisis. The Committee
takes note of the remarks made to the press by the
President of the Security Council, and calls for concrete
follow-up action by the Council to stop the senseless
violence and to impede any further escalation of this
dangerous crisis. The Committee believes that only a
comprehensive solution to the Gaza situation, in line
with resolution 1860 (2009), can prevent the periodic
flare-ups of violence. Such a solution should become a
top priority for the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): I would like thank you, Sir,
for convening today’s meeting, and Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. I am also grateful to
Ambassador Riyad Mansour, Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine, and Ambassador David
Roet, Deputy Permanent Representative of Israel, for
their statements.
The Japanese statement today touches upon two
issues: first, on the Middle East peace process and,
secondly, on the situation in Syria. For the sake of time,

14-4776839/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

however, I will read out only the first part, as the text
will be distributed in the Chamber.
Japan is deeply concerned about the recent
escalation of violence between the Gaza Strip and
Israel, including the launch of an Israeli ground
operation in Gaza, and the growing number of
casualties. It is deplorable, that despite efforts by the
international community, including the Egyptian
proposal and the Security Council’s demand for a
ceasefire, violence continues and Palestinian militants
have not accepted any international peace efforts. Both
Israeli and Palestinian civilians face a serious security
threat. We profoundly deplore the loss of so many lives
among innocent civilians. The current vicious cycle of
violence might also pose a great risk to regional peace
and security.
Japan joins the Council and the Secretary-General
in calling for de-escalation and an end to the violence.
The international community must speak with one
voice to urge both sides to exercise maximum restraint
and calm the situation. In that regard, we would like to
commend Egypt, the United Nations, the United States
and others for their mediation efforts. Japan will play its
part in such international efforts to restore a ceasefire.
Japan’s Prime Minister Shinzo Abe spoke with Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu by phone today
and appealed to him to exercise maximum restraint and
to make a courageous decision to achieve a ceasefire as
soon as possible.
Japan’s Parliamentary senior Vice-Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Nobuo Kishi, has embarked on a trip to
the region. Last weekend he had meetings with Egyptian
President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi and Foreign Minister
Sameh Shokry in Cairo. Senior Vice-Minister Kishi
conveyed Japan’s support for the important role played
by Egypt, especially its proposal for a ceasefire and its
willingness to work to calm the situation and achieve a
lasting ceasefire in coordination with the international
community. He will be continuing his Middle East tour
and will travel to Jordan, Israel, Palestine and Turkey
starting today.
Japan will also continue to help address the
worsening humanitarian situation in Gaza. In
consultation with United Nations agencies, including
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, Japan will consider
providing humanitarian assistance based on the needs
on the ground.

40/70

22/07/2014

Even against that harsh backdrop, we should
not lose hope for a two-State solution. The crisis in
Gaza underscores the urgent need to achieve a just,
sustainable and comprehensive peace. It is important for
the international community to overcome the current
crisis and foster a proper environment that would allow
both the Palestinian and the Israeli parties to resume
talks.
Japan will continue to assist Palestinian
State-building efforts that aim at achieving a twoState solution. The Corridor for Peace and Prosperity
and the Conference on Cooperation among East Asian
Countries for Palestinian Development are part of
our initiatives. My Mission will elaborate on Japan’s
assistance at an appropriate occasion in future.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate, and the Secretary-General
for his briefing. Brazil fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s visit to the Middle East. We are confident
that it will help bring about a ceasefire and respect for
international humanitarian law. Brazil also expresses
its appreciation to the Permanent Representative of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of the Observer
State of Palestine for their interventions.
The last time the Security Council held an
open debate on the situation in the Middle East (see
S/PV.7164), the nine-month deadline for reaching a
final status agreement between Israelis and Palestinians
was just expiring. On that occasion, Brazil and many
other delegations regretted the lack of progress and
underscored that failing to deal with the fundamental
aspects of the Palestine question would only pose
greater challenges in future. Peace in the Middle
East is so fundamental and the stakes are so high
that we simply cannot allow the future of Israelis and
Palestinians — and therefore of the whole region — to
be dictated by those who choose to perpetuate tension
and conflict.
Brazil strongly condemned the abduction and
heinous murder of the three young Israelis and a
Palestinian youth and the chain of abhorrent violence
that ensued. Acts of savagery cannot be tolerated.
Beyond punishing those responsible for the recent
excesses, it is necessary to put an end to the atmosphere
of incitement that over the years has encouraged the
perpetrators of such appalling crimes.
We further condemn the Israeli bombardment of
Gaza, along with the disproportionate use of force,

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

which resulted in more than 600 Palestinians dead
and thousands of wounded, many of them unarmed
civilians and children. We also condemn the firing of
rockets and mortars from Gaza into Israel. We reject
the current Israeli ground incursion into Gaza, which
has led to more death and destruction and represents
a serious setback to peace efforts. The new offensive
could help trigger further instability in the Middle
East and exacerbate the already dire humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. We urge
the Israelis to strictly respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law.
We also consider it necessary that Israel put an
end to the blockade of Gaza immediately. We urge
both parties to establish a permanent ceasefire and
effectively cooperate with the Government of Egypt
and the United Nations in that regard. The international
community must not continue to passively stand by
while gross violations are committed against civilians.
We cannot proceed as if the flare-ups in violence were
unavoidable, and therefore had to be tolerated.
Brazil reiterates its call for the Council to end
its self-imposed distance, to fully carry out its
responsibilities and to actively support and steer the
peace process. Resuming peace talks is as urgent and
necessary as ever. Only the implementation of the twoState solution will bring durable peace and security to
Israel and Palestine and put an end to the suffering of
the civilian population on both sides.
Let us not forget that the protection of civilians
must be implemented in a universal and non-selective
manner. The commendable emphasis placed by the
Council on the protection of civilians when dealing with
other items on its agenda cannot be sidestepped when it
comes to the responsibility to protect Palestinians, who
bear the brunt of the violence.
Brazil welcomes the formation of a Palestinian
national unity Government. That is a significant
step towards Palestinian reconciliation. It is also
indispensable to building a prosperous and democratic
State that is willing to honour from the outset all the
previous commitments made by Palestine. We urge
all those supporting the Government to abide by the
previous agreements, in particular by rejecting violence
and recognizing Israel.
Turning to Syria, Brazil welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014). The newly found unity among
Security Council members should be extended to the

S/PV.7222

political track. It is deeply troubling that, while the
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate, the
political process remains paralyzed. The mistaken
belief that a military solution is possible through
the provision of weapons to all belligerent parties in
Syria can result only in more violence, instability and
suffering.
We encourage Mr. Staffan de Mistura and
Ambassador Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy to promote the
early resumption of political negotiations. As recalled
in the Fortaleza declaration adopted at the sixth Brazil,
Russia, India, China and South Africa Summit last
week in Brazil, “national dialogue and reconciliation
are key to the political solution for the Syrian crisis”.
Brazil welcomes the removal of the last shipment of
chemical weapons declared by Syria and supports the
ongoing investigation of the alleged use of chlorine gas
against civilian targets.
It is disheartening that the number of deaths,
refugees and displaced people continues to grow,
together with so many broken promises to put an end
to violence.
We strongly condemn the continued violations of
human rights committed by all sides, as consistently
denounced by the Human Rights Council’s Independent
Commission of Inquiry.
The recent deterioration in Iraq gives rise to grave
concerns. The sad reality is that the current situation
in that country derives directly from the unilateral
intervention of 2003. The crisis was compounded by,
among other failures, the dismantling and disbanding
of the Iraqi army. As called for by the Fortaleza
declaration, it is time now to
“refrain from interference that will further deepen
the crisis and to support the Iraqi Government and
the people of Iraq in their efforts to overcome the
crisis and build a stable, inclusive and united Iraq.”
We urge Iraq’s political leaders to expedite the
formation of an inclusive Government and to work
to meet the needs of all Iraqi citizens, irrespective of
ethnicity, religion or sect.
Brazil strongly condemns the recent terrorist
attacks perpetrated in Lebanon and firmly supports the
Lebanese Government in its fight against terrorism.
Brazil’s participation in the international conference on
support to the Lebanese Armed Forces, recently held in

14-4776841/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Rome, was a clear demonstration of our commitment to
support Lebanon’s State institutions.
We also underscore the role played by the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Brazil has been
leading its Maritime Task Force since 2011 and has
supplied a frigate as its flagship.
As in other neighbouring countries, in particular
Turkey and Jordan, the spillover effects of the Syrian
conflict impose a heavy burden on Lebanon, whose
generosity in hosting more than 1 million Syrian
refugees should be not only commended, but also
concretely supported by the international community.
Finally, we would like to reiterate our support to
the policy of disassociation from regional crises agreed
in the Baabda Declaration of June 2012.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate to consider
the situation in the Middle East. We are overwhelmed
by what is happening in Gaza.
In these trying times, I wish to start by commending
the efforts of and expressing our appreciation to all of
those who are engaged in efforts to bring an end to
the suffering of the Palestinian people, particularly
in Gaza. In that regard, I would like to mention the
Secretary-General, the Egyptian Government and the
United States Secretary of State.
Since 7 July, a new military aggression has been
conducted against the population in Gaza. What has
been happening since that day is all the more shocking
and appalling to millions around the world. More than
600 citizens have been killed, and the toll continues to
rise, thousands have been wounded or maimed, lives
have been destroyed, while homes, mosques, schools
and hospitals have become military targets and reduced
to ruin. Even olive trees — how symbolic — have been
uprooted and burned in the tracks of armoured trucks.
Whatever the pretext for the new escalation, it
remains a mere pretext. How can anyone justify the
brutal shelling, aerial and maritime strikes, missiles and
drones over densely populated areas? How can anyone
bear the images of the children who have been torn from
the sanctity of their innocence, while the world watches
in horror as their impossible playground is turned into
the open-air graves of those whose terrible guilt seems
to be only that they are Palestinian?
42/70

22/07/2014

In other areas there are other children, including
Algerians. I have to mention one of them — a young
Algerian three years of age, Abdullah Drage Yusuf,
who was killed with his mother in a home that was
struck by a missile. It cannot be said that the home was
a militant base. He was buried with other Palestinians
in Rafah cemetery.
How can anyone describe the situation from a legal,
political or human rights angle? Where are the borders
between what we see and the notions of collective
punishment, mass killing and war crimes? I will leave
it up to the conscience of each member of the Council
to think about and maybe to take a stand.
Is the international community going to turn a
blind eye to the situation and turn its back on all of its
values and rights? Let us mention the basic one, namely,
the right to life. The internatinoal community and the
Security Council are promoting it and rightly defending
it, including through lectures around the world.
What type of example are we setting? Are there
exceptions among the universal rights? I do not wish to
add to the comments of my colleagues and to that which
the whole world is witnessing. Today urgent action is
needed to put an end to the ordeal.
Our action — the Council’s action — is called
upon. It is needed individually and collectively for the
sake of peace throughout the world. Let us not forget
that Gaza is under blockade; or should I say, beleagured
for the past seven years in terms of food, medicine, gas,
money, salaries and sometimes even water, which are
heavily rationed, restricted or prohibited.
We must not forget that the unfulfilled promises, the
ever-failing initiatives for the so-called establishment
of peace, have added to the dwindling commitments
and resulted in the mounting frustrations, helplessness
and despair that represent flammable ingredients for a
bleak future that certainly will not benefit any of the
peoples or States of the region.
Let us not forget that the Palestinian territory
is under an illegal, oppressive and extremely brutal
occupation. Occupation is the core of the issue. The
Secretary-General rightfully mentioned in the morning
that the root causes, putting an end to the occupation and
materializing the national legitimate rights in a viable
State for the Palestinians is the only way out — through
negotiations.
For the time being, our urgent duty — moral,
political and legal — is to protect civilians.
14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We — the international community and the
Security Council — should act urgently and be aware
of an important issue. The current aggression will
contribute only to an even greater widening of the gap
between the aspiration for peace and security for all.
Security cannot be built upon aggression. It would be a
terrible illusion to think that security will prevail one
day in the absence of peace or prospects for peace. We
should not try to test the “How late is too late?” theory.
The lack of a conclusion to the international
community’s endeavour, or inaction on the part of
the Council according to its responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations, could become part of
the problem. It is our hope that we will overcome the
problem before then.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Emvula (Namibia): It is a pleasure to see you,
Sir, presiding over the Council for the month of July. I
wish to thank you for organizing this very important
debate at this crucial moment, which affords the broader
United Nations membership an opportunity to address
the challenges facing the Middle East, particularly the
people of Palestine.
At the outset, I wish to statea that my delegation
aligns itself with the statement to be made by the
Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
countries.
My delegation wishes to express concern at the
continuing turmoil and deterioration of the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, as a result of the repressive and illegal
measures that continue to be undertaken by Israel, the
occupying Power, against the Palestinian people.
I join others in condemning the latest violations,
provocation and escalation of aggressive measures
carried out by the Israeli forces aimed at collective
punishment of the Palestinian people. The Israeli
forces continue to carry out airstrikes in the Gaza Strip,
injuring more and more Palestinians and causing great
fear and distress among the population, who continue
to suffer from deplorable living conditions as a result of
Israel’s inhumane and unlawful blockade.
While we condemn the indiscriminate rocket fire
emanating from Gaza and targeting Israeli cities and
civilian infrastructure, we maintain that such attacks

S/PV.7222

do not justify the disproportionate use of force and
collective punishment of 1.7 million Palestinians living
in Gaza. The death toll caused by the occupying forces
stands at significantly more than 600 Palestinians,
including the killing of innocent women and children.
Thousands of Palestinian homes continue to be
destroyed or severely damaged by the indiscriminate
Israeli air attacks, displacing thousands of Palestinians
and further destroying critical civilian infrastructure,
including waste-water treatment facilities, water
distribution networks, hospitals and schools, including
United Nations facilities, all of which should stop.
It is cynical to equally attribute blame to both parties
when one is the occupier and possesses unparalleled
military might, which it uses indiscriminately, leading
to civilian casualties. Israel, the occupying Power, must
be held accountable for all those war crimes, acts of
State terrorism and systematic human rights violations
committed against the Palestinian people. We call on
the Human Rights Council to take immediate action to
investigate the genocide against the people of Palestine.
The Israeli actions are in clear violation of its
obligations as an occupying Power under the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War to protect the civilian population
under its occupation. Israel cannot be allowed to
remain immune from the provisions of international
humanitarian and human rights law governing such
situations. If Israel continues to ignore the demands to
respect international law, measures aimed at ensuring
an end to such violations and that the rule of law prevails
must be taken in response.
It remains the responsibility of the United Nations
and the international community to ensure that the
question of Palestine is resolved in all its aspects.
While supporting the steadfastness and resolve of the
Palestinian leadership in the face of such unprovoked
aggression against its land and people, we reiterate
our total condemnation of all those illegal actions and
crimes being perpetrated by Israel in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, which
dramatically raise tensions and destabilize the situation
on the ground.
In that context, we call for the immediate
establishment of a committee to investigate such
horrendous crimes and to bring the perpetrators to
justice in accordance with the relevant international
legal instruments at our disposal. We furthermore urge
the international community to continue to provide the

14-4776843/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

necessary humanitarian assistance to ease the suffering
of the affected Palestinian communities, in particular
vulnerable members of society such as women, children
and the elderly.
We welcome the ongoing efforts aimed at
negotiating an immediate ceasefire and appeal to both
parties to commit to embracing the opportunity and to
abiding by their previous agreements and obligations
with regard to a lasting peace between Israelis and
Palestinians living side by side within secure borders.
Israel’s ongoing violation of international law, including
humanitarian law and human rights law, threatens to
further destabilize the very fragile situation and to
seriously undermine the future of the peace process,
which has been suspended as a result of Israel’s
unilateral decision to halt the negotiations.
The international community, including the
Security Council, cannot continue to fail to act to
hold Israel accountable for such flagrant breaches
of international law. Such continued failure on the
part of the international community has only further
emboldened the occupying Power and bolstered its
impunity, which has resulted in the continuation of the
violations that I have just mentioned, and therefore the
failure to secure a just and lasting peace.
We wish to warn and remind the Council that the
escalation of the Israeli-Palestinian crisis is the result of
its continued failure to effectively address the conflict
by finding a lasting and sustainable solution, as required
through the implementation of the various Council
resolutions that call for a two-State solution. For how
long will the Council continue to adopt resolutions that
are never adhered to?
Let me conclude by reiterating Namibia’s support for
the efforts being undertaken by the Secretary-General
and our unwavering backing of and solidarity with
the people of Palestine in their just cause for freedom,
independence and social justice. We also affirm
our support for the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, its unconditional
admission as a full Member of the United Nations and
its agencies and for it to take its rightful place among
the community of nations.

22/07/2014

disproportionate military operations of the Israeli army
against the civilian population of the Gaza Strip, which
have caused several hundred casualties — men, women
and children, all of whom were innocent — without to
date seeing any clear evidence of a halt to the violence.
Given such facts, the Government of Ecuador has
demanded and urges the immediate suspension of the
aggression against the Palestinian civilian population
and calls on the State of Israel to exercise maximum
restraint and to act in accordance with international
law and international humanitarian law. The defence
of a country and its right to defend itself under no
circumstances justifies subjecting thousands of
innocent civilians to pain and suffering or flouting
what we know as international law.
We must start by acknowledging what this very
body, the United Nations, has historically prescribed,
namely, that the two-State solution is the only way to
permanently end such unlawful subjugation as a result
of Israel’s illegal occupation of Palestine. At the same
time, the blockade of the Gaza Strip, the settlement
policy, the wall and the arbitrary arrest of Palestinian
civilians must also cease.
Ecuador firmly believes in the just cause of the
Palestinian people to exercise their right to selfdetermination and independence. My country therefore
fully recognizes the State of Palestine within the pre1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
My delegation wishes to recall that, two years ago, the
General Assembly welcomed the State of Palestine as
an observer member of the United Nations. That vast
majority of States is now waiting to see the State of
Palestine soon become a fully fledged member of the
General Assembly. That has not been possible to date
owing to the obvious action of one of the members of
the Security Council.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.

In the light of the foregoing, it is essential that we
recall the crucial obligation of the United Nations to
maintain international peace and security. The Security
Council has the main responsibility for fulfilling
that task. As has been demanded by Palestine, the
Arab countries and the countries of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, we too demand that the
members of the Security Council act more forcefully
and not give more time to the aggressor to conclude at
whatever cost strategic tasks that are not necessarily
our own.

Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
The Government of Ecuador has strongly condemned the

We demand more boldness and determination in
the face of a situation of abuse and disproportionate

44/70

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

violence by Israel against Palestine, which also have
negative repercussions on the stability of the entire
Middle East region. The Security Council should
always act without gross biases in any situation that it
is called upon to address.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting and
for your leadership in the presidency throughout this
month. I would also like to thank the Russian Federation
for its work last month.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
The Movement has vehemently expressed its
condemnation of the latest aggression against the
Palestinian people. The Movement, made up of the vast
majority of the international community, has once again
raised its voice to ask that the rest of the international
community, in particular the Security Council, take
strong and immediate measures to prevent Palestinian
men, women and children from dying, to immediately
stop the aggression and end the genocidal slaughter
that has been carried out by Israel against the civilian
population in the Gaza Strip.
The Security Council should condemn in the
strongest terms the aggression and massacre of more
than 650 Palestinians, mostly women and children, and
the more than 3,700 injured people to date.
As we have said on countless occasions, the
Nicaraguan people feel as if it were their own the pain
and suffering of the Palestinian people, particularly
at this time when that heroic people are victims once
again of Israeli terrorist attacks by air, sea and land,
in violation of all provisions of all international
conventions and resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council itself, in open violation of the
most basic rights of that fraternal people — their right
to life, to live without military occupation, without
a criminal blockade, without the suffocation of the
settlements and without the horror of ethnic cleansing
and collective punishment.
In the face of so much death and destruction,
of such genocide, there is no justification for the

S/PV.7222

Security Council to continue to fail to comply with
its responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. It should impose an immediate ceasefire and
condemn Israel and hold it responsible for the genocide
committed. The Palestinian people continue to be the
victims of the double standards of a permanent member
of the Security Council.
We know that the main threat to peace and security
in the Middle East is Israel’s refusal of peace itself and
of peaceful coexistence with the State of Palestine.
Nicaragua, through our President, has once again made
an appeal in that regard:
“We have no choice but to call upon the international
community. And from this Plaza La Fe we call on
the international community to put a stop to the
acts of war against the civilian population in the
Gaza Strip and eventually reach a final settlement
between the Palestinian and Israeli peoples that
will enable those two fraternal nations, who are
both children of God, to live as God intended: in
peace.”
It is time for the Security Council to fulfil its
historic responsibility and not allow one of its members
to continue to cover Israel’s impunity and blackmail
and approve the admission of the State of Palestine as
a full Member of the Organization, in accordance with
the decision of the vast majority of the international
community when it decided through the General
Assembly to grant Palestine the status of non-Member
Observer State to the United Nations.
There will be no peace in the Middle East until this
historic injustice at the root of the conflict is rectified,
namely, when the Palestinian people’s right to a free
and independent State within the borders established
in 1967 with East Jerusalem as its capital is fulfilled.
Only a viable Palestinian State can guarantee peace and
security in the region.
Before concluding, we would like to reiterate our
concern over the developments in the Middle East and
North Africa, where we have seen that imposing the
policy of regime change, the funding of recognized
terrorist groups, the promotion of warmongering
policies at the expense of dialogue and negotiation,
and interference and intervention in the internal affairs
of sovereign States have all been a constant in recent
years, especially for the people and the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic. Such illegal acts and policies,
which are the cause of conflicts and tremendous refugee

14-4776845/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

flows, are in fact the real threat to international peace
and security, the very thing we say we most want to
preserve.
We hope that the Security Council will know how to
act in the face of those acts and policies consistent with
its responsibility in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
In conclusion, I wish to share a thought from our
fondly remembered Brazilian colleague Paulo Freire,
which will serve guide us: “Nobody ‘is’ if they prohibit
others from ‘being’”. In the end, the Security Council
should thus allow the State of Palestine to “be” a reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I shall deliver an abridged
version of my statement. The full text is being circulated
in the Chamber.
In recent weeks, we have been witnessing with the
greatest concern the deep human and humanitarian
suffering caused by Israel’s operation in the Gaza Strip.
Since 8 July, more than 600 Palestinians have been
killed and nearly 4,000 have been wounded. Homes and
key infrastructure have been destroyed, hospitals have
been targeted and more than 100,000 people have been
displaced. The world’s conscience has been shaken,
among other things, by the images of the killing of four
children, aged 9 to 12, on a Gaza beach, and later by the
attack on Shujaiya.
Turkey strongly condemns the inhumane attacks
on Gazans. They are more than alarming; they should
be condemned by the entire international community.
As of today, Turkey has declared three days of national
mourning in solidarity with the Palestinian people.
The Israeli operation in the Palestinian territory is
in violation of international law. In fact, it constitutes
collective punishment of the Palestinian people, who
are striving to sustain their lives under occupation.
We once again demand that Israel immediately halt its
operations in Gaza. All violence must end. The parties
should urgently engage in negotiations towards a lasting
ceasefire. Turkish authorities are constantly in contact
with Palestinian and regional leaders and other relevant
stakeholders to discuss solutions to that end.
The world should give the strongest response to
the human tragedy in Gaza unfolding before its eyes.
The international community, in particular the Security

46/70

22/07/2014

Council, should assume its responsibility to take the
necessary measures to stop the Israeli aggression against
the Palestinian people without delay and facilitate the
provision of humanitarian assistance to the region.
Alleviating those gross humanitarian needs
should be our immediate concern. Turkey has already
accelerated its humanitarian aid to Gaza. The Turkish
Cooperation and Coordination Agency, the Turkish
Disaster and Emergency Management Presidency
and the Red Crescent are conducting humanitarian
operations bilaterally and in cooperation with the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East to that effect.
Of course, the establishment of peace and security
in the Middle East is possible only by taking viable
steps towards the settlement of the Palestinian question.
Turkey has always supported all efforts towards a lasting
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict based on two
States living side by side in peace and security, on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders, the relevant resolutions,
the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. In
that regard, we support the proposal of President Abbas
to find an appropriate international response to the
protection needs of Palestinian civilians.
The Syrian regime continues to brutally oppress
the Syrian people in flagrant violation of international
law by taking advantage of the lack of effective action
by the international community. Those violations
must be stopped and those responsible must be held
accountable. The elimination of Syria’s chemical
weapons programme remains to be completed The
uninterrupted and effective delivery of cross-border and
cross-line humanitarian operations is key to responding
to the most urgent needs in Syria.
Unfortunately, the regime has also consistently
violated the provisions of resolution 2139 (2014). Those
violations led to resolution 2165 (2014). We hope that
the latter will not share the fate of resolution 2139
(2014). Turkey has already started to cooperate with
the United Nations on the implementation of resolution
2165 (2014).
A political settlement remains the priority for
achieving a peaceful end to the Syrian conflict. In that
regard, Turkey welcomes the appointment of Mr. Staffan
de Mistura as the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria and hopes that his appointment
will finally revitalize the efforts to reach a political

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

settlement on the basis of the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
I would like to take this opportunity once more to
call upon Israel to end its aggression against Gaza and
return to the negotiating table with a genuine desire to
put an end to the decades-long search for peace. As we
always have in the past, we will remain in solidarity
with the Palestinian people in the extremely difficult
days they are experiencing.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to speak about the situation in Palestine.
The events we are discussing in this Chamber are
tragic. The Charter on which the Organization was
founded states that the peoples of the United Nations
are determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war, which has brought untold sorrow to
mankind. The same Charter, which is quoted with such
grand eloquence in so many statements, says that the
Organization is based on the principle of the sovereign
equality of all its Members. However, this meeting and
the scourge afflicting the Palestinian people are clear
proof that the international order cannot save Palestine
from the untold suffering brought about by Israeli
aggression.
This meeting, this Council and the tragedy of
Palestine are clear proof that this principle — the
sovereign equality of all its Members — is not true.
What the Charter says is not true. Members in this
Organization are not equal. I will not speak about my
country, which is one of the 193 Members, but I shall
refer to the statement on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, whereby 120 countries demand
that the Council stop the invasion into Gaza and put
an end to the repeated Israeli military attacks against
the Palestinian people. Many statements have been
made on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, which
brings together more than two thirds of the membership
of the Organization, calling for an end to the Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian territory.
We are not equal, as the Charter claims, because
only one of the five privileged members with the right
to veto can paralyse any initiative for action. A single
member has more power than two thirds of the Members
of the United Nations. That same permanent member

S/PV.7222

with the right to veto, which has justified those crimes
with the “right to self-defense” formula, is complicit
through action and inaction for those atrocities. Of
course, I am referring to the United States, the same
Member State that has hindered Palestine’s recognition
as a full member of the Organization.
However, I do not believe that those considerations,
which are discussed in the grey corridors of international
diplomacy, went through the minds of any of the eight
members of the Abu Jarad family when an Israeli
missile struck their house in northern Gaza on 14 July,
killing all of them, including five children aged 15, 13,
12 and 3 years and 6 months.
While we will never forget the atrocities the Nazis
committed against the Jewish people, we also cannot
remain silent in the face of these tragic events. It
appears that in this story Goliath uses attack planes and
missile launchers, while David wears a scarf.
In that context, I want to devote the four minutes
that I have to the Palestinian people and to the Council.
I apologize to the Palestinian people, through their
representative and with our limited ability to reach them,
from the bottom of our souls as a human beings. I want
to apologize for the more than 600 Palestinians — men,
women, the elderly and girls and boys — who lost their
lives in the past few days. The international community,
of which we are part, has failed them. We are failing
them.
I want to apologize for the more than 3,500
Palestinian men, women, elderly and children who
have been wounded and may be permanently disabled
as a result of the Israeli aggression. The international
community is failing them.
I apologize for the nearly 100 schools and the
18 medical facilities destroyed by the Israeli attack.
The international community is failing them.
I apologize for the 72,000 children who will
require specialized psychological counselling after
these horrendous attacks. The international community
is failing them.
I want to apologize for the 1,500 homes that have
been totally or partially destroyed by the occupying
Power. The international community is failing them.
I want to apologize for 6,000 Palestinians detained
by the occupying Power. The international community
is failing them.

14-4776847/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I want to apologize for the illegal settlements. I
want to apologize for the inhumane wall being built to
isolate them. The international community is failing
them.
I now want to address the Council — its 15 members
and the 5 that have a privilege that makes us unequal,
the right to veto — but above all the Government of
the United States. We well know that what the world
is witnessing today is the result of the illegal and
illegitimate Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory.
We have lost our innocence. We know that many of
the diplomatic efforts only give more time to Israel to
pursue its military objectives.
The Council has the power to stop that, and it does
not do it. It does not impose sanctions against Israel.
There will be no decisions taken to stop tose atrocities.
As President Evo Morales has said, we must put an
end to that genocide and prosecute those responsible.
Bolivia demands in the strongest terms that the
Council put an end to the Israeli military aggression
against Palestine. We call upon them to shoulder their
responsibility and put an end to the building of the wall.
We demand that an end be put to illegal settlements. We
demand that Palestinian prisoners be freed. We demand
compliance with the Geneva Conventions, human
rights conventions and the Rome Statute. We call for
a sanctions regime against Israel. We want aggression
and the occupation to end. The Palestinians must have
a free, sovereign and independent State.
I will conclude this statement by recalling the
words of Nelson Mandela, that great revolutionary who
took no half-measures but fought for the freedom of
peoples. He said: “We know too well that our freedom
is incomplete without the freedom of the Palestinians”.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): India is deeply concerned
at the steep escalation in the current conflict between
Israel and Palestine, which has resulted in a large
number of civilian casualties and heavy damage to
property.
When the Council last held its open debate on
this issue in April 2014 (see S/PV.7164), the direct
negotiations between Israel and Palestine, which began
in late July 2013 after a gap of more than two years, had
ended without any outcome. Instead of a resumption of
dialogue, we are today faced with the tragic resumption
of conflict.
48/70

22/07/2014

We in India are following the current situation with
a great deal of concern. We have called upon both sides
to exercise maximum restraint and avoid taking actions
that may further exacerbate the situation and threaten
the peace and security of the region. India supports all
efforts for an immediate ceasefire between the parties
involved.
We remain hopeful that a sustainable ceasefire
will be reached between the two sides, linked to the
resumption of the peace process, for a comprehensive
resolution of the Palestinian issue. India remains firmly
convinced that dialogue remains the only viable option
that can effectively address the issues confronting the
region and its people. We hope that both sides will
demonstrate the necessary political will to agree to a
ceasefire and return to the negotiating table.
India’s deep association with, and continuing
commitment to, Palestine is rooted in our modern
history that goes back to our own struggle for
independence. We would also like to reiterate our
support for a negotiated solution to the IsraeliPalestinian issue based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map, resulting in a sovereign, independent, viable
and united State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living within secure and recognized borders,
side by side and at peace with Israel.
India has consistently held that the blockade of
Gaza, which adversely affects essential services,
economic activities and infrastructure development,
must be lifted. We reiterate that this blockade and the
issue of increasing settlement activities need to be
addressed to take forward the peace process so as to
reach a mutually acceptable political solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): Let me first commend you, Mr. President, for
having convened this very important meeting in a very
timely manner. Let me also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. I should like also to
associate the delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea with the statement to be made by the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Today we are witnessing another barbaric armed
invasion into the Gaza Strip by Israel, posing a great
14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

threat to peace and security in the Middle East. This
ongoing armed invasion by Israel is characterized by
indiscriminate destruction and massive civilian killings,
giving rise to shock, outrage and condemnation on the
part of the international community.
In this regard, the delegation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea would like to clarify its
position as follows.
First, Israel should immediately put an end to its
armed invasion into the Gaza Strip, as requested by the
international community. The Middle East, along with
the Korean peninsula, is one of the largest hotspots
in the world. The core issue in the Middle East is the
question of Palestine. Israel, since the first day of its
inception, following the end of the Second World War,
has been a country with a history of bloody aggression
and provocations against Palestine and Arab countries.
Israel’s armed invasion should not be tolerated, and it
cannot be justified on any grounds. The more Israel
expands its armed invasion, based on ridiculous
arguments, as we saw this morning, the more Israel will
expose its true colours as an aggressor and a source of
threat and tension in the region, thereby inviting greater
condemnation from the international community.
Secondly, Israel should stop the indiscriminate mass
killing of civilians, as requested by the international
community. Under international law, mass civilian
killings are regarded as a crime against humanity and
a war crime.
Israel’s indiscriminate mass civilian killings are
becoming ever more brutal because they are targeting
even young children, who are the happiness and future
of mankind.
The indiscriminate mass killings of civilians by
Israeli soldiers are becoming more savage because
they are targeting civilian hospitals. All of these
killings targeted at defenceless civilians should not
be tolerated, and the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea condemns Israel in the strongest terms.
Thirdly, the Security Council should carry out its
mission to ensure international peace and security, as
requested by the international community. The Council
is not a political tool to be used by one specific country
for its selfish needs and to abuse power. The question of
Palestine has now reached a very dangerous and critical
stage; all this is related directly to the behaviour of that
one country, the United States, a permanent member
of the Security Council. The United States has since

S/PV.7222

the beginning defended and supported Israel, pushing
it towards war, with the ridiculous argument we heard
this morning that Israel has the right to defend itself.
These kinds of acts on the part of the United States can
only have a destructive impact on the credibility of the
Security Council.
The establishment of the State of Palestine is the
inalienable right of its people. Giving support and
solidarity to the just struggle of the people of Palestine
to establish an independent State based on the pre1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, is
receiving support from an overwhelming international
majority, which no one can stop. The Government of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea remains
consistent in its very strong support for the just struggle
of the people of Palestine. We urge Israel to stop all
of the illegal and unlawful military actions occurring
now in that part of the world and respond positively to
international demands.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having convened this
open debate of the Security Council. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing.
I wish to focus my statement on the question of
Palestine.
This debate comes amid the rapidly worsening
situation in the Gaza Strip. The horrible and
indiscriminate attacks upon the Palestinian civilian
population, especially in Shujaiya and Khan Younis,
along with the similar violence unfolding in the
occupied Palestinian territory in the past several weeks,
have shocked the people of Indonesia.
It is particularly saddening to consider that those
brutal attacks are taking place during Ramadan, the
holy month during which the blessings of the Almighty
have been promised to us. Rather than focusing on
the blessings of the Almighty, the reality is that the
Palestinian people is forced to endure a brutal and
inhumane assault by Israel. In that regard, Indonesia
strongly condemns Israel’s indiscriminate killings and
its excessive as well as disproportionate use of force.
Indonesia is encouraged by the Secretary-General’s
recent words on the Israeli offensive in Gaza, which
stressed that “there can be no military solution to

14-4776849/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

this conflict”. We certainly welcome the initiatives of
the relevant parties and key countries in pursuit of a
ceasefire, as well as the engagement of the SecretaryGeneral through his travel to the region. Indonesia
hopes that those actions will strongly encourage the
Security Council to act.
Israel’s military aggression in Gaza must stop
immediately, and it is the responsibility of the Council
to act decisively to bring it to a halt. For Indonesia,
the Israeli aggression is yet another test of whether
the Security Council will live up to its responsibilities
towards international peace and the protection of
vulnerable populations under the Charter of the United
Nations. Should the Council again fail to act, that
would not only represent a failure of the Organization,
but also the defeat of peace and humanity.
The loss of civilians on both sides of the PalestinianIsraeli conflict is not only deeply disturbing, it also
prolongs the animosity and resentment between the
two communities. So long as the violence continues,
the prospects for a just and lasting peace between Israel
and its neighbours will remain on the distant horizon.
Despite that obvious fact, Israel persists in its acts of
defiance, ignoring the fact that its occupation is the
root cause of the violence. It is obvious that stopping
the madness of the Israeli aggression is only the first
step towards peace. Without Israel’s withdrawal from
all of its occupied territories, the world will continue
to witness violence, not only in Palestine but in Israel
itself. I reiterate: it is Palestine that is occupied by Israel.
It is Palestine that is struggling for its sovereignty and
independence. Suppression of that legitimate struggle is
not self-defence, but a blatant violation of international
law.
I would like to reiterate that the need for a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, based on the two-State solution, is now more
pressing than ever. The world is witness to the fact
that the might of the Israeli armed forces has only
strengthened the tenacity and determination of the
Palestinian people. Therefore, again echoing the words
of the Secretary-General, there can be no military
solution to the conflict. Only the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, can yield what we all yearn for: peace
between Israel and Palestine.
To conclude, I wish to express once again Indonesia’s
unwavering support for the Palestinian people and their
legitimate struggle for self-determination. I would also
50/70

22/07/2014

like to call again on the Council to act immediately
and decisively to stop the Israeli aggression, to ensure
unhindered access to humanitarian assistance for all
victims and to bring all parties back to the negotiating
table.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.
Mr. Waheed (Maldives): It is with a sombre spirit
that the Maldives takes this opportunity to speak on
the situation in the Middle East, a region that has
throughout the past millennia been plagued by conflict
and which today faces one of its darkest hours. Although
the Middle East is embroiled in many conflicts, the
greatest need at this moment lies undeniably with the
State of Palestine. With more than 500 people killed
over the past two weeks, the majority of them civilians,
including women, children and the elderly, the toll on
the future of the Palestinian people is immeasurable.
That toll will be exacerbated further by the lack of
medical supplies and equipment and basic development
that has resulted from Israel’s illegal blockade of the
Gaza Strip. That toll will be but one more violation of
international law on top of the occupation, aggression,
extra-judicial executions, excessive and indiscriminate
use of brutal force, forcible colonization, forced
displacement and the collective punishment of an entire
people and nation.
That toll is and has been, for the better part of the
last century, too much to bear. The Maldives echoes
the calls made in this Chamber for the de-escalation of
hostilities in the Gaza Strip, the restoration of calm, the
reinstatement of the November 2012 ceasefire and the
immediate, unconditional end to the Israeli blockade.
Furthermore, the Maldives calls for greater assistance
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which has issued
an emergency appeal for assistance and is currently
housing more than 84,000 displaced peoples, with that
number soon likely to exceed 100,000.
The realization of peace in the Middle East will
not be achieved unless bold decisions are made by the
Security Council to fulfil its mandate to protect the
vulnerable, as outlined in the Charter of the United
Nations. A resolution from the Council calling for an
immediate ceasefire, the reopening of the Gaza Strip
based on the 2005 Agreement on Movement and Access,
an end to the blockade, and the guaranteed protection of
civilian populations is long overdue and much wanted.

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

During the holy month of Ramadan, the prayers of
the Maldivian people have been for those who have lost
life and limb in this conflict. The wanton destruction,
violence and hatred that have marred this time weighs
heavily on the souls of 1.5 billion Muslims the world
over. The Maldives reiterates its enduring support for
the legitimate and inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to freedom, justice and dignity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Mørch Smith (Norway): Our complete
statement will be available on PaperSmart.
Developments in the Middle East since our last
meeting (see S/PV.7164) are cause for deep concern.
For the fourth time in the seven years since Hamas took
control over the Gaza Strip, violence has flared up and
inflicted an intolerable toll on civilians.
That violence, coming after the suspension of the
United States-led initiative to negotiate a final status
agreement between Israel and the Palestinian Liberation
Organization shows that the status quo is unsustainable.
Reaching a final status agreement would have
abrogated the Israeli occupation of Palestine, granted
the Palestinian people a sovereign State and opened the
way to broad recognition of Israel as promised by the
Arab Peace Initiative. An agreement would have laid the
ground for nurturing peace. Instead, massive violence
now incites unlimited hatred and causes devastating
suffering for civilians.
Norway condemns the rocket attacks against Israeli
civilians. Israel has the right to defend its citizens. Yet
Israel has an obligation to respect the requirements
under humanitarian law, an obligation shared by all the
combatant Palestinian groups. Being the stronger party
and operating in very densely populated areas only
adds to Israel’s responsibility. We take note of Israel’s
acceptance of the ceasefire initiative proposed by Egypt
a week ago. Norway condemns the loss of more than 600
civilian lives, among them many women and children.
That unacceptable level of suffering of civilians is out
of proportion. Civilian casualties, including the killing
of four children on the beach in Gaza and the military
operation in Shujaiya, should be swiftly and thoroughly
investigated.
The ongoing military confrontation is a threat to
international peace and stability. Going beyond the
recent press statements, the Security Council could take

S/PV.7222

more decisive action to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law.
Norway has repeatedly called for an immediate and
unconditional cessation of hostilities and for a long-term
and durable ceasefire. The bloodshed and suffering
must end. That goal, however, also requires addressing
the complex underlying causes of the conflict.
First, Norway calls for concerted international
action by all friends of Israel and Palestine in support
of the Egyptian initiative and leadership to broker an
unconditional and immediate cessation of hostilities.
Secondly, Norway calls for addressing the
appalling humanitarian situation in Gaza. Recalling
resolution 1860 (2009) and the understanding reached
for the truce that ended the 2012 confrontations, we see
that the challenges are clear. There is an urgent need
for humanitarian and medical assistance and for the
reconstruction of private homes and infrastructure.
There is a need to bring the security arrangements in
Gaza in line with the rest of Palestine.
The people in Gaza cannot continue to live under
a blockade and remain dependent on assistance from
the international community. Border crossings must
be reopened, and access and movement for people and
goods must be facilitated. Key to achieving that is, in
the short term, to reunite Palestine under one integrated
and reformed authority, headed by President Abbas, as
the Palestinian factions have agreed to do.
As the Chair of the Donor Group and the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee (AHLC) and in partnership with
the European Union presidency, Norway will take an
initiative calling for an international donors conference
for Palestine in Oslo as soon as a ceasefire is announced.
The conference will address immediate challenges
and call for pledges of international assistance. On
the margins of the General Assembly, Norway will
chair an ordinary meeting of the AHLC, hosted by the
Secretary-General, to coordinate external assistance
for building the Palestinian institutions and sustainable
economic growth.
Thirdly, Norway calls on the Security Council to
request that the parties return to a political process
aimed at solving the outstanding issues of their conflict
peacefully, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions, previous commitments and agreements
between the parties.

14-4776851/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Without hope for the future, the freedom to live
dignified lives, and respect for rights and international
norms, there will be no lasting peace for either of the
civilian populations. Without lasting peace, mutual
respect and broad recognition of the two peoples and
their rights, there will not be security and peace.
We should not forget the other crises in the region.
The situation in Syria remains extremely serious,
despite the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) in the past
week. Norway remains firm in its condemnation of the
blatant disregard for civilian suffering, human rights
and international humanitarian law demonstrated by
Syrian Government forces as well by as other parties
to the tragic civil war. The atrocities committed by
the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant and its seizure
of control of considerable territories in north-eastern
Syria and in north-western and central parts of Iraq
threaten not only Iraq and Syria, but the whole region.
Global resources and capacity for humanitarian
responses are under severe strain. Norway calls on the
States members of the Security Council to redouble their
efforts to address the root causes of those developments
and to agree on concerted action to restore stability and
calm.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): In the past
few days, we have witnessed horror and barbarous acts
directed against the Palestinian people who have been
besieged by Israel in Gaza. Those actions can be seen
only as part of the continuous Israeli aggression that
kills innocent people and commits atrocities, such as
the massacre in Shujaiya, where most of the victims
were children. We condemn all of the acts of aggression
committed by Israel, which violate international
humanitarian law and human rights.
Israeli aggression against Gaza is not a way of
defending Israel against the Palestinian people. How
can one kill hundreds of women, the elderly and children
in order to defend a population? Security cannot be
achieved through military might or by targeting innocent
civilians, as Israel is doing today. Such aggression will
push everyone towards confrontation by all means and
destroy any hope of peace in the region. Such actions
will not lead to the security to which the people aspire.
Those who consider that the assault against Gaza
is justified by the killing of the three Israeli youths are

52/70

22/07/2014

wrong. The Israeli authorities should have conducted
an investigation to find the culprits, given that the
crime took place in territory under the control of Israel,
which, as the occupying authority, must, according to
international law, be held responsible for the crimes
committed against unarmed Palestinians. What has
been taking place in Gaza is collective punishment and
State terrorism that requires a clear response by the
Security Council, given that the number of victims and
the dead continues to grow after the land invasion and
the air and sea assault. What is taking place in Gaza
is not in response to terrorism, and the people of Gaza
are not terrorists. They are a people who are strong and
who seek to regain the rights that have been stripped
from them over the past decades.
For some time now, the international community
has sought to broker peace between the Palestinians
and the Israelis. Palestinian unity was considered a
propitious environment for peace. However, the current
Israeli actions are a real impediment to that peace. With
regard to the daily tragedy for the people of Gaza and
the siege against over 1.5 million Palestinians, there
has been a violation of the November 2012 agreement
between the Israeli and Gazan authorities. There also
has been a violation of the agreements concerning the
exchange of prisoners. Israel is responsible for all those
violations.
Qatar spares no effort to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace, and we will continue to
support our brethren, the Palestinian people. We are
committed to stopping the violence. We also commend
international efforts to reach a humanitarian truce and
ceasefire. We have encouraged negotiations, including
those in Cairo. We urge the international community
to reach a just and lasting agreement, a ceasefire and
respect for international law and human rights, thereby
guaranteeing the security of the Palestinian people.
The Security Council has a special responsibility
to prevent any attempt to endanger the security of the
Palestinian people. It needs to demand that Israel put an
end to the assault so that humanitarian assistance can
reach Gaza and so that a solution can be found.
With regard to Syria, the Syrian authorities have
continued to attack their own people by targeting
civilians. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/427)
clearly points to the use of bombs against civilians,
sieges, the infliction of famine on civilians and the
refusal to allow access to humanitarian and medical
assistance. The situation in Syria has reached such a
14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

state as a result of the paralysis of the international
community in regard to meeting the needs of the
population.
The Security Council’s adoption of resolution 2165
(2014) clearly points to the international community’s
desire to promote the well-being of the Syrian people
and to implement resolution 2139 (2014) so as to put
a halt to the crisis, which will only deteriorate until a
solution is found that will guarantee the rights of the
Syrian people and condemn crimes against humanity.
We congratulate Mr. de Mistura and the Deputy
Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Ramzy, on their
appointments. We hope that that will make it possible
to reach a settlement of the crisis.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ahmad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Israeli occupation of the Arab territories,
with its repercussions for peace and stability in the
region, has reached a very dangerous phase, given the
international indifference that has not sought to force
Israel to end its occupation of the Arab territories or
to end the serious violations of international legal
instruments, including the Geneva Conventions of
1949.
The international community has not halted the
excesses of the settlements, displacements, carnage and
continued aggression. What is taking place today in
Gaza are sporadic raids and killings of children, women
and the elderly. That is just a new chapter in the Israeli
aggression against the sons of the Palestinian people.
We hereby reaffirm that Israel could not have carried
out such excesses in its policy of aggression without the
support and protection of some well-known countries
and the pretexts and excuses they have provided for
Israel. Those States are complicit in those policies, and
they are legally responsible and accountable for the
results.
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns the carnage
and the crimes committed by Israel against the
Palestinian people, our brothers in Gaza. We condemn
the international silence in the face of this ongoing
crime, and we call upon the Council to compel Israel to
halt its barbaric acts, which threaten peace and security
in the region.
Some in this Chamber have claimed that they are
committed to supporting the rights of the Syrian people.

S/PV.7222

Yet the hollowness of that statement and its hypocrisy
have been revealed in that they have not said anything
about that except at the end of their statements on the
Israeli occupation of the Golan Heights, as if that was
not a right of the Syrian people, as if the Golan were
not occupied Syrian territory. Every year, a number of
resolutions are adopted calling on Israel to withdraw
to the 4 June 1967 line. Where is the discussion on
human rights and international humanitarian law by
those delegations when it comes to the settlements
campaign of the Israelis and the suffering of the Syrian
people under the occupation in the Golan for more
than half a century? In the Golan, Syrian citizens have
been exposed to the worst forms of repression, racial
discrimination, arrest and torture. They are deprived
of their natural resources, including oil, gas and water.
The support by Israel of terrorist groups working in
the occupied Golan Heights is a flagrant violation of the
1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement, despite the
requests of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (UNDOF) and the international community. That
has exposed United Nations personnel to dangers and
undermines United Nations activity in the region. That
was evident in the kidnapping of UNDOF staff and
their exposure to firing, as they have been targeted by
terrorist groups supported by Israel.
On that subject we would point out that the most
recent report of the Secretary-General on UNDOF
(S/2014/401), which reaffirms that Israel has transferred
terrorist groups to Israeli hospitals through the
separation line so that they can return to the separation
zone and pursue their terrorist activities. Israel is in
communication with them, and they provide them with
closed boxes, the contents of which we are unfamiliar
with. That is in violation of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement of 1974, Council resolutions and
international law.
Given the international silence with regard to
Israeli practices, Israel has again mounted further
aggression in Palestinian territories and has targeted
civilian areas more than once in recent times. The
Secretary-General’s report on UNDOF, which I have
just referred to, also mentions Israeli aggression
against Syrian territories on 18 and 19 March as being
the most serious violations committed since the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement. The activities
pursued by Israel have increased tension in the region
to an unprecedented level. That may well have serious
consequences that will not just be limited to this region.

14-4776853/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It is for that reason that we call upon the United Nations,
including the Council, to shoulder its responsibility in
accordance with the Charter with regard to ending the
Israeli occupation, halting Israel’s barbaric policies
and forcing it to respect the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, including resolution 497 (1981), on
the occupied Syrian Golan, which calls upon Israel to
withdraw from all occupied Arab territories, including
the occupied Syrian Golan, to the line of 4 June 1967.
Finally, we reiterate our rejection of some
delegations’ attempts to disregard the main issue on the
agenda, namely, the Middle East and ending the Israeli
occupation in the occupied Arab territories, including
the Syrian Golan, and to discuss the domestic issues
of other countries under the guise of discussing the
Middle East. Therefore, in order to avoid becoming
a party to such attempts, which we reject, I will not
respond to such attempts under this agenda item,
nor to the delegations that violate the Charter of the
United Nations and international law via their attempts
to provide support, housing, weapons and training
to terrorists and mercenaries, and which assist their
return to Syria through neighbouring countries and
spread extremism and terrorist destruction in Syria and
throughout the entire region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): My delegation
would like to congratulate you, Sir, your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July.
The current Israeli invasion of Gaza is a collective
indictment of the international community, the United
Nations in general and the Security Council in
particular. History will indeed judge the United Nations
and members of the Security Council harshly for the
failure to carry out their historic responsibilities of
maintaining international peace and security.
For its part, South Africa has condemned violence
from all parties to the current conflict. We continue
to call for the immediate cessation of hostilities, the
firing of rockets and Israel’s disproportionate military
actions. There cannot, however, be any justification for
flagrant violations of international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
The Security Council cannot be caught using
double standards, such as calling for accountability for
violations of international law taking place somewhere,
54/70

22/07/2014

including calls to refer situations to the International
Criminal Court, while not doing so when the same acts
are committed by Israel. The most glaring weakness
of the Organization in its almost 70 years of existence
continues to be the manner in which it deals with the
Israeli-Palestinian question.
The past few days since the conflict started and the
subsequent Israeli ground invasion of Gaza began have
neither seen nor resulted in any meaningful action on
the part of the Council, which is the principal organ of
the United Nations responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
We have heard condemnations from speakers before
us and some members of the Council, but the biggest
question posed to us, and particularly to the Council, by
the people, children, women and the elderly of Palestine
is: What are you doing about our plight, the indignity
we continue to suffer at the hands of the occupiers and
the killing of our children, mothers and grandparents?
The Israelis know from experience over the years
that they will suffer no consequences of their actions
carried out in violation of all known provisions of
international law. Who is the most powerful party to
the conflict and who should bear the greatest degree
of responsibility and accountability? The reality is that
the whole crisis is meant to divert attention from the
real issues faced daily by the Palestinian people in their
struggle for self-determination and freedom.
We should all be reminded that at the core of the
Israeli-Palestinian question is the perpetual occupation
by Israel and the Palestinian struggle for selfdetermination, equality, freedom and justice. The root
cause of the conflict has to be addressed, namely, the
two-State solution that consists of the creation of the
State of Palestine on the basis of the pre-1967 borders,
existing side by side with the State of Israel.
We also call for the immediate admission of the
State of Palestine as a full Member of the United
Nations with all rights and privileges. The continued
lack of action on the part of the Security Council on
the Palestinian application for full membership is not
justified and serves only to give undue advantage to the
Israelis at the expense of the Palestinians.
There must be an immediate ceasefire now, to
stop all of the carnage that is currently taking place
as we debate the matter. The parties should return to
negotiations, as there can be no military solution to the
conflict.
14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

South Africa has welcomed the formation of a
national unity Government by the Palestinians. The
South African Government has announced 10 million
rand in humanitarian aid to Gaza to address the current
plight of the Palestinians caused by the military ground
operation.
The people and Government of South Africa will
continue to identify with the Palestinian cause and to
contribute to efforts towards a durable and sustainable
political solution to the crisis.
We continue to be inspired by the words of our
former late President Mandela, who said, “We know
too well that our freedom is incomplete without the
freedom of the Palestinians.”
The South African Government has today
announced its intention to dispatch a team to Israel
and Palestine to convey our growing concern about
the escalation of violence there. President Zuma will
also invite President Abbas on a working visit to South
Africa.
In conclusion, we call on the Council to shoulder
its responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations and to adopt a draft resolution that will send an
unequivocal and strong message that the indiscriminate
and arbitrary killing of civilians on both sides has to
stop and that there will be accountability for the gross
violations of international law in all its aspects.
The Security Council cannot afford the luxury of
permanent paralysis and inaction regarding this matter.
The status quo is not sustainable and will forever
remain an indelible mark on the aims and objectives of
the Organization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM) in this important
meeting of the Council.
Let me start by conveying the sympathy and
condolences of the members of the Movement to the
Palestinian people and their leadership on the tragic
loss of life and devastation that they have suffered
in the recent period as a result of the indiscriminate,
brutal shelling and aerial strikes, followed by a
massive ground invasion of the Gaza Strip, by the
Israeli occupying forces. The attacks and invasion

S/PV.7222

clearly constitute deliberate reprisals and collective
punishment against an entire civilian population, in
grave breach of international law.
The latest Israeli military aggression against
the Palestinian civilian population in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, has
caused high civilian casualties, particularly in the
Gaza Strip, where more than 600 Palestinians — most
of them women, children and elderly persons — have
been killed and thousands have been injured, hundreds
of them critically, by the Israeli occupying forces.
It is particularly tragic that women and children
constitute the majority of the victims of the
indiscriminate, lethal military strikes. In that regard,
according to estimates by United Nations bodies and
independent agencies present on the ground, more than
three quarters of the victims have been civilians. The
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has determined
that more than one quarter of the fatalities have been
children.
Moreover, the indiscriminate Israeli bombardment,
coupled with the ground invasion, against densely
populated civilian areas has caused widespread
destruction and damage to civilian property and
vital civilian infrastructure and has devastated and
disrupted all aspects of life in Gaza, which is already
long-suffering under the illegitimate, suffocating
Israeli blockade. The massive Israeli military offensive,
which is unjustifiable under any pretext, and the
constant violence, provocation and incitement against
the Palestinian people, have caused widespread trauma,
fear and distress among the entire civilian population
and must be condemned.
In the light of the dire humanitarian situation,
especially in the Gaza Strip, the Non-Aligned
Movement believes that there is an urgent need to help
the Palestinian people, including through the provision
of emergency humanitarian assistance to meet the
needs of Palestinian civilians.
NAM therefore calls on the international community
to provide emergency assistance to alleviate the great
suffering caused by the regrettable deterioration and
destabilization of the situation on the ground. In that
regard, NAM calls for urgent additional support to
UNRWA for the provision of the necessary food and
other humanitarian aid to the Palestine refugees and
other displaced civilians in Gaza.

14-4776855/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Despite efforts by regional and international actors,
including the Council’s 12 July call for a ceasefire and
by NAM, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the League of Arab States, Israel, the occupying
Power, has defiantly persisted in its military aggression
and ground invasion against the Palestinian civilian
population under its occupation, in grave contravention
of international law, particularly the Fourth Geneva
Convention.
The intransigence on the part of the occupying
Power is the continuation its practice of blatantly
ignoring the demands of the international community
to end its occupation and to stop its illegal policies
and practices that, over the past six decades, have
destabilized regional and international peace and
security and claimed the lives, land, dignity and welfare
of millions of Palestinian people.
The atrocities committed by Israel during the past
weeks add to a long list of grave breaches perpetrated
by that regime over the past six decades. That
includes, but is not limited to, occupation, aggression,
collective punishment, extrajudicial execution, the
use of excessive, indiscriminate and brutal force, the
confiscation and colonization of Palestinian land
through massive settlements, the Wall and the transfer
of hundreds of thousands of settlers, the arbitrary
detention and imprisonment of thousands of Palestinian
civilians, now numbering more than 6,000, the use of
torture and other internationally prohibited abuses
against civilians, the destruction of homes and the
forced displacement of civilians.
This ongoing tragedy and injustice is mostly due
to the culture of impunity under which the occupying
Power has systematically and willfully perpetrated
its violations over the years — impunity undoubtedly
fostered by the repeated failure of the international
community, particularly the Security Council, to hold
it accountable for its crimes and compel its compliance
with the law.
In the two statements issued by the Non-Aligned
Movement during the recent crisis, we stressed the
urgent need for the Council to uphold its duties under
the Charter of the United Nations and to act decisively
in order to uphold international law and to ensure
accountability for its violation.
The very fragile situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, demands the urgent
attention and action of the Security Council to stop the

56/70

22/07/2014

current invasion of Gaza, to bring a halt to the repeated
Israeli military aggression against the Palestinian
civilian population, to end the inhumane blockade of the
Gaza Strip and to ensure full respect for international
humanitarian law and the protection of the Palestinian
civilian population. The Security Council must assume
a more active role in the crisis — to prevent the further
destabilization of the situation, to stop a relapse into
such deadly and destructive cycles of violence and to
contribute to the efforts to achieve just and lasting
peace and security.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
unwavering support and solidarity of the members of
the Non-Aligned Movement for the Palestinian people
and their relentless efforts to achieve their inalienable
rights and legitimate national aspirations for freedom,
justice, dignity and peace.
Allow me to say a few words in my national capacity
in response to the Israeli representative, who today has
once again leveled a baseless accusation against my
country. It is ironic that while his regime is at this very
moment inflicting brutal, indiscriminate and collective
punishment on an entire defenceless civilian population
and has an unparalleled and perverse record of using
violence as a means to further its aims, he levels
accusations against my Government.
That representative’s remarks against my
Government are absurd and are nothing more than a
smokescreen to disguise the crimes that his regime has
been committing for decades and to divert attention
from the bloodbath that it is currently creating in the
Gaza Strip. Throughout its history, that regime has
never stopped using violence and terrorism to terrify
the inhabitants of the land that it occupies and the
peoples of the region with a view to keeping their land
under occupation. Terrorizing civilians has always
been its preferred way to oppress peoples thoughout its
existence.
As occupation lies at the heart of the Palestinian
question, the Palestinian people, like every other
people under foreign occupation, has no choice but to
resist its occupiers. That resistance has continued for
decades and will continue relentlessly as long as the
occupation persists. In that regard, the Israeli attempts
and propaganda are undoubtedly doomed to failure.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): With regard to Syria,
Iceland welcomes the Security Council’s adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014), with the aim of ensuring access
for humanitarian assistance to the people in need
throughout Syria. We commend the non-permanent
members Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg, which
relentlessy worked towards building the consensus on
the resolution that was long overdue.
However, humanitarian assistance can give only
short-term relief. Much more needs to be done by the
Security Council to seek a political solution to the
conflict. The situation is already having significant
consequences for regional peace and security and is
affecting the situation in neighbouring countries, as
well as the United Nations peacekeeping mission on the
Syrian Golan. The Council cannot sit idly by.
In Syria, we have also been witnessing flagrant
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law for more than three years now, especially by
the Syrian Government. We continue to condemn those
violations and reiterate our call to the Security Council
to refer the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court.
On the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, I want to start
by expressing Iceland’s condemnation of the violations
of international humanitarian law by both sides in
the conflict. We condemn the indiscriminate rocket
attacks by Hamas and other militant organizations in
Gaza against civilian targets in Israel, which terrorize
the civilian population and have so far resulted in two
civilian deaths. We also condemn the use of force by
the Israel Defense Forces (IDF), which has resulted
in more than 600 deaths in Gaza, the vast majority of
them civilians, and the injuring of more than 3,500
people, as well as immense destruction of homes and
other civilian infrastructure. The IDF’s air and ground
assault raises concerns about respect for the principle
of distinction, proportionality and precaution in attacks
under international humanitarian law.
While the current situation in Gaza is more than
tragic, I will not dwell on it, since the core problem
is not what is happening today but the occupation.
The occupation of Gaza and the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, affects all aspects of the daily life of
Palestinians and violates their human rights, including
their freedom of movement and property rights,
and their right to assembly, freedom of expression,
education, health and equal access to justice and due
process, to name a few.

S/PV.7222

In that respect, let us recall that this month it is
10 years since the issuance of the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice in which the Court
clearly states that the wall, where built on occupied
Palestinian land, including East Jerusalem, is illegal
under international law. However, contrary to the
recommendations of the Court, not much has changed
on the ground. The wall continues to obstruct the
movement of Palestinians and to have a severe impact
on their livelihood opportunities. Let us also recall that
this summer the blockade on Gaza has been in place
for eight years, with dire consequences for the civilian
population.
We spend a great deal of time at the United Nations
discussing the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
the importance of dialogue and mediation for peace
and security and so on. Those concepts are not meant
to be abstract. They do not exist in a vacuum. The
whole idea is to apply them to real life situations. We
therefore commend the Secretary-General for going to
Israel and the State of Palestine to try directly to seek a
ceasefire. We strongly encourage him to continue being
personally engaged and to make full use of his good
offices to find a lasting solution to the conflict.
The conflict also requires the urgent attention of the
Security Council. First and foremost, a ceasefire that
not only provides for laying down arms but also lays
the ground for achieving something more sustainable
must be agreed. Secondly, the Security Council must
firmly uphold its responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Every effort must be made to bring
about a peaceful solution to the conflict that results in
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security. The parameters are fairly clear and
well known to all. The Council can start by demanding
respect for its own numerous resolutions on the conflict
and for international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. I would
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing.
Israel is using all its land, naval and air military
capability to humiliate the Palestinian people, who
have now been besieged in Gaza for almost seven

14-4776857/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

22/07/2014

years. The occupying Power is again demonstrating its
barbarity and cruel nature through its actions against
the Palestinian civilians in Gaza, including women,
children and the elderly. That has claimed more than
600 lives, injured thousands of people and given rise to
thousands of refugees. It has also led to the destruction
of infrastructure in all sectors of activity.

(see S/PV.7214) on Israeli aggression against Gaza on
10 July, before the number of victims was more than
just a few dozen. Following that meeting, the Council
issued a press statement (SC/11472). That is not what
the Palestinian people were waiting for. That statement
was certainly not in keeping with Israel’s actions, which
undermine security throughout the region as a whole.

Like many representatives, I ask myself a number
of questions. How can we explain the fact that 70 per
cent of the victims of the aggression, according to
United Nations estimates, are civilians? How can one
justify the murder of unarmed civilians under the
pretext of protecting other civilians? What arguments
can possibly be used to justify the targeting of medical
teams and hospitals?

The situation has escalated significantly over the
past week, especially since the bloodbath of Shujaiya.
There are now over 500 victims. The Security Council
met in consultations yet again on 20 July, but failed to
take a firm position. Of course, some felt that this gave
a green light to the occupation forces to continue their
murder without being held responsible.

Israel is shedding Palestinian blood, which
compounds the other acts of violence that have been
inflicted on the Palestinian people for six decades.
The consequences of that slaughter linger in the
international consciousness. After the bloodbaths of
Sabra and Shatila, Qana, Haifa, Jenin and elsewhere,
this time it was the turn of the Shujaiya neighbourhood.
The occupying forces attacked it using rockets and other
ammunition, claiming 70 lives, the majority of which,
as always, were women, children and the elderly.
How long will Israel continue its aggression against
the Palestinian people? How long will it disregard
international law? How long will the international
community remain silent in the face of those acts,
limiting itself to weakly condemning Israel while
Palestinians are attacked on a daily basis in clear view
of the entire world? How long will a representative of
Palestine continue to read us lists of murdered innocent
children? That list is, of course, horrendous.
Israel believes that it enjoys some sort of immunity
that puts it above the law and allows it to violate
people’s rights wherever, whenever and however it
wants to. It is not interested in the whole concept of
being accountable for one’s actions. The whole concept
of criminal liability is what international law is based
on and we are about to commemorate the World Day for
International Justice. How can one use the pretext of
the fight against terrorism to carry out crimes against
Palestinians and to avoid any responsibility or liability?
It is important that the Council, as the body
responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, take measures to put an end to the
aggression. The Security Council held its first meeting

58/70

We reaffirm our condemnation of the Israeli
aggression and the military ground operations launched
by Israel against Gaza. The international community
and the Security Council must first assume their
responsibilities to put an immediate end to the military
aggression against Gaza.
Secondly, there is a need to lift the unjust blockade
on Gaza to put an end to the negative humanitarian, social
and economic impacts resulting from it. Palestinians are
deprived of their basic rights and their right to a decent
life. We also call for an opening of the crossing points
to ensure that the necessary humanitarian assistance is
provided to the people of Gaza.
Thirdly, there is a need to mobilize the efforts of
the international community to increase its delivery of
humanitarian assistance to Palestine. We must support
the efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. For that
reason, we have decided to send medical aid to the Gaza
Strip and we have welcomed a number of Palestinians
into our hospitals.
Fourthly, we should support the call of President
Mahmoud Abbas to place the State of Palestine under
an international protection regime.
Fifthly, there is a need to put an end to the attacks
by Israel and Israeli settlers against the Palestinian
people and their assets, property and religious holy
sites. There is a need to begin an exchange of refugees
and to put an end to the colonialist activities of Israel in
Jerusalem and East Jerusalem, the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip.
Sixthly, there is a need to establish an independent
and sovereign Palestinian State based on the pre-1967

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

borders, in accordance with the Arab Peace Initiative,
the resolutions of international law, the concept of land
for peace and the Madrid terms of reference.
We welcome the international and regional efforts
and initiatives aimed at putting an end to the aggression
against Gaza. We also welcome the activities undertaken
within that framework. We reaffirm the importance
of achieving a lasting and just truce that would avert
renewed aggression by Israel against Gaza, and of
lifting the blockade on Gaza.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela thanks you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting of the Security
Council on the Middle East, in particular to consider
the situation in the Gaza Strip arising from the brutal
military attack by Israel, the occupying Power, on the
people of the territory of the State of Palestine.
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The international community is once again shaken
by the escalation of violence caused by Israel’s bloody
military actions in Gaza. The severity of the conflict,
which erupted a few days ago as a result of the military
operations, requires the Security Council to make
a resounding statement in the form of a resolution in
favour of an immediate ceasefire in accordance with
the agreement of November 2012, leading to the full
withdrawal of Israeli military forces from Gaza and
putting an end to the violence against the Palestinian
people.
Our country categorically condemns the
aggression perpetrated by the occupying Power,
through indiscriminate bombing and the invasion of the
territory, which has sown destruction, killed more than
500 innocent civilians, mostly children, women and
the elderly, and wounded thousands of people, in clear
violation of the norms of international law, including
international humanitarian law.
Venezuela reiterates its solidarity with the
Palestinian people and Government in the face of this
new attack by the Israeli military forces, which has
subjected the inhabitants of the Gaza Strip to an illegal
embargo since 2007 and violated their human rights

S/PV.7222

and the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. We
therefore demand that Israel put an end to this military
aggression and the construction of settlements in the
occupied territories of the Palestinian State, refrain
from taking measures of collective punishment, and
lift the suffocating blockade on the Gaza Strip, which
has had an ongoing and devastating impact on the
Palestinian people by deliberately depriving them of
their means of subsistence, including economic income,
food, medicine and other goods that are essential to the
daily lives of its inhabitants and the functioning of their
political institutions.
Finally, our country reiterates the need to return
to the path of negotiations in order to achieve a broad
peace founded on a vision of a region in which two
States — Israel and Palestine — live side by side within
secure and recognized borders, on the basis of the pre1967 borders, in accordance with international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Mr. Jaime Calderón (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador reaffirms its commitment
to peace, unconditional respect for human rights,
international law and the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. It also reiterates its hope
that a peaceful solution to the conflict between Israel
and Palestine can be found.
El Salvador vigorously condemns and rejects the
armed attacks by Israel against the Gaza Strip, which
have increased during the past week and led to the loss
of human lives, hundreds of wounded and the flight of
thousands of Palestinians from their homes, as well as
serious material damage.
El Salvador believes that the exercise of States’
right to legitimate self-defence, as set out in the
Charter of the United Nations, does not justify the
disproportionate use of military force against another
State, and even less against its civilian population.
That is not only a breach of the spirit of the Charter but
also a flagrant violation of the norms of international
humanitarian law.
We urge immediate, continuous, unrestricted
and unhindered access for the people of Gaza to
humanitarian assistance and basic supplies. In that
regard, we are very optimistic about the meeting that
the Human Rights Council will hold soon to assess the
situation of civilians in the Gaza Strip.

14-4776859/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

El Salvador calls for the strict implementation of
all of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly relating to the peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine, which stress,
inter alia, respect for the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people.
On that basis, El Salvador reiterates its call for the
immediate cessation of armed aggression and requests
the Security Council to play a more active and central
role in finding a peaceful solution to the conflict.
El Salvador calls for the full restoration of calm
to pave the way to resolving all issues peacefully.
We therefore support and urge the various actors that
have been accompanying the parties in their quest for
peaceful solutions to intensify their diplomatic actions
in the short term and to give priority to the voice and
rights of peoples in search of peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity
afforded us to take the floor.
(spoke in English)
Canada supports the right of Israel, like any other
country, to defend itself against terror attacks. We stand
unequivocally with Israel in its efforts to protect the
lives of its citizens, which are once again under direct
threat.
The indiscriminate rocket attacks from Gaza
on Israel are terrorist acts, for which there can be
no justification. The Council must condemn these
reprehensible acts by Hamas and call for the restoration
of calm and an end to the current hostilities. This is
not a conflict between the Palestinian Authority or the
Palestinian people and the State of Israel. It is a conflict
between a terrorist organization and the Jewish State.
(spoke in French)
There is no moral equivalence between Hamas,
a terrorist organization with a blatant disregard for
human life, and the liberal democratic State of Israel,
which is fulfilling its obligation to defend its people.
Is there any Government represented in this Chamber
that would not defend itself vigorously if hundreds of
rockets were raining down on its people day after day?
The Israel Defense Forces have continued to
demonstrate a commitment to minimizing civilian
60/70

22/07/2014

casualties in response to the relentless rocket attacks.
Hamas has sought to deliberately put civilians, from
both sides, in mortal danger. We mourn the resulting
deaths and deplore the suffering.
(spoke in English)
In early June, President Abbas announced a new
Government that would reassert his authority over
Gaza, until then firmly under the boot of Hamas. If
there is something positive that might be derived from
this tragedy, it should be the opportunity that it creates
for President Abbas to take on three big challenges.
The first challenge is to complete the disarmament
of Hamas and other Palestinian terrorist groups operating
in Gaza, including the Palestinian Islamic Jihad. This
means that he must follow through on his commitment to
demilitarization and the removal of existing stockpiles
of thousands and thousands of largely Iranian-supplied
missiles nestled and shielded amid the homes, grocery
stores and schools of Palestinians. It means that Hamas
fighters put down their arms and embrace the peace
process.
Secondly, there must be a complete cessation of the
production and smuggling of weapons and materials
that enable terrorist groups to both acquire and make
rockets.
Thirdly, the Palestinian Authority’s security
apparatus must assume immediate and total control
of Gaza and the Rafah border crossing. There is no
place for militias, private armies or alternative security
forces. The principle of “one authority, one gun” must
be enforced, and security coordination between the
Palestinians and the Israelis should continue.
(spoke in French)
Canada supports the Secretary-General’s efforts to
de-escalate the situation as well as the efforts of the
Governments of Egypt and the United States to attempt
to broker a ceasefire. Canada commends Israel for its
unconditional acceptance of the Egyptian ceasefire
proposal, which was rejected by Hamas.
(spoke in English)
Canada expresses profound concern regarding the
reports that rockets found in a Gaza school run by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East were returned to Hamas.
Canada unequivocally calls on the United Nations to
launch an immediate independent investigation to

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

determine the facts surrounding the report. Canada also
calls on the United Nations to ensure that no rockets are
returned to Hamas in any way, shape or form.
Canada calls on Hamas and other terrorist groups
to end the violence and suffering. It is in Hamas’s
power to end this conflict, and we call on it to do so
immediately.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): It is indeed with a heavy
heart that we address today the unspeakable suffering,
death and devastation of Palestinians wrought by the
inhuman, indiscriminate, brutal and disproportionate
military aggression and assault by a Member State
that is not following the rule of law and international
standards.
Prior to coming to this meeting, I glanced at a
newspaper headline stating, “While hundreds of women
and children are dying in Gaza, the global conscience
is quiet”, and it carried three pictures of three world
leaders. One leader kept his eyes closed, another kept
his ears shut and the third one kept his mouth shut. I
hope that picture does not reflect a global leadership
characterized by inactivity even as unarmed fellow
human beings are being slaughtered mercilessly. I am
surprised that the leaders that always teach us the value
of human rights are now simply remaining quiet and
keeping mum.
I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this open debate and allowing us to vent our frustration
and helplessness. We know that this debate will not stop
the brutality against innocent civilians in Palestine;
however, it may speak to the moral, ethical and human
rights values of the powerful. We feel better, at least,
that history is not repeating itself. When the Jews were
being mercilessly persecuted under the Nazis, hardly
anyone raised their voice. Here we have been given
a chance to raise our voice in frustration and also to
convey our solidarity with the Palestinian people and
their just cause.
The graphic and disturbing pictures of helpless
Palestinians exposed to Israel’s full-scale military
onslaught greatly shock our conscience. We are no
less pained to see the inaction and helplessness of the
Security Council plus that of powerful leaders, yet
some lip service is still better than nothing so as to
give hope to those who are imprisoned in Gaza, where
more than 600 innocent lives have been lost. Collateral

S/PV.7222

damage has turned vibrant Gaza City into a dustbin,
destroying the water, sewerage and electricity systems
as well as hospitals. It is no wonder that a group of
young Americans of Philadelphia have urged conscious
citizens to do their best to end the modern-day apartheid
in Palestine.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs confirmed that four out of every five Palestinians
killed during Israel’s ongoing military offensive in
Gaza have been civilians, including children, women
and elderly. Is this not genocide?
We do not deny Israel’s right to exist in peace or
to self-defence. But we strongly condemn its practice
of routinely killing innocent Palestinians under various
pretexts. It is unfortunate that Israel has been using the
pretext of self-defence to kill people living under its
own occupation on a whim, with impunity and without
consequences. Its practice of cleansing Palestinians
from that sacred land under various pretexts must not
be acceptable to any.
More importantly, the advocates who so
vociferously champion the right of Israel to self-defence
often forget that the poor Palestinians also have the
right to live, not in the shadow of lurking death and
perpetual occupation, but as normal human beings with
equal dignity, freedom and security in peace, just like
all Israelis and like all free people on the planet Earth.
The occupation forces are trampling on that right
every day. How long will the international community
deliberately keep its eyes, ears and mouths shut and
refuse to see, hear and speak about the tragedy daily
unfolding in occupied Palestine?
Israel is currently attacking a population of
1.8 million that has no army, no navy, no air force,
no mechanized military units, no command and
control and no heavy artillery. Israel pretends that this
indiscriminate slaughter is a war. But as celebrated
journalist Chris Hedges puts it in his recent post on
www.TruthDig.com ,“only the most self-deluded
supporter of Israel is fooled”. The rockets fired at the
Israeli civilian population —which we certainly do
not support, but rather condemn—cannot remotely be
compared to the 1,000-pound iron fragmentation bombs
that have been dropped in large numbers on crowded
Palestinian neighbourhoods; to the forced removal of
some 400,000 Palestinians from their homes; to the
wounding of more than 7,000 of them from missile
attacks fired by sophisticated Israeli F-16 fighter jets
and Apache helicopters; or to the destruction of basic

14-4776861/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

infrastructure, as well as 100,000 homes, in the wake
of indiscriminate aggression.
We condemn violence and destruction, and we urge
the Council to do so as well. The disproportionate use
of force against an unarmed civilian population is in
breach of the Geneva Convention and international
human rights and humanitarian laws.
Despite repeated calls for a ceasefire by the
Secretary-General and a few other leaders, Israel has
continued its ground offensive in Gaza, adding to the
death and destruction. We urge the Security Council
to adopt a binding resolution to enforce a ceasefire and
immediately end the hostilities so that no more blood,
whether Palestinian or Israeli, is shed. We express our
sympathy and condolences to the families of the dead.
The Security Council has a Charter responsibility and
obligation to secure peace by ending aggression and
addressing threats to peace. We hope that the Council
will rise to the occasion and take effective measures to
bring the bloodshed to an end.
In conclusion, as we have repeatedly said, there
can be no military solution to this conflict. Military
intervention, in particular the use of brute military force,
often exacerbates instead of ameliorating the conditions
for peace. Unfortunately, a political settlement of this
protracted crisis is nowhere in sight. With the latest
round of American mediation now dead and the Quartet
road map in limbo for the past few years, it is incumbent
on the Security Council to perform the role of honest
broker. It is a pity that for the past 66 years, the Council
has often hesitated to take concrete action, even when
its own resolutions have been blatantly flouted when
they could have meaningfully contributed to a fair
resolution of the issue.
This culture of impunity must end and the rule of law
and justice must prevail. We hope that the devastating
escalation of violence can serve as a wake-up call for
the Council to work vigorously to end Israel’s military
occupation and bring about the beginning of a twoState solution that guarantees the safety and security
of the residents of both the State of Israel and Palestine,
with its capital in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, so that they may
live side by side in peace and harmony.

22/07/2014

The Security Council has convened yet another
open debate on the Middle East without having made any
progress on the path to peace. Far from improving, the
situation has deteriorated. The main problem remains
Israel’s systematic aggression against Palestine, with
the ensuing crimes committed against its people. In
recent weeks, we have seen Israel, in grave violation
of the provisions of the four Geneva Conventions and
of human rights, step up its military attacks and the
bombardment of civilian areas and targets, killing
Palestinian civilians and destroying their homes and
property, especially in the besieged Gaza Strip.
Cuba vigorously condemns Israel’s latest aggression
against the people of Gaza. Israel is using its military
and technological superiority to carry out a policy of
collective punishment, with a disproportionate use
of force that has killed innocent civilians and caused
enormous material damage. The figures for Palestinian
civilians are alarming. The number of dead is above
520 and the wounded number more than 3,500, many
of them with after-effects they will endure for the rest
of their lives.
We call on the international community to demand
that Israel put an end to the latest escalation of violence.
Only conversations on an equitable basis can lead to
a just peace that will enable the Palestinian people to
exercise its inalienable rights and allow the definitive
establishment of the State of Palestine, with its capital
in East Jerusalem. Until the Security Council plays
its designated role in defence of international peace
and security and adopts concrete practical measures
to ensure that Israel ends its aggression against the
Palestinian people, it will continue to encourage
the Israeli occupying force to persist in its arbitrary,
expansionist and criminal policy and to act with
impunity.

The President: I now the give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.

Israel’s illegal occupation of Palestinian and other
Arab territories is the main obstacle to achieving peace
and a just, lasting, broad solution in the Middle East.
Israel’s behaviour deliberately flouts United Nations
resolutions, threatens regional and international peace
and security, and violates the human rights of an entire
people. There will be no peace in the Middle East while
those aggressions persist and until the legitimate and
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people are taken
into account.

Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
fully support the statement made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The General Assembly took a historic decision
when a majority of its members granted Palestine the
status of a non-member observer State in the United

62/70

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7222

Nations. We reiterate our support for Palestine’s
accession to the United Nations as a full Member State.
It is imperative to continue supporting the Palestinian
people in its legitimate claim for the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

Zimbabwe aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, as
well as with the African Union decision adopted at the
Summit of Heads of State and Government in Malabo
in June.

The Palestinian people are suffering under the
growing number of illegal Israeli settlements; the
construction of an illegal wall that isolates whole
communities and hinders the formation of the
Palestinian State; Israel’s demolition of Palestinian
homes and the eviction of thousands of people; the
difficult and agonizing reality faced by Palestinian
prisoners; and the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Gaza Strip, which is exacerbated by
the ongoing and unjust blockade of the area, as well
as by nocturnal military air strikes, assassinations,
kidnapping and torture. In recent weeks, the Israelí
army has conducted hundreds of violent military raids
on Palestinian homes in the West Bank, arresting and
detaining hundreds of Palestinians who are being held
along with thousands of others already in Israeli jails.
Only the end of Israel’s colonialist policy, the liberation
of Palestinian prisoners and the lifting of the blockade
on the Gaza Strip will allow for a meaningful political
process capable of bringing peace to the region.

I wish to convey deep sorrow and sincere
condolences to the Palestinian people and their
leadership on the tragic loss of life and the devastation
they have suffered as a result of the indiscriminate and
disproportionate acts of violence by the occupying force
in the Gaza Strip. The senseless killing of civilians
clearly constitutes deliberate reprisals and collective
punishment against a whole civilian population, in
serious breach of international humanitarian law.

We reiterate that a political solution through
dialogue and negotiations is the only alternative for the
conflict in Syria. The sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria should be safeguarded,
as well as the right of its people to self-determination
without any foreign intervention or interference of any
kind, including attempts to use the supposed protection
of human lives as a pretext for foreign intervention.
We cannot but reiterate the concern produced by the
loss of innocent lives as a result of the Syrian conflict,
and our condemnation of all acts of violence. Cuba
welcomes the successful conclusion of the operation for
the destruction and withdrawal from Syrian territory
of all chemical weapons under exceptionally difficult
conditions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Zimbabwe.
Mrs. Chikava (Zimbabwe): At the outset, as this is
the first time that I take the floor during your presidency
of the Security Council, let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency for
the month of July and for the able manner in which you
have conducted the business of the Council.

Zimbabwe is extremely outraged at the ongoing
bombardment, coupled with the ground invasion, against
densely populated civilian areas, which is causing
wanton destruction to vital civilian infrastructure and
disrupting all aspects of life in Gaza, where people are
already suffering under the illegal Israeli blockade.
Israeli Defense Forces actions in Gaza are
unjustifiable under any pretext. Zimbabwe calls
for an immediate halt to the violence. Israel should
respect international humanitarian law and ensure the
protection of civilians.
Zimbabwe expresses grave concern about the dire
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip caused by
widespread destruction and damage to civilian property.
There is an urgent need to assist the Palestinian people
through the provision of emergency aid and relief to
meet the needs of vulnerable civilians. We call on
the international community to provide emergency
assistance to alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian
people.
It is unacceptable that the Israeli military violates
the territorial integrity of Gaza and the human rights
of the Palestinian people, killing hundreds and injuring
thousands, while the Security Council fails to intervene
decisively. The Security Council must uphold its
Charter responsibilities and act to protect innocent
Palestinian civilians. The international community
must act in unison to stop Israel’s relentless acts of
collective punishment on the Palestinian people.
The ongoing injustice and culture of impunity by
Israel must stop. The Security Council must hold Israel
accountable for its actions and compel it to comply with
international law. The collective failure of the Security

14-4776863/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Council and the international community has fostered
Israeli’s flagrant violations of all Security Council
resolutions on the Arab-Israeli conflict. We also call on
Israel to stop the expansion of illegal settlements, to lift
the blockade on Gaza and to return to the negotiating
table.
We urge the Security Council to play a more active
role to encourage the resumption of peace talks aimed at
resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict in accordance with
the principles of international law and all the relevant
United Nations resolutions. Zimbabwe supports
negotiations towards a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East leading to the restoration of
the Palestinian people’s legitimate right to establish
an independent State co-existing peacefully with the
State of Israel. There is no option to peaceful dialogue
to achieve a two-State solution based on the June 1967
borders.
In conclusion, Zimbabwe reaffirms its unwavering
support and solidarity with the Palestinian people
in their quest to realize their inalienable rights and
legitimate national aspirations for freedom, justice,
dignity and peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand is deeply
concerned about the recent escalation of violence and
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza, in
a conflict that could and should have been avoided.
Yesterday, my Prime Minister, The Right Honourable
John Key, made a motion in the New Zealand
Parliament expressing that concern as well as grave
concern at the appalling and unacceptable number of
civilian casualties. The motion, which was adopted
unanimously, also gave strong support to international
efforts to obtain a ceasefire and to end hostilities so
that both parties could return to negotiations.
It is clear that the parties have fallen short of their
obligations to protect civilians, including through
indiscriminate firing into civilian populations. That
undermines basic precepts of acceptable international
behaviour. The rapidly escalating toll in death and
injury is, as my Prime Minister said, appalling and
unacceptable. There is an urgent need for immediate
steps to prevent further civilian casualties.
New Zealand urges all parties to take the necessary
measures to protect civilians, including through
further humanitarian pauses. There is also a need for
64/70

22/07/2014

broader measures to alleviate the ongoing humanitarian
situation on the ground. In particular, urgent assistance
is required for overwhelmed medical services and for the
unprecedented number of displaced civilians — people
who, in the words of my Prime Minister, have nowhere
to go — numbers that are already double those displaced
during the 2009 crisis and are still growing rapidly.
To provide that urgent assistance, New Zealand has
agreed, and will very shortly be advising of, a further
financial contribution to United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
thus responding to the Secretary-General’s statement
this morning urging that Member States do so.
Prime Minister Key said that New Zealand strongly
supported international efforts to obtain an immediate
ceasefire and joined the Council’s continuing call for
an end to hostilities, adding that New Zealand had been
“deeply disappointed that, to date, ceasefire initiatives
have failed”. We urge all parties to continue efforts to
de-escalate the situation.
The latest incidents reinforce the importance of a
sustainable resolution to the conflict between Israel
and the Palestinians. It should be clear to all now that a
continuation of the status quo is untenable. New Zealand
calls on both parties to return to the negotiating table
to work towards a meaningful and permanent two-State
solution. A credible political horizon is vital, including
a sustainable end to the blockade of Gaza.
The pattern of conflict has gone on too long, and the
cost to innocent civilians is just too high. The violence
only sows more seeds of resentment and revenge, which
will damage both sides and the wider international
community. We will reap the product of what is now
occurring in years to come.
In short, New Zealand endorses and supports
the Secretary-General’s plea this morning to stop the
fighting, start the dialogue and tackle the causes of this
conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, and the
representative of Israel and the observer of the Observer
State of Palestine for their statements.
We regret to note that, once again, the Gaza
Strip is the scene of an armed confrontation that has
caused many innocent victims among the civilian
14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

population. We support the current efforts undertaken
by the Secretary-General, who has travelled to the
region to obtain a cessation of hostilities. We support
and appreciate the mediation efforts of other actors,
especially Egypt and the United States, who have
travelled to the region in order to reach a ceasefire.
Mexico reiterates its grave concern at the
escalation of violence between Israel and Palestinian
armed groups in the Gaza Strip, and emphatically calls
on both parties to put an immediate end to all acts of
aggression and violence. We condemn the firing of
rockets and the use of force in the Gaza Strip, which has
caused more than 500 deaths, more than 3,000 injured
and thousands of displaced persons, primarily affecting
the civilian population, including women and children.
We are particularly concerned by evidence of attacks
on hospitals and civilian housing, which are contrary to
international humanitarian law.
We call on the parties to refrain from engaging in
hostile actions that affect the Palestinian and Israeli
populations, and demand that they respect the provisions
of international law and international humanitarian law,
in particular those relating to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The status quo is not acceptable. It
will only further exacerbate tensions and bring more
violence and confrontation, directly affecting the
civilian population and destabilizing the region.
Therefore, Mexico calls for compliance with
resolution 1860 (2009), which contains the elements
needed to address the factors that led to the current
conflict, specifically the embargo imposed on the people
who live in the Gaza Strip, which is unsustainable,
unacceptable and counterproductive. We reiterate the
need to resolve the underlying problem in the region
as quickly as possible, thereby guaranteeing the
rights of both Israel and Palestine to live in peace and
security within internationally recognized borders. In
that regard, we recognize the importance of promptly
renewing direct talks between the two sides.
We call on the Security Council to fully assume
its responsibilities and take all measures in its power
to bring about a cessation of hostilities and provide
humanitarian assistance and promote dialogue between
stakeholders in order to restore trust between Israel and
Palestine. Only then can a lasting peace be achieved in
the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.

S/PV.7222

Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this very important debate.
At the outset, I express my country’s deepest
condolences and profound sympathy for the
indescribable human tragedy and senseless deaths
among the civilian population in the Gaza Strip, most
of whom are innocent women, children and the elderly,
and the countless injured — all of whom are victims of
a collective punishment.
I would like to express Kazakhstan’s great
concern at the latest developments in the Gaza Strip,
where heavy, brutal air strikes and aggressive ground
operations by the Israeli army have resulted in the
deaths of more than 600 Palestinians, violating norms
of international human rights and humanitarian laws.
It is clearly evident that the persistence of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict continues to threaten regional and
international peace and security, mainly aggravated by
Israel. The rule of law has to be applied internationally,
and it is the duty of the Security Council to enforce
it and not fail in its obligations. In that context, we
support Cairo’s peace initiative as a framework to
end the violence, and the efforts of the international
community and the Secretary-General to broker a
ceasefire and resume peace talks.
We recognize the legitimate right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and their right to create
an independent State of Palestine within the 1967
borders, peacefully coexisting with Israel. We advocate
for the Observer State of Palestine to obtain fullfledged membership in the United Nations, and we
call on Israel to urgently end its illegal occupation and
stop expanding settlements and the illegal separation
wall — some of the key causes of the ongoing conflict.
We are convinced that Israel does not have the right
to use its force the way it does on whatever pretext.
We call on the Security Council to end this systematic
aggression.
We regret that the prospects for a ceasefire are
becoming bleak. The humanitarian situation in Gaza
has deteriorated drastically. The human toll on the
Palestinian side has increased dramatically, owing to
the asymmetrical and disproportionate war. We also
call for the lifting of the Israeli blockade on Gaza,
which imposes severe and unbearable limitations. As
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon himself pointed out,
this is an “atrocious action,” stressing that “Israel must
exercise maximum restraint and do far more to protect
civilians.”

14-4776865/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

22/07/2014

We support the call of all Member States for an
immediate ceasefire between the parties, a return to
negotiations, and for de-escalating tensions, providing
support for the grave humanitarian crisis and lifting
Israeli restrictions on the movement of persons and
goods into and out of Gaza.

its military superiority, when confronting an unarmed
civilian population that is destitute as a result of the
ongoing occupation and the asphyxiating blockade on
the Gaza Strip. The Arab Group vigorously condemns
the barbaric aggression and extreme violence against
civilians in the Gaza Strip.

We are equally concerned about the increasing
violence in Syria and the devastating humanitarian
consequences. We call for the de-escalation of
hostilities and the halting of aerial bombardment, and
for mobilizing cross-border aid operations for hard-toreach areas.

Israel has again topped itself. This is one of the
darkest pages in history, replete with violations of
human rights law and international humanitarian law
concerning civilians in armed conflict. Israel has
outdone itself in carrying out ever more horrendous
actions and escalating its military operations to a new
level, as evidenced by the ground incursion subsequent
to the air bombardments and the targeting of Palestinian
beaches in the framework of its collective reprisals
against the civilians under occupation. The result can be
seen in the growing number of civilian victims — over
600, most of them women and children . Thousands
have been wounded; tens of thousands have lost their
homes, according to reports of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The crowning
glory of this activity was the murderous action carried
out in the Shujaiya neighbourhood, All these actions
are war crimes.

The various tensions elsewhere in the Middle East
are destabilizing the region. We therefore urgently call
on all parties to commit their political will to ensuring
lasting peace and security, freedom and justice for all
people through a genuine multilateral approach.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. AlAjmi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the Arab Group, I congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumpton of the presidency of the Security
Council. We are convinced that your wisdom and
professionalism will enable you to manage the Council
during this month with success. We would also like to
congratulate your predecessor on his on his presidency
last month.
We find ourselves gathered together again during
this now regular meeting on the ageanda item “The
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question”. However, this time it is taking place in
humanitarian circumstances that are far from routine.
That reminds us of the tragic Israeli aggression against
the Gaza Strip at the end of 2009, which remains
quite present in our collective memory. The blood of
innocent victims, men, women, children, continues to
flow. And the anguished cries persist of mothers who
have lost children, the cries of pain of the injured, the
despair of those who have been displaced, who have
lost their shelters, their homes, all as a result of the
Israeli bombardment.
Now we are again facing another episode of
bloodthirsty and ever more aggressive Israeli collective
punishment. Its bombardments resemble a sea of lava
that cannot discriminate among an elderly woman
baking bread, an elderly man praying or a student
studying his lessons. The deadly Israeli machine is
always proud to demonstrate its superiority, especially

66/70

We now find ourselves on the very brink of a
humanitarian disaster as Israel pursues its nihilistic
policy aimed at undermining all of the basic rights of
the Palestinian people by rejecting the peace process;
shattering the dreams of a people who have been
deprived of the right to create a State within the 4 June
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital; and
ignoring all peace proposals, including the Arab Peace
Initiative.
That is why the Arab Group has turned to the
international community, represented by the Security
Council, to request that it assume its responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations. As the Council
is the guarantor and bulwark of the maintenance of
international peace and security, it is requested, first, to
push Israel to immediately and unconditionally put an
end to its military aggression against the Gaza Strip and
guarantee that such actions will never happen again,
and force Israel to fully bear its legal responsibility for
the damage caused by its barbaric aggression.
Second, the Council must condemn the racist actions
of the Israeli occupation authorities and Israeli settlers
against the Palestinians and their assets, including
places of worship, and the violations of human rights
and provisions of the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention
on the protection of civilians in times of war.
14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Third, it must work to lift the illegal blockade
imposed on the Gaza Strip and guarantee the opening
of the crossing points to ensure access to humanitarian
assistance.
Fourth, it must back Egypt’s initiative of 14 June
calling for a ceasefire and requesting all relevant players
to abide by it and guarantee all underlying conditions.
Fifth, it must place the Palestinian territories under
international protection to ensure Palestine’s enjoyment
of its territorial integrity and legitimate sovereignty.
Sixth, it must call upon Israel to unconditionally
release all Palestinian prisoners held since the
beginning of the current aggression, especially those
under administrative detention without charge, which
clearly contravenes existing law.
Seventh, it must provide the necessary assistance to
the Palestinian State to ensure its capacity to meet the
urgent needs of the Palestinian people and to rebuild
the Gaza Strip.
In conclusion, the Arab Group reaffirms its
commitment to and solidarity with the Lebanese
Republic and its support for its territorial integrity
and security. We demand that Israel end its repeated
violations of Lebanese territory and air space,
completely withdraw from the occupied Lebanese
territories and respect the provisions of resolution 1701
(2006).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): My delegation
wishes to thank you, Sir, for convening this important
open debate on the situation in the Middle East. We
thank His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his comprehensive briefing. Viet Nam highly
appreciates his efforts to reduce tensions in the area.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
As we meet today, hundreds of Palestinians, many
of them women and children, have been killed in the
latest indiscriminate attacks against the population of
Gaza. Thousands of people have been displaced, years
of social and economic gains have again been undone,
and hope for peace in the region has once again been
shattered. Viet Nam is extremely concerned over
the escalation of violence and strongly deplores the

S/PV.7222

unacceptable level of civilian casualties. We endorse
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s remarks on the
atrocious action in Gaza and join him and others in
calling on Israel to cease the violence against and take
action to protect the Palestinian civilians.
We call for an immediate ceasefire, an end to
the violence against civilians and a resumption of
negotiations between the parties concerned. We call
for intensified efforts by the international community,
in particular the Security Council and the Quartet,
to achieve such a ceasefire and address the current
political and humanitarian crisis, including the
facilitation of humanitarian relief in Gaza. We extend
our full support to those and any other efforts of the
international community aimed at bringing peace and
stability to the region.
The cycle of violence has plagued and will continue
to plague the region unless a just and peaceful solution
is found to the almost seven-decade-long Palestinian
question, as well as to the broader conflict in the
Middle East. In that regard, Viet Nam supports efforts
towards the peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict on the basis of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, including
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map, with a view to achieving
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution that will
ensure the legitimate interests of all parties concerned.
Urgent and decisive actions are now needed to resume
direct talks between Israel and Palestine and the
broader Middle East peace process. Viet Nam once
again reaffirms its principled support for the two-State
solution, including the establishment of an independent
and sovereign State of Palestine existing in peace with
the State of Israel.
While such a resolution to the Palestine-Israel
conflict would have a profound impact on the Middle
East, peace in the region also requires forward movement
on the other crises. We are deeply troubled by the recent
rise of violence in Iraq and support the efforts of the
international community and the Iraqi Government to
restore stability and secure the country’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity in the interests of peace and
stability in the region. We are also concerned about the
situation in Syria, and call on all parties to refrain from
the use of force and to settle disputes through peaceful
negotiations to bring stability to Syria and avoid any
civilian casualties.

14-4776867/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

22/07/2014

Peace in the Middle East can be achieved only
if Palestinians are guaranteed a better life and their
fundamental rights, including the sacred right to selfdetermination and the establishment of an independent
and sovereign State. We also share the SecretaryGeneral’s view that both Palestinians and Israelis
need to feel a sense of security and to see a horizon of
hope. The root causes of the conflict must therefore be
addressed. The only way to do that is through peaceful
negotiations.

For the third time in the past six years, we have
seen hostilities in the Gaza Strip. It is therefore
essential to put a permanent end to the recurring cycle
of that bloody conflict. My delegation believes that the
international community, including actors with greater
influence over the parties, should support the pursuit
of a lasting peace on the basis of full compliance with
the Madrid principles, the Quartet road map and the
other agreements and full respect for international law,
including the Security Council resolutions on the issue.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jamaica.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to welcome the convening of
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. We also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing on the
reality on the ground and for his good offices in the
region.

Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this important open debate today.
Jamaica is deeply concerned about the escalating crisis
in Gaza, which has resulted in rising civilian casualties,
claiming the lives of more than 600 Palestinians and
injuring in excess of 3,700 people, many of whom are
women and children.

My country is following very closely the current
situation in the Gaza Strip. We have expressed our
concern about the escalating violence and our strong
condemnation of the ground incursion by the Israeli
army into the Gaza Strip, which further aggravates the
situation on the ground, and of the firing of rockets into
Israel. We therefore demand the immediate withdrawal
of Israeli troops from the Gaza Strip and the immediate
cessation of rocket fire against Israel.

We strongly condemn the targeting of civilian
populations, which constitutes a blatant violation of
international humanitarian law. While acknowledging
that Israel has legitimate security concerns and
recognizing its right to self-defence, we are dismayed
at the disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force
against an unarmed civilian population that has limited
options for shelter. We also condemn the actions of
Hamas and call for an urgent end to its ongoing rocket
attacks on Israeli cities and population centres.

Peru condemns the attacks on densely populated
urban areas and the disproportionate use of military
force. We therefore reiterate our call for the full respect
of human rights and international humanitarian law
and for immediate measures to protect the civilian
population, ensuring medical care for victims and the
opening of border crossings to facilitate the evacuation
of the civilian population.
Peru reiterates its call for the immediate cessation
of hostilities. To that end, we support the efforts of
the Secretary-General and the other initiatives, such
as those of Egypt, to achieve a ceasefire. We also
agree with the statements of those who spoke before
me that point out the need to address the root causes
of the conflict. That requires the resumption of direct
negotiations between the parties to achieve a viable and
lasting solution that puts an end to the status quo and
enables the Palestinians and Israelis to live in peace
within two States with secure and internationally
recognized borders.

68/70

The Security Council and the wider international
community cannot remain a bystander to those tragic
events. The focus of the international community must
be on brokering an immediate cessation of hostilities,
even as we redouble our efforts to bring humanitarian
relief to those thousands under siege within the dense
confines of the Gaza Strip. We cannot turn a blind
eye to the unfolding and mounting humanitarian
catastrophe. We call on the international community
to respond to the appeal made by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East for $115 million to be mobilized in order to
meet the urgent humanitarian needs of the people of
Gaza for food, water, medicine and sanitation services.
The generous contribution of $47 million by the United
States is most welcome.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s visit to
the region and greatly appreciate the briefing from
Ramallah that he provided this morning, in which

14-47768

22/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

he outlined the intense discussions in which he is
currently engaged. Those discussions are geared
towards a cessation of the fighting, the commencement
of dialogue and tackling the root causes of the crisis.
Jamaica believes that the cycle of violence will
continue in the absence of a negotiated political
settlement on the basis of a two-State solution. We
remain committed to a just, lasting and comprehensive
agreement that recognizes the Palestinian State within
the pre-1967 borders and guarantees the security of
Israel. Achieving such a solution must be based on the
implementation of confidence-building measures by
both sides.
We have a collective responsibility to address those
deep-rooted problems, which is the only pathway to
achieving sustainable peace and security in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your leadership
and your work as President of the Security Council
during this particularly busy month. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing this
morning.
When Guatemala took its seat on the Council in
January 2012, the shadows of the emerging conflict in
Syria and the long-standing tensions between Israel and
the Palestinian Authority were somewhat eased by the
hope sown in the region by the so-called Arab Spring.
Although we remain confident that the legitimate
demands of the peoples will ultimately produce results,
for now there is only despair. Every week, the violence
escalates, divisions increase and the humanitarian
disaster grows. Our grief only increases with the
addition of the recent events in the Gaza Strip to the
situation in Syria, the situation in Iraq, its impact on
neighbouring countries, such as Lebanon and Jordan,
and the sudden rise in the activities of jihadists from
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
Despite what I have just said, Guatemala remains
steadfast in maintaining that diplomacy and dialogue
are the best way to achieve a long-term solution in each
of the conflicts that undermines the Middle East. While
the extent of the current intransigence and hostilities
could suggest that it is naive, we continue to believe
that political solutions to the disputes that have divided
the region for years are the only way to achieve lasting

S/PV.7222

stability and the possibility of returning to the path of
progress.
For example, what is on everyone’s mind, for the
central role it plays in the region, is the escalating
violence in Israel and the Gaza Strip. Again the civilian
population is threatened; once again we are faced
with clashing narratives with regard to the origin of
violence. While the recriminations cross and shares of
responsibility are assigned, that which it is found, with
amazement and horror, is the high cost that events have
left, especially for the defenceless Palestinian civilian
population. Not only do we deeply deplore the material
and human losses occurred, but we are convinced that
such actions will bring about a further escalation of the
conflict, together with unpredictable consequences for
both parties.
In that context, we join our voice to the urgent
calls from various sectors for an immediate cessation
of all acts of violence and reiterate that the only lasting
solution must be sought in a negotiation on the basis
of two States, Israel and Palestine, living in peace and
under secure borders.
We are aware of the enormous challenges that
a political solution may entail for the parties, both
nationally and internationally. However, we insist that
it is the only way left. Continuing along the present
course will only deepen divisions, preventing the
desired goal of peace.
The President: The representative of Israel has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): Throughout the course of
today, a number of Member States have used their time
before the Security Council to criticize Israel. In truth,
they deserve the criticism. They sit in this Chamber
and pour out their rage and grief, when in fact many
of those same nations are responsible for much of the
conflict inflaming the Middle East.
I am glad to see that the representative of Lebanon
has shown such an interest in Palestinian rights.
However, before speaking about Israel in this Chamber,
might I suggest that she take a look at the refugee camps
throughout Lebanon, where Palestinians are kept in
some of the worst conditions in the region? They are
constantly subject to violence, extreme discrimination
and economic and social oppression.
Earlier today, we heard from the odd couple of the
United Nations — Iran and Saudi Arabia. Back home

14-4776869/70

S/PV.7222

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

they are fighting a proxy war in Syria, responsible for
the killing of 150,000 Syrians, but here at the United
Nations they could not be closer. They have one thing in
common — both are cradles of terrorism and radicalism
in the Middle East, one created Hizbullah and the other
created Al-Qaida.
Iran and Qatar have also teamed up to arm and
finance Hamas. Every rocket flying out into Israel
could bear the imprint “Courtesy of Tehran”, while
every terror tunnel could have a sign that reads “Made
possible through a kind donation from the Amir of
Qatar”.
If it were not enough that they enabled the building
of an underground terror network, those nations sit
here in the Council and deliver remarks that have no
grounding in reality. In his remarks, the representative
of Iran actually used the term “compliance” and called
for the implementation of United Nations resolutions.
Given that it is the world’s primary sponsor of terrorism,
that it now has six nuclear weapons in clear violation of
Security Council resolutions, and that it is smuggling
arms into Gaza in clear violation of Security Council
resolutions, I was not aware that Iran was actually
familiar with the term “compliance”.
Finally, in that list of Member States, Egypt
also had a lot to say about human rights. Given that
it sentenced 683 Egyptians to death in a single day,
instead of calling for divestments Egypt’s time would

22/07/2014

be better spent making investments in its own people.
Come to think of it, the same goes for all repressive
Arab nations and the countries of the Non-Aligned
Movement here in this Chamber — Cuba, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela — great democracies — the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea — that brutally
and mercilessly suppress the rights of their people. It is
time to end the hypocrisy.
Once again, this war in Gaza is not one we chose. It
was our last resort. It was imposed on us by Hamas, by
its brutal attacks on our civilians. Israel did not want this
war, and three times — three different times — Israel
agreed to accept a ceasefire, and every single time
Hamas refused and launched even more rockets. Each
of those rockets sends a clear, loud message — Hamas
is determined to wage war.
As we have said before, Israel has no interest in
being in Gaza. We are fighting in Gaza, but we are not
fighting the people of Gaza. The equation, once again,
is very simple. When it is quiet in Israel, it will be quiet
in Gaza. The goal of our operation is to eliminate the
rockets, shut down the terror tunnels and demilitarize
Gaza in order to restore sustained quiet for the people
of Israel and the people of Gaza.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

70/70

14-47768
