S/PRST/2010/25

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 November 2010
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6427th meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 November 2010, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Protection of
civilians in armed conflict”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment regarding the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, to the continuing and full implementation, in a
mutually-reinforcing manner of all previous relevant resolutions and
statements of its president including resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296 (2000),
1325 (2000), 1612 (2005), 1674(2006), 1738 (2006), 1820 (2008), 1882 (2009)
1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) 1894 (2009), noting in particular that resolution
1894 marked a significant step in providing guidance to ensure the effective
protection of civilians on the ground.
“The Security Council takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians of 11 November 2010
(S/2010/579) and the recommendations contained therein.
“The Security Council recalls that on 15 March 2002 an Aide Memoire
was adopted, as a practical tool that provides a basis for improved analysis and
diagnosis of key protection issues. The Security Council adopts the updated
aide memoire contained in the annex to this Statement of its President and
stresses the need to continue its use on a more systematic and consistent basis.
“The Security Council recognizes that States bear the primary
responsibility to respect and ensure the human rights of all individuals within
their territory and subject to their jurisdiction as provided for by relevant
international law.
“The Security Council reaffirms that parties to armed conflict bear the
primary responsibility to take all feasible steps to ensure the protection of
affected civilians and urges parties to armed conflict to meet their basic needs,
and give attention to the specific needs of women and children, refugees,
internally displaced persons, as well as other civilians who may have specific
vulnerabilities including persons with disabilities and older persons.
“The Security Council emphasizes that the promotion of peace processes
and the achievement of sustainable peace and development as well as respect
for human rights and the rule of law are of utmost importance for the long term
protection of civilians.
10-64655 (E) 221110

*1064655*

S/PRST/2010/25

“The Security Council remains committed to addressing the impact of
armed conflict on civilians, in particular women and children. The Council
expresses its deep regret that civilians continue to account for the vast majority
of casualties in situations of armed conflict, including as a result of deliberate
targeting, indiscriminate or disproportionate attacks and sexual and gender
based violence, as well as other acts that violate applicable international law.
The Council demands that all relevant parties immediately put an end to such
practices and reaffirms its readiness to adopt appropriate measures.
“The Security Council notes with concern the humanitarian impact of
conflict, in or near densely populated areas, and calls on parties to armed
conflict to give protection to the civilian population in accordance with
applicable international humanitarian law.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong condemnation of all violations
of applicable international law and demands that parties to armed conflict
comply strictly with the obligations applicable to them under international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, as well as to implement all
relevant decisions of the Security Council. The Security Council emphasizes in
this context the responsibility of States to comply with their relevant
obligations to end impunity and notes that the fight against impunity for the
most serious crimes of international concern has been strengthened through
prosecution of these crimes in national, international and “mixed” criminal
courts and tribunals, commissions of inquiry as well as specialized chambers
in national tribunals. The Council takes note of the stocktaking of international
criminal justice undertaken by the first Review Conference of the Rome
Statute held in Kampala, Uganda from 31 May to 11 June 2010. The Security
Council also draws attention to the full range of justice and reconciliation
mechanisms, including truth and reconciliation commissions, national
reparation programmes and institutional reforms.
“The Security Council recognises the needs of civilians under foreign
occupation and stresses further, in this regard, the responsibilities of the
occupying power in full compliance with international humanitarian law.
“The Council reiterates the importance for all, within the framework of
humanitarian assistance, of upholding and respecting the humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. The Security
Council condemns and calls for the cessation of all acts of violence and other
forms of intimidation deliberately directed at humanitarian personnel as such
and calls on all parties to conflict to comply with the obligations applicable to
them under international humanitarian law to respect and protect humanitarian
personnel and relief consignments. The Council underlines in this respect the
importance to continue the systematic monitoring and analysis of constraints
on humanitarian access.
“The Security Council stresses the importance of achieving durable
solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons, in particular their
voluntary, safe and dignified return, or local integration or resettlement.
“The Security Council welcomes the proposals, conclusions and
recommendations on the protection of civilians included in the report of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (A/64/19). The Council

2

10-64655

S/PRST/2010/25

stresses the importance of ensuring engagement by senior mission leadership
on the protection of civilians, with a view to ensuring that all mission
components and all levels of the chain of command are properly informed of
and involved in the mission’s protection mandate and their relevant
responsibilities. The Council welcomes progress made by the SecretaryGeneral in elaborating a conceptual framework, outlining resource and
capability requirements and developing operational tools for the
implementation of protection of civilians mandates. The Council emphasises
the importance of improving pre-deployment training for peacekeeping
personnel on the protection of civilians. The Council encourages troop and
police contributing countries to make full use of and provide feedback on these
important materials.
“The Security Council underlines that, in order to carry out their
mandate, missions must communicate effectively with local communities and
have the capacity to do so. The Council underlines, in this context, the
importance of taking into account gender sensitivities and of making full use
of all the tools available to the mission, in particular its Public Information and
Civil Affairs components, such as civil affairs officers, community liaison
interpreters, and radio.
“The Security Council reaffirms its practice of requiring benchmarks to
measure and review progress made in the implementation of peacekeeping
mandates, underlines the importance of clear benchmarks in the context of
drawdown in peacekeeping missions, and stresses the importance of including
indicators of progress regarding the protection of civilians in such benchmarks
for relevant missions.
“The Security Council recognises the need for systematic monitoring and
reporting on progress to protect civilians in armed conflict. The Security
Council further reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to develop
guidance for peacekeeping and other relevant missions on the reporting of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. The Security Council reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to include in his reports on country-specific
situations more comprehensive and detailed information relating to protection
of civilians in armed conflict.
“The Security Council notes the practice of briefings to Security Council
members by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on behalf
of the United Nations humanitarian community.
“The Security Council takes note of the Montreux Document on pertinent
international legal obligations and good practices for States related to
operations of private military and security companies during armed conflict.
“The Security Council emphasizes that all civilians affected by armed
conflict, including those suffering losses as a result of lawful acts under
international law, deserve assistance and recognition in respect of their
inherent dignity as human beings.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to submit his next
report on the protection of civilians by May 2012.”

10-64655

3

S/PRST/2010/25

Annex
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Aide Memoire
For the consideration of issues pertaining to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
Enhancing the protection of civilians in armed conflict is at the core of the
work of the United Nations Security Council for the maintenance of peace and
security. In order to facilitate the Council’s consideration of protection of civilians
concerns in a given context, including at the time of the establishment or renewal of
peacekeeping mandates, in June 2001 Council Members suggested that an Aide
Memoire, listing the relevant issues, be drafted in cooperation with the Council
(S/2001/614). On 15 March 2002, the Council adopted the Aide Memoire as a
practical guide for its consideration of protection of civilians issues and agreed to
review and update its contents periodically (S/PRST/2002/6). It was subsequently
updated and adopted as an annex to Presidential Statement S/PRST/2003/27 on
15 December 2003.
This is the fourth edition of the Aide Memoire and is based on the Council’s
previous deliberations on the protection of civilians, including resolutions 1265
(1999), 1296 (2000), 1674 (2006), 1738 (2006) and 1894 (2009). It is the result of
consultation between the Security Council and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), as well as between OCHA and concerned United
Nations departments and agencies, and other relevant humanitarian organisations.
The Aide Memoire is intended to facilitate the Security Council’s
consideration of issues relevant to the protection of civilians in armed conflict. To
this end, it highlights primary objectives for Security Council action; offers, on the
basis of the Security Council’s past practice, specific issues for consideration in
meeting those objectives; and provides, in the addendum, a selection of agreed
language from Security Council resolutions and presidential statements that refer to
such concerns.
Bearing in mind that each peacekeeping mandate has to be elaborated on a
case-by-case basis, the Aide Memoire is not intended as a blueprint for action. The
relevance and practicality of the various measures described has to be considered
and adapted to the specific conditions in each situation.
Most frequently civilians are caught in circumstances of dire need where a
peacekeeping operation has not been established. Such situations may require the
Council’s urgent attention. This Aide Memoire may, therefore, also provide
guidance in circumstances where the Council may wish to consider action outside
the scope of a peacekeeping operation.

10-64655

1

S/PRST/2010/25

I. General protection concerns pertaining to the conflictaffected population
A.

Protection of, and assistance to, the conflict-affected population
Parties to armed conflict to take the necessary measures to protect and meet
the basic needs of the conflict-affected population.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Stress the responsibility of parties to armed conflict to respect, protect and
meet the basic needs of civilian populations within their effective control.
¾ Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, acts of violence or
abuses committed against civilians in situations of armed conflict in
violation of applicable international humanitarian law and human rights
law.
¾ Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law, including with regard to:

▪ The prohibition against violence to life and person, in particular
murder, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture; enforced
disappearances; outrages upon personal dignity; rape, sexual slavery,
enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, and any
other form of sexual violence.

▪ The prohibition against arbitrary deprivation of liberty; corporal
punishment; collective punishment; and the passing of sentences and
the carrying out of executions without previous judgment pronounced
by a regularly constituted court, affording all judicial guarantees which
are generally recognized as indispensable.

▪ The prohibition against taking of hostages.
▪ The prohibition against ordering the displacement of the civilian
population for reasons related to the conflict, unless the security of the
civilians involved or imperative military reasons so demand.

▪ The prohibition against the recruitment or the active use of children in
hostilities by parties to armed conflict in violation of applicable
international law.

▪ The prohibition against slavery and the slave trade in all their forms
and uncompensated or abusive forced labour.

▪ The prohibition against wilfully impeding relief supplies as provided
for under international humanitarian law.

▪ The prohibition of persecution on political, religious, racial or gender
grounds.

▪ The prohibition of any adverse distinction in the application of
international humanitarian law and human rights law based on race,
colour, sex, language, religion or belief, political or other opinion,
national or social origin, wealth, birth or other status.

2

10-64655

S/PRST/2010/25

▪ The obligation to respect and protect, to whichever party they belong,
the wounded and sick, to take all possible measures, particularly after
an engagement, to search for and collect the wounded and sick and to
provide, to the fullest extent practicable and with the least possible
delay, the medical care and attention required by their condition
without distinction on any grounds other than medical ones.
¾ Call on all parties to ensure access for relevant organizations, as applicable,
to all prisons and places of detention.
¾ Mandate United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council, where appropriate and on a case-bycase basis, to contribute to the protection of the civilian population,
particularly those under imminent threat of physical violence, within their
zones of operation. In doing so, request:

▪ That the protection of civilians is prioritized in decisions about the use
of available capacity and resources, including information and
intelligence resources, in the implementation of mandates.

▪ The development of clear guidelines/directives as to what missions can
do to protect civilians, including practical protection measures such as
intensified and systematic patrolling in potential volatile areas, joint
protection teams or early warning cells.

▪ Systematic coordination, between the civil and military components of
the mission and with humanitarian actors, in order to consolidate
expertise on the protection of civilians.

▪ That missions communicate with the civilian population to raise
awareness and understanding about their mandate and activities and to
collect reliable information on violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights abuses perpetrated against civilians.
¾ Request that United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
develop comprehensive protection strategies in consultation with United
Nations country teams and other relevant actors.
¾ Request that reports of the Secretary-General on country specific situations
include information on the protection of civilians.
¾ Request that United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
develop benchmarks and indicators of progress regarding the protection of
civilians to measure. specific developments in the implementation of their
protection mandates.
¾ Request troop- and police-contributing countries to ensure the provision of
appropriate training to heighten the awareness and responsiveness to
protection concerns of their personnel participating in United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the Security
Council to protect civilians.
¾ Urge relevant regional and/or subregional bodies to develop and implement
policies, activities, and advocacy for the benefit of civilians affected by
armed conflict.

10-64655

3

S/PRST/2010/25

B.

Displacement
Parties to armed conflict and other relevant actors refrain from, and take the
necessary measures to prevent and respond to, the displacement of the
civilian population.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, displacement in violation
of applicable international humanitarian law and human rights law.
¾ Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law, including
with regard to:

▪ The prohibition against deportation, forcible transfer or displacement
of the civilian population, in whole or in part, unless the security of the
civilians concerned or imperative military reasons so demand.

▪ The obligation, in case of displacement, to ensure to the greatest
practicable extent that the civilians concerned are received under
satisfactory conditions of shelter, hygiene, health, safety and nutrition
and that members of the same family are not separated and that basic
needs are met during displacement.

▪ The right to freedom of movement and to leave one’s country and seek
asylum.

▪ The right to non-refoulement under the Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees, the protection of which does not extend to any
person with respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering
that she or he has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations.
¾ Underline the primary responsibility of States to respect and maintain the
security and civilian character of camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons, including disarming armed elements, separating
combatants, curbing the flow of small arms in camps and preventing
recruitment by armed groups in and around camps.
¾ Mandate peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the
Security Council to take all feasible measures to ensure security in and
around such camps and for their inhabitants.
¾ Request that reports of the Secretary-General on country-specific situations
include the protection of displaced persons as a specific aspect of the report.
¾ Urge relevant regional and/or subregional bodies to develop and implement
policies, activities, and advocacy for the benefit of internally displaced
persons and refugees.

4

10-64655

S/PRST/2010/25

Durable solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons, including safe,
voluntary and dignified return and reintegration.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law, refugee law and human rights law,
including with regard to:

▪ Respect for the right of refugees and displaced persons to voluntary
return in safety and dignity to their homes.

▪ Respect for the property rights of refugees and displaced persons,
without adverse distinction on the basis of gender, age or other status.
¾ Stress in relevant resolutions the importance of achieving durable solutions
for refugees and displaced persons, including voluntary, safe and dignified
return, and of ensuring their full participation in the planning and
management of these solutions. Call upon all parties concerned to create the
conditions conducive to allowing the voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable return, local integration or resettlement of refugees and
displaced persons.
¾ Call upon all parties concerned to ensure non-discriminatory treatment of
returning refugees and internally displaced persons.
¾ Call upon all parties concerned to ensure the participation of refugees and
internally displaced persons and inclusion of their needs, including their
right to voluntary, safe and dignified return and reintegration, in all peace
processes, peace agreements and post-conflict recovery and reconstruction
planning and programs.
¾ Encourage United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council, as appropriate and on a case-by-case
basis, to support domestic mechanisms for addressing housing, land and
property issues or their establishment by national authorities.
¾ Encourage United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council, as appropriate and on a case-by-case
basis, to prevent the illegal appropriation and confiscation of land and
property belonging to refugees and internally displaced persons and to
ensure the protection of returning refugees and internally displaced persons.

C.

Humanitarian access and safety and security of
humanitarian workers
Parties to armed conflict to agree to and facilitate relief operations that are
humanitarian and impartial in character and to allow and facilitate rapid and
unimpeded passage of relief consignments, equipment and personnel.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Condemn, and call for the immediate removal of, impediments of
humanitarian access in violation of applicable international humanitarian
law.

10-64655

5

S/PRST/2010/25

¾ Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law, including:

▪ The prohibition against using starvation of civilians as a method of
warfare by depriving them of objects indispensable to their survival,
including wilfully impeding relief supplies as provided for under
applicable international humanitarian law.

▪ Agreeing to relief actions which are humanitarian and impartial in
character and conducted without any adverse distinction.
¾ Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict and third States with
their obligations under applicable international humanitarian law to allow
and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of relief consignments,
equipment and personnel subject to their right to prescribe technical
arrangements, including search, under which such passage is permitted.
¾ Mandate United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council, where appropriate and as requested, to
facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance.
Parties to armed conflict to respect and protect humanitarian workers
and facilities.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, attacks deliberately
targeting humanitarian workers.
¾ Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law, including the duty to respect and protect
relief personnel and installations, material, units and vehicles involved in
humanitarian assistance.
¾ Mandate peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the
Security Council to contribute, as requested and within capabilities, to the
creation of the necessary security conditions for the provision of
humanitarian assistance.
¾ Encourage the Secretary-General to bring to the attention of the Security
Council situations in which humanitarian assistance is denied as a
consequence of violence directed against humanitarian personnel and
facilities.
¾ Request that States include key provisions of the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel and its Optional Protocol, such
as those regarding the prevention of attacks against members of United
Nations operations, the criminalisation of such attacks and the prosecution
or extradition of offenders, in future as well as, if necessary, in existing
status-of-forces, status-of-mission and host country agreements negotiated
with the United Nations.

6

10-64655

S/PRST/2010/25

D.

Conduct of hostilities
Parties to armed conflict to take all feasible precautions to spare civilians from
the effects of hostilities.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, all acts of violence or
abuses committed against civilians in violation of applicable international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
¾ Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law, including the prohibitions against:

▪ Directing attacks against the civilian population or against individual
civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

▪ Directing attacks against civilian objects;
▪ Launching an attack that is indiscriminate, i.e., of a nature to strike
military objectives and civilians or civilian objects without distinction;

▪ Launching an attack which may be expected to cause incidental loss of
life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or a
combination thereof which would be excessive in relation to the
concrete and direct military advantage anticipated;

▪ Directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or
vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping
mission in accordance with the United Nations Charter, as long as they
are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under
international humanitarian law;

▪ Utilizing the presence of a civilian or other protected person to render
certain points, areas or military forces immune from military
operations;

▪ Rape and other forms of sexual violence;
▪ Directing attacks against buildings dedicated to religion, education, art,
science or charitable purposes, historic monuments, hospitals and
places where the sick and wounded are collected, provided they are not
military objectives;

▪ Directing attacks against buildings, material, medical units and
transport, and personnel using the distinctive emblems of the Geneva
Conventions in conformity with international law;

▪ Destroying or seizing the property of the adversary unless required by
military necessity;

▪ Using starvation of civilians as a method of warfare by depriving them
of objects indispensable to their survival, including wilfully impeding
relief supplies as provided for under applicable international
humanitarian law.

10-64655

7

S/PRST/2010/25

¾ Request regular reporting by United Nations peacekeeping and other
relevant missions authorized by the Security Council on concrete steps
taken to ensure the protection of the civilian population in the conduct of
hostilities and on measures to ensure accountability for violations of
applicable international humanitarian law.

E.

Small arms and light weapons, mines and explosive remnants
of war
Protection of the civilian population through the control of, and reduction in
the availability of, illicit small arms and light weapons.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Express concern at the detrimental impact of the proliferation of arms, in
particular small arms, on the security of civilians by fuelling armed conflict,
and request the mission to monitor the presence of arms among the civilian
population.
¾ Request States and regional and subregional organizations to adopt
measures to curb and reduce the illicit trafficking of small arms and light
weapons such as voluntary collection and destruction; effective stockpile
management; arms embargoes; sanctions; and legal measures against
corporate actors, individuals and entities involved in such activities.
¾ Encourage strengthened practical cooperation between United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the Security
Council aimed at monitoring and preventing the cross-border movement of
small arms and light weapons.
¾ Mandate United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council to collect and dispose of or secure illicit
and/or surplus small arms and light weapons as well as surplus ammunition
stockpiles.
¾ Consider imposing arms embargoes and other measures aimed at preventing
the sale or supply of arms and related materiel of all types to parties to
armed conflict that commit violations of applicable international law.
¾ Encourage strengthened practical cooperation among relevant sanctions
monitoring groups of the Security Council, peacekeeping and other relevant
missions authorized by the Security Council and States.
¾ Request the establishment of a baseline arms inventory as well as arms
marking and registration systems in situations where a United Nations arms
embargo coincides with disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
efforts.

8

10-64655

S/PRST/2010/25

Protection of the civilian population through the marking, clearance, removal
or destruction of mines and explosive remnants of war (ERW), including cluster
munition remnants.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Call on parties to armed conflict, after the cessation of active hostilities and
as soon as feasible, to mark, clear, remove or destroy mines and ERW in
affected territories under their control, prioritizing areas affected by mines
and ERW which are assessed to pose serious humanitarian risk.
¾ Call on parties to armed conflict to record and retain information on the use
of mines and explosive ordnance or the abandonment of explosive
ordnance, to facilitate rapid marking and clearance, removal or destruction
of mines and ERW and risk education, and to provide the relevant
information to the party in control of, and civilian populations in, the
territory.
¾ Call on parties to armed conflict to take all feasible precautions in the
territory under their control affected by mines and ERW to protect the
civilian population, in particular children, including issuing warnings,
undertaking risk education, marking, fencing and monitoring of territory
affected by mines and ERW.
¾ Call on parties to armed conflict to protect United Nations peacekeeping
and other relevant missions authorized by the Security Council, as well as
humanitarian organizations, from the effects of mines and ERW and to
make available information on the location of mines and ERW that they are
aware of in the territory where the mission/organizations are or will be
operating.
¾ Call on parties to armed conflict, States and other relevant actors to provide
technical, financial, material or human resources assistance to facilitate the
marking, clearance, removal or destruction of mines and ERW.
¾ Call on parties to armed conflict, States and other relevant actors to provide
assistance for the care, rehabilitation and economic and social reintegration
of victims of ERW and their families and communities.

F.

Compliance, accountability and the rule of law
Compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Call on parties to armed conflict to take appropriate measures to respect and
ensure respect for international humanitarian law and human rights law,
including by:

▪ Enforcing appropriate military disciplinary measures and upholding the
principle of command responsibility.

▪ Training troops on applicable international humanitarian law and
human rights law.

10-64655

9

S/PRST/2010/25

▪ Vetting armed and security forces to ensure that personnel have a
reliably attested record of not having been involved in violations of
international humanitarian law or human rights law.
¾ Consider applying targeted and graduated measures against parties to armed
conflict that commit violations of applicable international humanitarian law
and human rights law.
¾ Stress that the support of United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant
missions to military operations led by national armed forces is strictly
conditioned on the compliance of those armed forces with international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and on joint planning of such
operations.
¾ Call upon United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions to
intercede with national armed forces if elements of the latter, receiving
support from the mission are suspected of committing violations of
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and, if the
situation persists, to withdraw the mission’s support.
¾ Request the mission to provide military training, including in the area of
human rights, international humanitarian law, child protection and the
prevention of gender-based and sexual violence, to the armed forces.
Accountability for persons suspected of genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes or serious violations of human rights law.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Stress the importance of ending impunity for criminal violations of
applicable international humanitarian law and human rights law as part of a
comprehensive approach to seeking sustainable peace, justice, truth, and
national reconciliation.
¾ Call on States to comply with their obligations to investigate, search for,
prosecute or extradite persons suspected of committing genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity or other serious violations of human rights
law.
¾ Stress the need for the exclusion of, and reject any form of, or endorsement
of, amnesty for genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes or other
serious violations of human rights in conflict resolution processes and
ensure that no such amnesty previously granted is a bar to prosecution
before any United Nations-created or assisted court.
¾ Mandate United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council to promote, in cooperation with relevant
States, the establishment of effective arrangements for investigating and
prosecuting violations of international humanitarian law or other serious
violations of human rights law.
¾ Request the cooperation of States and United Nations peacekeeping and
other relevant missions authorized by the Security Council in the
apprehension and surrender of alleged perpetrators of genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes or other serious violations of human rights
law.

10

10-64655

S/PRST/2010/25

¾ Consider the establishment, in situations where local judicial mechanisms
are overwhelmed, of ad hoc judicial mechanisms at the national or
international level to investigate and prosecute war crimes and serious
violations of human rights law.
Consider the referral of situations involving genocide, crimes against humanity or
war crimes to the International Criminal Court.
Protection of civilians through the restoration and enforcement of the rule of
law, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes and security
sector reforms.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Call upon States to ensure equal protection under the law and equal access
to justice for victims of violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights law, including women and children, and to take the necessary
measures to ensure the protection of victims and witnesses.
¾ Mandate United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council to support restoration of the rule of law,
including the provision of assistance in monitoring, restructuring and
reforming the justice sector.
¾ Request the rapid deployment of qualified and well-trained international
civilian police, justice and corrections experts as a component of United
Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the
Security Council.
¾ Call on States, regional and subregional organizations to provide technical
assistance for local police, judiciary and penitentiaries (e.g., mentoring,
legislative drafting).
¾ Stress the importance of permanently disarming, demobilizing, reintegrating
former combatants of national and foreign armed groups and assisting the
victims in conflict affected communities.
¾ Stress the importance of security sector reform and urge all international
partners to support the efforts to professionalize and ensure the civilian
oversight of the national security forces and the police.
Build confidence and enhance
reconciliation mechanisms.

stability

by

promoting

truth

and

Issues for consideration:
¾ Mandate the establishment of appropriate, locally adapted, mechanisms for
truth and reconciliation (e.g., technical assistance, funding, and
reintegration of civilians within communities).
¾ Request, where appropriate, the establishment by the Secretary-General of
commissions of inquiry and similar measures with regard to situations
involving genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity or serious
violations of human rights law.

10-64655

11

S/PRST/2010/25

G.

Media and information
Protection of journalists, other media professionals and associated personnel.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Condemn and call for the immediate cessation of attacks against journalists,
media professionals and associated personnel operating in situations of
armed conflict.
¾ Call for compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law and respect for the civilian status of
journalists, media professionals and associated personnel as well as their
equipment and installations.
¾ Demand that States take all necessary steps to prosecute those responsible
for attacks against journalists, media professionals and associated personnel
in violation of applicable international humanitarian law.
Counter occurrences of speech used to incite violence.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Condemn and call for the immediate cessation of incitements to violence
against civilians in situations of armed conflict.
¾ Demand that States bring to justice individuals who incite or otherwise
cause such violence.
¾ Impose targeted and graduated measures in response to media broadcasts
inciting genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes or other serious
violations of human rights law.
¾ Mandate peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the
Security Council to promote the establishment of media monitoring
mechanisms to ensure effective monitoring, reporting and documenting of
any incidents, origins and contents that incite “hate media”.
Promote and support accurate management of information on the conflict.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Urge parties to armed conflict to respect the professional independence of
journalists, media professionals and associated personnel.
¾ Encourage United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council to include a mass-media component that
can disseminate information about international humanitarian law and
human rights law while also giving objective information about the
activities of the United Nations.
¾ Request relevant actors to provide technical assistance to States in drafting
and enforcing anti-hate speech legislation.

12

10-64655

S/PRST/2010/25

II. Specific protection concerns arising from Security Council
discussions on children affected by armed conflict
Parties to armed conflict to take the necessary measures to meet the specific
protection, health, education and assistance needs of children.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, violations and abuses
committed against children in situations of armed conflict, including the
recruitment or active use in hostilities of children by parties to armed
conflict in violation of applicable international law, the killing or maiming
of children; rape and other grave sexual abuse of children; abduction of
children; attacks against schools or hospitals; and denial of humanitarian
access for children.
¾ Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law relating to children
affected by armed conflict.
¾ Call upon relevant parties to develop and implement concrete time-bound
action plans to halt recruitment and use of children, in close collaboration
with United Nations peacekeeping missions, United Nations country teams
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Children and
Armed Conflict.
¾ Call upon all parties concerned to implement the recommendations of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
¾ Include specific provisions for the protection of children in the mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the
Security Council.
¾ Request that reports of the Secretary-General on country-specific situations
include the protection of children as a specific aspect of the report.
¾ Call upon all parties concerned to ensure that the protection, rights and
well-being of children affected by armed conflict are specifically integrated
into peace processes, peace agreements and post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction planning and programmes, including measures for family
tracing and reunification, the rehabilitation and reintegration of separated
children, and the release and reintegration of children associated with armed
forces and groups.
¾ Urge States, United Nations entities, regional and subregional organizations
and other concerned parties, to take appropriate measures to control illicit
subregional and cross-border activities harmful to children, as well as other
violations and abuses committed against children in situations of armed
conflict in violation of applicable international law.
¾ Urge relevant regional and/or subregional bodies to develop and implement
policies, activities, and advocacy for the benefit of children affected by
armed conflict.

10-64655

13

S/PRST/2010/25

III. Specific protection concerns arising from Security Council
discussions on women affected by armed conflict
Parties to armed conflict and other relevant actors to refrain from, and take the
necessary measures to prevent and respond to, sexual violence.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, acts of sexual violence
committed in the context of, and associated with, armed conflict.
¾ Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with the rules of
international humanitarian law and human rights law prohibiting rape,
sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced
sterilization or any other form of sexual violence.
¾ Call on parties to armed conflict take appropriate measures to refrain from,
prevent and protect all persons from all forms of sexual violence, including
by:

▪ Enforcing appropriate military disciplinary measures and upholding
the principle of command responsibility.

▪ Training troops on the categorical prohibition of all forms of sexual
violence.

▪ Debunking myths that fuel sexual violence.
▪ Vetting armed and security forces to ensure that personnel have a
reliably attested record of not having been involved in the perpetration
of rape and other forms of sexual violence.

▪ Evacuating to safety civilians under imminent threat of sexual
violence.
¾ Request that reports of the Secretary-General on country-specific situations
include sexual violence as a specific aspect of the report, including to the
extent possible, disaggregated data as to gender and age of victims; and
request the development of mission-specific strategies and plans of action
for preventing and responding to sexual violence, as part of a broader
protection of civilians strategy.
¾ Urge relevant regional and/or subregional bodies to develop and implement
policies, activities, and advocacy for the benefit of civilians affected by
sexual violence.
¾ Request troop- and police-contributing countries to deploy higher numbers
of women peacekeepers or police, and to ensure the provision of
appropriate training to their personnel, participating in United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions, on the protection of civilians,
including women and children, and the prevention of sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations.

14

10-64655

S/PRST/2010/25

Parties to armed conflict to take the necessary measures to meet the specific
protection, health and assistance needs of women and girls.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, violations and abuses
committed against women and girls in situations of armed conflict.
¾ Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law relating to the
protection of women and girls affected by armed conflict.
¾ Call upon all parties concerned to ensure that the protection, rights and
well-being of women and girls affected by armed conflict are specifically
integrated into all peace processes, peace agreements and post-conflict
recovery and reconstruction planning and programmes.
¾ Include specific provisions for the protection of women and girls in the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council.
¾ Request that reports of the Secretary-General on country-specific situations
include the protection of women and girls as a specific aspect of the report.
¾ Urge relevant regional and/or subregional bodies to develop and implement
policies, activities, and advocacy for the benefit of women and girls
affected by armed conflict.
Equal participation and full involvement of women in the prevention and
resolution of armed conflict.
Issues for consideration:
¾ Urge States, United Nations entities, regional and subregional organizations
and other concerned parties to ensure increased representation of women at
all decision-making levels in national, regional and international institutions
and mechanisms for the prevention, management, and resolution of conflict.
¾ Call on all actors involved in negotiating and implementing peace
agreements to adopt a gender perspective, including by considering:

▪ The needs of women and girls during repatriation and resettlement and
for rehabilitation, reintegration and post-conflict reconstruction.

▪ Measures that support local women’s peace initiatives and indigenous
processes for conflict resolution, and that involve women in the
implementation mechanisms of peace agreements.

▪ Measures that ensure the protection of, and respect for, the human
rights of women and girls, particularly as they relate to the
constitution, the electoral system, the police and the judiciary.
¾ Urge the Secretary-General and his Special Envoys to ensure the
participation of women in discussions pertinent to the prevention and
resolution of conflict, the maintenance of peace and security, and postconflict peace-building, and encourage all parties to such talks to facilitate
the equal and full participation of women at all decision-making levels.

10-64655

15

S/PRST/2010/25

¾ Ensure that Security Council missions take into account gender
considerations and the rights of women and girls, including through
consultation with local and international women’s groups.
¾ Urge troop- and police-contributing countries to expand the role, numbers
and contribution of women in United Nations operations, and especially
among military observers and civilian police.
Sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA).
Issues for consideration:
¾ Urge humanitarian and development organizations to take appropriate
action to prevent SEA by their personnel, including pre-deployment and intheatre awareness training and, in the case of United Nations actors, to
promote and ensure compliance, including by civilian staff of United
Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions, with the SecretaryGeneral’s Bulletin on special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and abuse (ST/SGB/2003/13).
¾ Urge troop- and police-contributing countries to take appropriate action to
prevent SEA by their personnel, including pre-deployment and in-theater
awareness training to promote and ensure compliance with the SecretaryGeneral’s Bulletin on special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and abuse (ST/SGB/2003/13).
¾ Urge troop- and police-contributing countries to ensure full accountability
in cases of SEA involving their personnel and to report to the SecretaryGeneral on action taken.

16

10-64655

10-64655

Addendum: Selection of agreed language
I. GENERAL PROTECTION CONCERNS PERTAINING TO THE CONFLICT-AFFECTED POPULATION
A. Protection of, and assistance to the conflict-affected population
Condemn, and call for
the cessation of,
violations of
applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights law

Call for compliance
with applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights law

S/RES/1925 (2010),
pp 11

[C]alling on all parties to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian and human rights law,
emphasizing the need to bring to justice the perpetrators of such crimes and urging the Government… to comply with its
obligations in this respect,

S/RES/1935 (2010),
pp. 12

Emphasizes the importance of ensuring access for relevant organizations, as applicable, to all prisons and places of
detention in [the affected country], and calls for full respect for relevant international law including humanitarian law and
human rights law.

S/RES/1917 (2010),
op. 21

S/RES/1910 (2010),
pp. 16
S/RES/1828 (2008),
op. 11
S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 5

S/RES/1556 (2004),
pp. 8

See also, for example,
S/RES/1925 (2010), op.
18; S/RES/1923 (2010),
pp. 4; S/RES/1919 (2010),
pp. 12 and op. 4;
S/RES/1910 (2010),
op. 16; S/RES/1906
(2009), pp. 6 and op. 10;
S/RES/1674 (2006), op. 3,
op. 11 and op. 26;
S/RES/1574 (2004), op.
11; S/RES/1556 (2004),
pp. 8; S/RES/1493 (2003),
op. 8; S/RES/1468 (2003),
op. 2; and S/RES/1296
(2000), op. 2 and op. 5.
See also, for example,
S/RES/1935 (2010), op. 9;
S/RES/1906 (2009), op. 11
and pp. 3; S/RES/1891
(2009), pp. 8; S/RES/1860
(2009), pp. 3; and pp. 4;
S/RES/1801 (2008), op.
13; S/RES/1794 (2007),
pp. 5 and op. 7;
S/RES/1790 (2007), pp.
18; S/RES/1776 (2007),
pp. 1; S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 6; S/PRST/2004/46;
S/RES/1574 (2003), o
p. 11 ; S/RES/1564 (2004),
pp. 10; S/RES/1493
(2003), op. 8; and
S/RES/307 (1971).
op. 3.

17

S/PRST/2010/25

Remaining greatly concerned by the humanitarian and human rights situation in areas affected by armed conflicts,
condemning in particular the targeted attacks against the civilian population, widespread sexual violence, recruitment and
use of child soldiers and extrajudicial executions
Condemning all and any violations of human rights and international humanitarian and human rights law, stressing the
responsibility of all parties in [the affected country] to respect fully their obligations in this regard and to take appropriate
measures to protect civilians, including women and children ….
Demands an end to violence by all sides, to attacks on civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel, and to other
violations of human rights and international humanitarian law…
Reaffirms … its condemnation in the strongest terms of all acts of violence or abuses committed against civilians in
situations of armed conflict in violation of applicable international obligations with respect in particular to (i) torture and
other prohibited treatment, (ii) gender-based and sexual violence, (iii) violence against children, (iv) the recruitment and
use of child soldiers, (v) trafficking in humans, (vi) forced displacement, and (vii) the intentional denial of humanitarian
assistance, and demands that all parties put an end to such practices.
Condemning all acts of violence and violations of human rights and international humanitarian law by all parties to the
crisis … including indiscriminate attacks on civilians, rapes, forced displacements, and acts of violence especially those
with an ethnic dimension, and expressing its utmost concern at the consequences of the conflict … on the civilian
population, including women, children, internally displaced persons, and refugees.

S/PRST/2010/25

18

Role of United
Nations peacekeeping
and other relevant
missions and actors

Stressing the primary responsibility of the Government of the [affected country] for ensuring security in its territory and
protecting its civilians with respect for the rule of law, human rights and international humanitarian law ….
Calls upon the States in the region to ensure that any military actions against armed groups are carried out in accordance
with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, and that they take appropriate measures to protect
civilians and reduce the impact of military actions upon the civilian population, including through regular contacts with
and early warning of the civilian population on potential attacks.
[E]ncourages the … authorities [of the affected country] to take full advantage of [the mission’s] support, notably … to
address the issue of prolonged pretrial detentions and prison overcrowding, with special regard to children.
Expressing its serious concern with the high number of civilian casualties, and calling for compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law and for all appropriate measures to be taken to ensure the protection of civilians.
[R]eaffirming that all parties should continue to take all feasible steps and develop modalities to ensure the protection of
affected civilians, including children, women and members of religious and ethnic minority groups … s
Expressing its concern that serious crimes, in particular killing and maiming, have been committed against civilians and
humanitarian staff, in the ongoing conflict in [the affected country] and reaffirming the importance of the fight against
impunity.
[S]tresses the responsibility of all parties and armed groups in [the affected country] to take appropriate steps to protect
the civilian population in the country, consistent with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, in
particular by avoiding any indiscriminate or excessive use of force in populated areas.
The Council … recognizes the needs of civilians under foreign occupation and stresses … in this regard, the
responsibilities of the occupying Power.
Deeply concerned at armed activities and banditry in [the region] which threaten the security of the civilian population,
the conduct of humanitarian operations in those areas and the stability of those countries, and which result in serious
violations of human rights and international humanitarian law.
Decides that, [the mission] shall have the following mandate from the date of adoption of this resolution:
(e) Assistance in the field of human rights
– To contribute to the promotion and protection of human rights in [the affected country], with special attention to
violations committed against children and women and to all forms of sexual violence, to monitor, help investigate and
report on human rights and humanitarian law violations with a view to ending impunity, … bring to the attention of the
Council all individuals identified as perpetrators of serious human rights violations …
Emphasizes that the protection of civilians must be given priority in decisions about the use of available capacity and
resources and authorizes [the mission] to use all necessary means, within the limits of its capacity and in the areas where
its units are deployed, to carry out its protection mandate ….
Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate in this order of priority:
Protection of civilians
(a) Ensure the effective protection of civilians, including humanitarian personnel and human rights defenders, under
imminent threat of physical violence, in particular violence emanating from any of the parties engaged in the conflict;
(b) Ensure the protection of United Nations personnel, facilities, installations and equipment;
(c) Support the efforts of the Government of the [affected country] to ensure the protection of civilians from violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights abuses, including all forms of sexual and gender-based violence, to
promote and protect human rights and to fight impunity, including through the implementation of the Government’s
“zero-tolerance policy” with respect to discipline and human rights and humanitarian law violations, committed by
elements of the security forces, in particular its newly integrated elements;
Calls upon [the mission] to collect information on potential threats against the civilian population as well as reliable
information on violations of international humanitarian and human rights law, and bring them to the attention of the
authorities as appropriate.

S/RES/1906 (2009),
pp. 3
S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 17

S/RES/1892 (2009),
op. 15
S/RES/1890 (2009),
pp. 15
S/RES/1883 (2009),
pp. 11
S/RES/1872 (2009),
pp. 13
S/RES/1863 (2009),
op. 19
S/PRST/2009/1
S/RES/1861 (2009),
pp. 4

S/RES/1933 (2010),
op. 16

S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 11
S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 12

S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 17

See also, for example,
S/RES/1935 (2010), op. 2;
S/RES/1906 (2009), op. 5;
S/RES/1828 (2008), op. 7;
S/RES/1794 (2007), op. 2;
S/RES/1778 (2007), op. 1,
op. 2, op. 6; S/RES/1769
(2007), op. 15;
S/RES/1701 (2006),
op. 12; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 16;
S/RES/1590 (2005), op. 4;
and S/RES/1565 (2006),
op. 4.

10-64655

10-64655

Protection strategy
and practical
protection measures

[U]nderscores the importance of [the mission] making full use of its authority and capabilities … to take necessary action
to provide improved security to the civilian population, humanitarian and development actors, and United Nations
personnel under imminent threat of violence, and stresses that this mandate includes the protection of refugees, displaced
persons, returnees, and other civilians with regard to the activities of militias and armed groups
Reaffirms its practice of ensuring that mandates of UN peacekeeping and other relevant missions include, where
appropriate and on a case-by-case basis, provisions regarding the protection of civilians, stresses that mandated protection
activities must be given priority in decisions about the use of available capacity and resources, including information and
intelligence resources, in the implementation of mandates; and recognizes, that the protection of civilians when and as
mandated requires a coordinated response from all relevant mission components;
Decides that [peacekeeping mission] will have the mandate, within the limits of its capabilities and in its areas of
deployment, to assist [the affected State] in establishing a stable security environment … and, to that end, to:
Protection of civilians, humanitarian personnel and United Nations personnel and facilities
(a) Ensure the protection of civilians, including humanitarian personnel, under imminent threat of physical violence;
(b) Contribute to the improvement of the security conditions in which humanitarian assistance is provided, and assist in
the voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced persons;
(c) Ensure the protection of United Nations personnel, facilities, installations and equipment;
(d) Ensure the security and freedom of movement of United Nations and associated personnel;
(e) Carry out joint patrols with the riot control units of the national police to improve security in the event of civil
disturbance.
Recognizes the increasingly valuable role that regional organizations and other intergovernmental institutions play in the
protection of civilians, and encourages the Secretary-General and the heads of regional and other intergovernmental
organizations to continue their efforts to strengthen their partnership in this regard.
Decides that [regional organization force] is authorized to take all necessary measures, within its means and capabilities,
to carry out the following tasks, in accordance with the agreement to be reached between the [regional organization] and
the United Nations: …
(b) to contribute to the protection of civilians under imminent threat of physical violence in the areas of its deployment,
and without prejudice to the responsibility of [the affected State] …
(e) to execute operations of limited character in order to extract individuals in danger.
Requests [the mission] in consultation with the UN Country Team to develop a comprehensive strategy for the
achievement of the objectives set out in paragraph 2 [protection of civilians] above and requests [the mission] to
maximize the use of its capabilities in [the affected region], in the implementation of that strategy;

Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate in this order of priority:

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 19

S/RES/1756 (2007),
op. 2

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 24
S/RES/1671 (2006),
op. 8

S/RES/1935 (2010),
op. 4

See also, for example,
S/RES/1933 (2010),
op. 16; S/RES/1919
(2010), op. 10 and op. 6;
S/RES/1894 (2009), op. 9;
S/RES/1794 (2007),
op. 18; S/RES/1296
(2000), op. 24.

S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 12

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 9

19

S/PRST/2010/25

Protection of civilians
(f) Implement the United Nations system-wide protection strategy in the [affected country], operationalizing it with [the
mission]’s protection strategy built on best practices and extend useful protection measures, such as the Joint Protection
Teams, Community Liaison Interpreters, Joint Investigation Teams, Surveillance Centres and Women’s Protection
Advisers.
Requests [the mission] to build on best practices and extend successful protection measures on protection …, in particular
the establishment of Joint Protection Teams, Early Warning Centres, communications liaisons with local villages and
other measures, to other areas ….

S/RES/1919 (2010),
op. 4

Protection
benchmarks

S/PRST/2010/25

20

Reporting

10-64655

Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant peacekeeping missions with protection mandates incorporate
comprehensive protection strategies into the overall mission implementation plans and contingency plans which include
assessments of potential threats and options for crisis response and risk mitigation and establish priorities, actions and
clear roles and responsibilities under the leadership and coordination of the SRSG, with the full involvement of all
relevant actors and in consultation with United Nations Country teams;
[C]alls upon [the mission] to strengthen its conflict management capacity by completing as soon as possible its integrated
strategy to support local tribal conflict resolution mechanisms in order to maximize protection of civilians; welcomes the
development of a comprehensive strategy on the protection of civilians and encourages [the mission] to continue and
complete its work on the strategy in a timely manner; and calls again upon [the mission], consistent with its current
mandate and capabilities, to pro actively conduct patrols in areas at high risk of localized conflict.
Requests further the Secretary-General to provide a full report on the situation in the [affected country] and on [the
mission]’s activities …, in order to prepare the strategic review …, and that this full report should include:
(a) Specific information on the challenges of [the mission]’s role in the protection of civilians, an assessment of existing
protection mechanisms …, and assessment of special measures for protection from sexual violence.
Recognizes the important role of the Secretary-General in providing timely information to the Security Council on
protection of civilians in armed conflict in particular through thematic and country specific reports and through briefings;
Requests the Secretary-General to include in his reports to the Council on country-specific situations more
comprehensive and detailed information relating to the protection of civilians in armed conflict, including on protectionrelated incidents and actions taken by parties to armed conflict to implement their obligations to respect and protect the
civilian population, including information specific to the protection needs of refugees, internally displaced persons,
women, children and other vulnerable groups;
Stresses the importance of achievable and realistic targets against which the progress of United Nations peacekeeping
operations can be measured; requests the Secretary-General to continue reporting to the Council every 90 days on
progress made towards implementing [the mission]’s mandate across [the affected region], including on progress towards
and obstacles to the implementation of the [protection] strategy …, also including an assessment of progress against the
benchmarks set out in … the report of the Secretary-General …
[S]tresses the importance of including indicators of progress regarding the protection of civilians in benchmarks for
relevant missions;
Takes note of the commitment of the Government of [the affected country] … to assume full responsibility for the
security and the protection of the civilian population in [the area affected by violence], including refugees, internally
displaced persons, returnees and host communities, with a particular focus on women and children, United Nations and
humanitarian personnel and assets, in accordance with its obligations under international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law, and underscores that in so doing, the Government [of the affected country] commits to carry out the
following tasks:
(i) To ensure the security and protection of civilians in danger, particularly refugees and internally displaced persons;
(ii) To facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid and the free movement of humanitarian personnel by improving security
in [the affected region];
(iii) To ensure the security and freedom of movement of [the mission’s] staff and United Nations and associated
personnel;
Notes also that, in this context, the Government of [the affected country] commits to work towards the achievement of the
following benchmarks related to the protection of civilians and humanitarian workers, in accordance with international
humanitarian law …:
(i) Voluntary return and resettlement in secure and sustainable conditions of internally displaced persons;
(ii) Demilitarization of refugee and internally displaced person camps as evidenced by a decrease in arms, violence and
human rights abuses;
(iii) Improvement in the capacity of [national] authorities in [the area affected by violence], including national law
enforcement agencies, the judiciary and the prison system to provide the necessary security for refugees, internally
displaced persons, civilians and humanitarian workers with respect for international human rights standards.

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 24

S/RES/1870 (2009),
op. 15

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 41

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 31
S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 32

S/RES/1935 (2010),
op. 8

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 27
S/RES/1923 (2010),
op. 2 and 3

See also, for example,
S/RES/1933 (2010),
op. 22; S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 40;
S/RES/1833 (2008), op. 6;
S/RES/1794 (2007), op. 7;
S/RES/1790 (2007), op. 5;
S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 25; S/RES/1529
(2004), op. 9.
See also, for example,
S/RES/1925 (2010), op. 6

10-64655

Relations between the
mission, the UNCT
and/or other
stakeholders

Training for
peacekeeping
personnel

Requests the Government of [the affected country] and the Secretary-General to establish a joint Government …/UN
high-level Working Group to assess on a monthly basis the situation on the ground with respect to protection of civilians,
the measures adopted by the Government of [the affected country] … to progress towards meeting the [protection]
benchmarks
Recalls that the protection of civilians requires a coordinated response from all relevant mission components and
encourages [the mission] to enhance interaction, under the authority of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, between its civil and military components at all levels and humanitarian actors, in order to consolidate expertise
on the protection of civilians.
Encourages [the mission] to enhance its interaction with the civilian population to raise awareness and understanding
about its mandate and activities and to collect reliable information on violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights abuses perpetrated against civilians
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that technical support is provided, in pre-deployment and in theatre, to [the
mission]’s troop- and police-contributing countries to include guidance and training for military and police personnel on
the protection of civilians from imminent threat and appropriate responses, including on human rights, sexual violence
and gender issues.
Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with relevant actors, to ensure that peacekeeping missions with protection
of civilians’ mandates, in keeping with the strategic plans that guide their deployment, conduct mission-wide planning,
pre-deployment training, and senior leadership training on the protection of civilians and requests troop and police
contributing countries to ensure the provision of appropriate training of their personnel participating in UN peacekeeping
and other relevant missions to heighten the awareness and responsiveness to protection concerns, including training on
HIV/AIDS and zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse in UN peacekeeping missions;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that United Nations personnel involved in peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peace-building activities have appropriate training in international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, including
child and gender-related provisions, negotiation and communication skills, cultural awareness and civilian-military
coordination, and urges States and relevant international and regional organizations to ensure that appropriate training is
included in their programs for personnel involved in similar activities.

S/RES/1923 (2010),
op. 4

Recalls the prohibition of the forcible displacement of civilians in situations of armed conflict under circumstances that
are in violation of parties’ obligations under international humanitarian law.
Urges the international community to provide support and assistance to enable States to fulfil their responsibilities
regarding the protection of refugees and other persons protected under international humanitarian law.
Notes that the overwhelming majority of internally displaced persons and other vulnerable groups in situations of armed
conflict are civilians and, as such, are entitled to the protection afforded to civilians under existing international
humanitarian law.
Recalling in addition the right to seek and enjoy asylum reflected in Article 14 of the Universal Declaration and the non-refoulement obligation of States under the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees adopted on 28 July 1951,
together with its Protocol adopted on 31 January 1967 (“the Refugees Convention and its Protocol”) and also recalling
that the protections afforded by the Refugees Convention and its Protocol shall not extend to any person with respect to
whom there are serious reasons for considering that he has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of
the United Nations.
The Security Council reaffirms the principle of non-refoulement of refugees, as provided for in relevant instruments of
international law, welcomes recent efforts of countries neighbouring [the affected State] to support the voluntary
repatriation of refugees in safety and dignity, and urges those host States to continue to provide international protection to
[those] refugees in need of it. It encourages the international community to provide the necessary assistance in this regard.

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 12
S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 13
S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 3

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 8

See also, for example,
S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 16; S/RES/1880
(2009), op. 28

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 14
S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 13

See also, for example,
S/RES/1325 (2000), op. 6;
and S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 19.

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 23

S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 14

B. Displacement
Protection of refugees
and internally
displaced persons,
including prevention
from forced
displacement
Asylum and
non-refoulement

S/RES/1624 (2005),
pp. 7

21

S/PRST/2010/25

S/PRST/2000/12

Durable solutions,
including safe,
voluntary and
dignified return and
reintegration

S/PRST/2010/25

22

Civilian character of
camps and
settlements of
refugees and
internally displaced
persons

10-64655

The Security Council is particularly concerned at the withdrawal of refugee status from and the consequent ending of
assistance to many refugees from the [neighboring State]… The decisions of the [affected State] in this regard may lead
to the involuntary return of tens of thousands of people to an area that is neither safe nor prepared to receive them. The
Council stresses the importance of the principle of non-refoulement set out in the 1951 Geneva Convention on the Status
of Refugees, to which [the affected State] is a party. The Council urges the [affected State] to continue to provide asylum
to all refugees regardless of their origin.
Encourages [the mission] and the United Nations country team to continue to assist the Government to prevent the
recruitment of refugees and children by armed groups and to maintain the civilian nature of refugee camps and internally
displaced person sites, in coordination with [national security forces] and the humanitarian community.
Calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to respect the civilian and humanitarian character of refugee camps and
settlements, and ensure the protection of all civilians inhabiting such camps, in particular women and girls, from all forms
of violence, including rape and other sexual violence, and to ensure full, unimpeded and secure humanitarian access to
them.
Emphasizing the need to respect international refugee law, preserve the civilian and humanitarian nature of the refugee
camps and internally displaced persons sites and prevent any recruitment of individuals, including children, which might
be carried out in or around the camps and sites by armed groups.
Reaffirms the need to maintain the security and civilian character of refugee and internally displaced person camps,
stresses the primary responsibility of States in this regard, and encourages the Secretary-General where necessary and in
the context of existing peacekeeping operations and their respective mandates, to take all feasible measures to ensure
security in and around such camps and of their inhabitants.
Invites the Secretary-General to bring to its attention situations where refugees and internally displaced persons are
vulnerable to the threat of harassment or where their camps are vulnerable to infiltration by armed elements and where
such situations may constitute a threat to international peace and security, expresses, in this regard, its willingness to
consider such situations and, where necessary, adopt appropriate steps to help create a secure environment for civilians
endangered by conflicts, including by providing support to States concerned in this regard.
Notes that a range of measures by the international community are needed to share the burden borne by African States
hosting refugees and to support their efforts to ensure the security and civilian and humanitarian character of refugee
camps and settlements, including in the areas of law enforcement, disarmament of armed elements, curtailment of the
flow of arms in refugee camps and settlements, separation of refugees from other persons who do not qualify for
international protection afforded refugees or otherwise do not require international protection, and demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants.
Stresses the importance of achieving dignified and durable solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons, and of
ensuring their full participation in the planning and management of these solutions, demands that all parties to the conflict
in [the affected region] create the conditions conducive to allowing the voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return of
refugees and internally displaced persons or their local integration.
Calling upon all parties concerned to create the conditions conducive to a voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return
of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Welcomes the progress by the [actors involved] towards achieving dignified durable solutions for refugees living in [host
country] and encourages a sustained effort with regards to the residual [affected country] refugee caseload.
Calls upon all parties concerned to ensure that all peace processes, peace agreements and post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction planning have regard for the special needs of women and children and include specific measures for the
protection of civilians including … (iii) the creation of conditions conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Reaffirms the unacceptability of the demographic changes resulting from the conflict, reaffirms also the inalienable rights
of all refugees and internally displaced persons affected by the conflict, and stresses that they have the right to return to
their homes in secure and dignified conditions…
Welcomes the commitment of the parties to the right of all refugees and displaced persons freely to return to their homes
of origin or to other places of their choice … in safety … and stresses the importance of facilitating the return or

S/PRST/1995/49

S/RES/1923 (2010),
op. 23
S/RES/1889 (2009),
op. 12

S/RES/1861 (2009),
pp. 13

See also, for example,
S/RES/1834 (2008), pp. 2;
S/RES/1778 (2007), pp.
12, op. 5; S/RES/1325
(2000), op. 12;
S/RES/1286 (2000), op. 2;
S/RES/1272 (1999),
op. 12; and
S/PRST/1999/32.

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 14

S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 14

S/RES/1208 (1998),
op. 6

S/RES/1935 (2010),
op. 15

S/RES/1906 (2009),
pp. 9
S/RES/1902 (2009),
op. 16
S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 11

S/RES/1615 (2005),
op. 18
S/RES/1088 (1996),
op. 11

See also, for example,
S/RES/1923 (2010), pp. 7;
S/RES/1917 (2010), op.
38, op. 39; S/RES/1895
(2009), pp. 8; S/RES/1883
(2009), pp. 11;
S/RES/1826 (2008), op. 8;
S/RES/1812 (2008), op.
18; S/RES/1752 (2007),
op. 6; S/RES/1747 (2007),
op. 27; S/RES/1716
(2006), op. 9; S/RES/1591
(2005), pp. 7; S/RES/1564
(2004), op. 6;
S/RES/1556 (2004),
pp. 19; S/RES/1545
(2004), pp. 13;

10-64655

resettlement of refugees and displaced persons which should be gradual and orderly and carried out through progressive,
coordinated programs that address the need for local security, housing and jobs.

Housing, land and
property

Role of United
Nations peacekeeping
and other relevant
missions and actors

S/RES/1933 (2010),
op. 14

S/PRST/1996/48

S/RES/941 (1994),
op. 3
S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 12

S/RES/1861 (2009),
op. 1

S/RES/1861 (2009),
op. 6

See also, for example,
S/RES/1812 (2008), op. 8;
S/RES/1778 (2007), op. 1;
S/RES/1756 (2007), op. 2;
S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 16; S/RES/1565
(2004), op. 5; S/RES/1545
(2004), op. 5(f) and op. 13;
S/RES/1509 (2003), op. 6;
S/RES/1419 (2002), op.
11; S/RES/1244 (1999),
op. 11; and S/RES/1145
(1997), op. 13.

S/RES/1542 (2004),
op. 7 (III)(b)

S/RES/1494 (2003),
op. 15

S/PRST/2010/25

23

Urges the signatories of the [peace agreement] to work towards a sustainable solution for the voluntary return,
reinstallation, reintegration and security of displaced persons, including by addressing land tenure issues, with the support
of the United Nations system, and to fulfil in this regard their commitments in accordance with the … Political
Agreement and their obligations under international law.
The Security Council is deeply concerned that in spite of its previous requests there has been little progress on the issue of
the return of [refugees from ethnic minority group] and urges [the Government] to adopt a comprehensive approach in
order to facilitate the return of refugees … to their homes of origin throughout [the affected State]. It deplores the
continued failure by [the affected State] to safeguard effectively their property rights, especially the situation where many
of those [ethnic minority refugees] who have returned to the former sectors have been unable to regain possession of their
properties. The Council calls upon [the affected State] to apply immediately proper procedures to the question of property
rights and to stop all forms of discrimination against the [minority population] in the provision of social benefits and
reconstruction assistance.
Reaffirms its support for the established principles that all declarations and actions made under duress, particularly those
regarding land and ownership, are null and void, and that all displaced persons should be enabled to return in peace to
their former homes.
Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate in this order of priority:
Protection of civilians
(g) Support the Government’s efforts, along with international partners and neighbouring countries, to create an
environment conducive to the voluntary, safe and dignified return of internally displaced persons and refugees, or
voluntary local integration or resettlement.
Decides to extend … the multidimensional presence in [the affected countries] intended to help create the security
conditions conducive to a voluntary, secure and sustainable return of refugees and displaced persons, inter alia by
contributing to the protection of refugees, displaced persons and civilians in danger, by facilitating the provision of
humanitarian assistance in [the affected region] and by creating favourable conditions for the reconstruction and
economic and social development of those areas.
Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate in [the affected country], in liaison with the United Nations
country team …:
Security and protection of civilians
…
(c) To liaise with the … Government [of the affected country] and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) in support of their efforts to relocate refugee camps which are in close proximity to the border,
and to provide to UNHCR, on availability and cost-reimbursable basis, logistical assistance for that purpose;
(e) To support the initiatives of national and local authorities in [the affected country] to resolve local tensions and
promote local reconciliation efforts, in order to enhance the environment for the return of internally displaced persons.
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations… decides that [peacekeeping mission] shall have the
following mandate: …
(b) to monitor and report on the human rights situation, in cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, including on the situation of returned refugees and displaced persons.
Recalls that the [opposition group] bears a particular responsibility to protect the returnees and to facilitate the return of
the remaining displaced population, and requests further measures to be undertaken [by United Nations agencies] to
create conditions conducive to the return of refugees and internally displaced persons, … to develop their skills and to
increase their self-reliance, with full respect for their inalienable right to return to their homes in secure and dignified
conditions.

S/RES/1494 (2003), op.
15; S/RES/1272 (1999),
op. 12; S/RES/1096
(1997), op. 8; and
S/RES/849 (1993), op. 11.

Condemn, and call
for the cessation of,
attacks against
humanitarian
workers and the
wilful impediment of
humanitarian access

Call for compliance
with applicable
international
humanitarian law

Concerned at armed activities and banditry in [the affected countries] which threaten the security of the civilian population,
the conduct of humanitarian operations in those areas and the stability of those countries, and which result in serious
violations of human rights and international humanitarian law.
Reiterating its serious concern at the worsening humanitarian situation in [the affected country], strongly condemning the
targeting and obstruction of the delivery of humanitarian aid by armed groups in [the affected country], which has
prevented the delivery of such aid in some areas, deploring the repeated attacks on humanitarian personnel, expressing its
condemnation in the strongest terms of all acts of violence or abuses committed against civilians and humanitarian
personnel, in violation of international humanitarian law and human rights law, and reaffirming the importance of the fight
against impunity.
[C]ondemning all attacks against United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel, regardless of their
perpetrators, and emphasizing that those responsible for such attacks must be brought to justice.
Condemns any attack against personnel or facilities from [the mission] and demands that no acts of intimidation or
violence be directed against the United Nations and associated personnel or facilities or other actors engaged in
humanitarian, development or peacekeeping work.
Reaffirms the obligation of all parties to implement fully the rules and principles of international humanitarian law,
particularly those regarding the protection of humanitarian personnel, and furthermore requests all the parties involved to
provide humanitarian personnel with immediate, free and unimpeded access to all persons in need of assistance, in
accordance with applicable international law.
Stresses the importance for all, within the framework of humanitarian assistance, of upholding and respecting the
humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence;
Calls for the unimpeded provision and distribution throughout [the affected territory] of humanitarian assistance, including
of food, fuel and medical treatment.
Welcomes the initiatives aimed at creating and opening humanitarian corridors and other mechanisms for the sustained
delivery of humanitarian aid.
Calls upon all parties concerned to ensure that all peace processes, peace agreements and post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction planning … include specific measures for the protection of civilians including … the facilitation of the
provision of humanitarian assistance.

S/RES/1923 (2010),
pp. 4
S/RES/1910 (2010),
pp. 14

S/RES/1906 (2009),
pp. 14
S/RES/1892 (2009),
op. 14

S/RES/1923 (2010),
op. 22

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 13
S/RES/1860 (2009),
op. 2
S/RES/1860 (2009),
op. 3
S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 11

See also, for example,
S/RES/1935 (2010),
op. 10; S/RES/1917
(2010), pp. 15;
S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 6; S/RES/1872
(2009), pp. 11;
S/RES/1840 (2008),
op. 16; S/RES/1828
(2008), pp. 12, op. 8;
S/RES/1780 (2007), op. 3;
S/RES/1769 (2007), pp.
13, and op. 14; and
S/RES/1265 (1999), op. 8
and op. 9.
See also, for example,
S/RES/1828 (2008), op. 3;
S/RES/1814 (2008), op.
12; S/RES/1794 (2007),
op. 17; S/RES/1778
(2007), op. 17;
S/RES/1769 (2007),
op. 14; S/RES/1747
(2007), op. 24;
S/RES/1674 (2006), op. 8,
op. 22; S/RES/1574
(2004), op. 11;
S/RES/1565 (2004),
op. 20, op. 21;
S/RES/1545 (2004),
op. 12; S/RES/1533
(2004), op. 5; S/RES/1509
(2003), pp. 6, op. 8;
S/RES/1502 (2003), op. 4;
S/RES/1497 (2003), op.
11; S/RES/1493 (2003),
op. 12; S/RES/1296
(2000), op. 12 and
op. 15; and S/RES/1265
(1999), op. 7, op. 8 and
op. 9.

S/PRST/2010/25

24

C. Humanitarian access and safety and security of humanitarian workers

10-64655

10-64655

Humanitarian
assistance and
preparedness

Role of United
Nations
peacekeeping and
other relevant
missions and actors

Urges all those concerned as set forth in international humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions and the Hague
Regulations, to allow full and unimpeded access by humanitarian personnel to civilians in need of assistance in situations
of armed conflict, and to make available, as far as possible, all necessary facilities for their operations, and to promote the
safety, security and freedom of movement of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel and
their assets.
Calls upon all Member States to ensure the free, unhindered and expeditious movement to [the affected State] of all
personnel, as well as equipment, provisions, supplies and other goods, including vehicles and spare parts, which are for the
exclusive and official use of [peacekeeping operation].
Calls on [the affected State to facilitate] international relief for the humanitarian disaster by means of a moratorium on all
restrictions that might hinder the provision of humanitarian assistance and access to affected populations.
Underlines the importance of safe and unimpeded access of humanitarian personnel to civilians in armed conflicts, calls
upon the parties concerned, including neighboring States, to cooperate fully with the United Nations Humanitarian
Coordinator and United Nations agencies in providing such access, invites States and the Secretary-General to bring to its
attention information regarding the deliberate denial of such access in violation of international law, where such denial
may constitute a threat to international peace and security, and, in this regard, expresses its willingness to consider such
information and, when necessary, to adopt appropriate steps.
Expresses its intention, where appropriate, to call upon the parties to a conflict to make special arrangements to meet the
protection and assistance requirements of women, children and other vulnerable groups, including through the promotion
of “days of immunization” and other opportunities for the safe and unhindered delivery of basic necessary services.
[N]oting the importance of contingency planning.

S/RES/1590 (2005),
op. 8
S/RES/1556 (2004),
op. 1
S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 8

S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 10
S/RES/1933 (2010),
pp. 6
S/RES/1919 (2010),
pp. 13

S/RES/1910 (2010),
pp. 15
S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 15

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 17
S/RES/1863 (2009),
op. 2
S/RES/1861 (2009),
op. 7

S/RES/1814 (2008),
op. 11

See also, for example,
S/RES/1883 (2009), pp. 0

See also, for example
S/RES/1933 (2010),
op. 16; S/RES/1894
(2009), op. 12, op. 14;
S/RES/1772 (2007),
op. 9(d); S/RES/1778
(2007), op. 6; S/RES/1769
(2007), op. 15;
S/RES/1756 (2007), op. 2;
S/RES/1701 (2006),
op. 12; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 16;
S/RES/1590 (2005), op.
16; S/RES/1565 (2004),
op. 4 and op. 5;
S/RES/1542 (2004), op. 9;
S/RES/1528 (2004), op. 6;
S/RES/1509 (2003), op.
3(k); S/RES/1502 (2003),
op. 5(a); S/RES/1492

S/PRST/2010/25

25

Stressing the ongoing importance of providing humanitarian and development assistance to the civilian populations
throughout [the affected country], encouraging comprehensive preparedness efforts by the United Nations … including the
need for increased humanitarian and development assistance … and the need for continued cooperation among the [parties
to the peace agreement], the United Nations and humanitarian organizations and urging donors to support implementation
of the [peace agreement] and to honour all pledges of financial and material support.
Expressing its concern at the significant decline in humanitarian funding for [the affected country] and calling on all
Member States to contribute to current and future consolidated humanitarian appeals.
Expresses its intention to:
(a) Call on parties to armed conflict to comply with the obligations applicable to them under international humanitarian
law to take all required steps to protect civilians and to facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of relief consignments,
equipment and personnel,
(b) Mandate UN peacekeeping and other relevant missions, where appropriate, to assist in creating conditions conducive
to safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian assistance,
Invites the Secretary-General to continue the systematic monitoring and analysis of constraints on humanitarian access, to
include as appropriate observations and recommendations in his briefings and country-specific reports to the Council;
[U]nderlines, in particular, that [the mission] is authorized to take all necessary measures to provide security for key
infrastructure and to contribute, as may be requested and within its capabilities and existing mandate, to the creation of the
necessary security conditions for the provision of humanitarian assistance.
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
(a) Decides further that [the mission] shall be authorized to take all necessary measures, within its capabilities and its area
of operations …, to fulfil the following functions, in liaison with the Government of [the affected country]:
(ii) To facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid and the free movement of humanitarian personnel by helping to improve
security in the area of operations.
Reiterates its support for the contribution made by some States to protect the World Food Programme maritime convoys,
calls upon States and regional organizations, in close coordination with each other and as notified in advance to the
Secretary-General, and at the request of [the Government], to take action to protect shipping involved with the
transportation and delivery of humanitarian aid … and United Nations-authorized activities, calls upon [regional

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 22

Accountability for
attacks against
humanitarian
workers

Targeted and
graduated measures
as a response to the
wilful impediment of
humanitarian access
and to attacks
against
humanitarian
workers

[C]ondemning all attacks against United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel, regardless of their
perpetrators, and emphasizing that those responsible for such attacks must be brought to justice.
Emphasizing that there are existing prohibitions under international law against attacks knowingly and intentionally
directed against personnel involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission undertaken in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations which in situations of armed conflicts constitute war crimes, and recalling the need for
States to end impunity for such criminal acts.
Expresses its strong condemnation of all forms of violence, including, inter alia, murder, rape and sexual assault,
intimidation, armed robbery, abduction, hostage-taking, kidnapping, harassment and illegal arrest and detention to which
those participating in humanitarian operations are increasingly exposed, as well as attacks on humanitarian convoys and
acts of destruction and looting of their property;
Urges States to ensure that crimes against such personnel do not remain unpunished.
Expresses its determination to take appropriate steps in order to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian personnel
and United Nations and its associated personnel, including, inter alia, by:
(a) Requesting the Secretary-General to seek the inclusion of, and that host countries include, key provisions of the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel, among others, those regarding the prevention of
attacks against members of United Nations operations, the establishment of such attacks as crimes punishable by law and
the prosecution or extradition of offenders, in future as well as, if necessary, in existing status-of-forces, status-of-missions
and host country agreements negotiated between the United Nations and those countries, mindful of the importance of the
timely conclusion of such agreements.
Decides that the provisions [relating to travel bans and freezing of assets and economic resources] shall apply to
individuals [and] entities, designated by the [Sanctions Committee] …
(c) as obstructing the delivery of humanitarian assistance to [the affected State], or access to, or distribution of,
humanitarian assistance in [the affected State].
Expresses its determination to take appropriate steps in order to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian personnel
and United Nations and its associated personnel, including, inter alia, by: …
(b) Encouraging the Secretary-General, in accordance with his prerogatives under the Charter of the United Nations, to
bring to the attention of the Security Council situations in which humanitarian assistance is denied as a consequence of
violence directed against humanitarian personnel and United Nations and its associated personnel.

S/RES/1925 (2010),
pp. 14
S/RES/1502 (2003),
pp. 5

(2003), op. 25;
S/RES/1289 (2000),
op. 12; and S/RES/1270
(1999), op. 14.
See also, for example,
S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 23; S/RES/1265
(1999), op. 10.

S/RES/1502 (2003),
op. 1 and op. 2

S/RES/1502 (2003),
op. 5(a)

S/RES/1844 (2008),
op. 8
S/RES/1502 (2003),
op. 5(b)

See also, for example,
S/RES/1894 (2009), op. 4
and op. 17; S/RES/1727
(2006), op. 12;
S/RES/1296 (2000), op.
5; and S/RES/1265
(1999), op. 10.

D. Conduct of hostilities
Condemn, and call
for the cessation of,
violations of
applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law

Expressing deep concern at the deterioration in the security situation in [the affected region], including ceasefire violations,
attacks by rebel groups, aerial bombardment by the Government …, increased inter-tribal fighting, and attacks on
humanitarian personnel and peacekeepers, which have restricted humanitarian access to conflict areas where vulnerable
civilian populations reside … and calling on all parties to cease hostilities and urgently facilitate humanitarian access,
Condemning in the strongest terms all attacks, including Improvised Explosive Device (IED) attacks, suicide
attacks and abductions, targeting civilians and [members of the armed forces] and their deleterious effect on the
stabilization, reconstruction and development efforts in [the affected country], and condemning further the use
by the [illegal armed] groups of civilians as human shields.
Condemns all violence and hostilities directed against civilians and all acts of terrorism.

10-64655

[Demands] an end to attacks on civilians, from any quarter, including by aerial bombing, and the use of civilians as human
shields.
Recalls that deliberately targeting civilians and other protected persons as such in situations of armed conflict is a flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law, reiterates its condemnation in the strongest terms of such practices, and demands
that all parties immediately put an end to such practices.

S/RES/1935 (2010),
pp. 11
S/RES/1890 (2009),
pp. 13
S/RES/1860 (2009),
op. 5
S/RES/1828 (2008),
pp. 13
S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 3

See also, for example,
S/RES/1868 (2009),
op. 12; S/RES/1806
(2008), op. 12;
S/RES/1674 (2006), op.
26; S/RES/1574 (2004),
op. 11; S/RES/1493
(2003), op. 8; S/RES/1468
(2003), op. 2; and
S/RES/1296 (2000), op. 2
and op. 5.

S/PRST/2010/25

26

peacekeeping mission] troop-contributing countries, as appropriate, to provide support to this end, and requests the
Secretary-General to provide his support to this effect.

10-64655

Call for compliance
with applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law

[C]alls on [armed forces] to continue to take robust efforts [to minimize the risk of civilian casualties], notably by the
continuous review of tactics and procedures and the conduct of after-action reviews and investigations in cooperation with
the Government [of the affected country] in cases where civilian casualties have occurred and when the Government [of
the affected country] finds these joint investigations appropriate;
Reiterates … that the support of [the mission] to [the] military operations against … armed groups is strictly conditioned
on [the] compliance [of the armed forces] with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and on an
effective joint planning of these operations, decides that [the mission] military leadership shall confirm, prior to providing
any support to such operations that sufficient joint planning has been undertaken, especially regarding the protection of the
civilian population, calls upon [the mission] to intercede with the [armed forces] command if elements of an … unit
receiving [the mission]’s support are suspected of having committed grave violations of such laws, and if the situation
persists, calls upon [the mission] to withdraw support from these … units.
Recognizing additional efforts taken by [armed forces] to minimize the risk of civilian casualties, welcoming their
intention to undertake continued enhanced efforts in this regard including the increased focus on protecting the [civilian]
population as a central element of the mission, and noting the importance of conducting continuous reviews of tactics and
procedures and after-action reviews and investigations in cooperation with the Government [of the affected country] in
cases where civilian casualties have occurred and when the Government [of the affected country] finds these joint
investigations appropriate.
[S]tresses the responsibility of all parties and armed groups in [the affected State] to take appropriate steps to protect the
civilian population…, consistent with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, in particular by avoiding
any indiscriminate attacks on populated areas.
Affirming the importance for all parties, including foreign forces, promoting the maintenance of security and stability in
[the affected State] to act in accordance with international law, including relevant obligations under international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law, and to cooperate with the relevant international organizations … and
underscoring that all parties, including foreign forces, should take all feasible steps to ensure the protection of affected
civilians.
Demands that all parties concerned comply strictly with their obligations under international humanitarian, human rights
and refugee law, in particular those contained in the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 and in the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977, as well as the decisions of the Security Council.

S/RES/1917 (2010),
op. 20

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 22

S/RES/1890 (2009),
pp. 16

See also, for example,
S/RES/1828 (2008),
pp. 13; S/RES/1806
(2008), op. 13;
S/RES/1801 (2008),
op. 13; S/RES/1794
(2007), op. 7; S/RES/1776
(2007), pp. 11;
S/RES/1574 (2004),
op. 11; S/RES/1564
(2004), pp. 10;
S/RES/1493 (2003), op. 8;
and S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 4.

S/RES/1814 (2008),
op. 17
S/RES/1790 (2007),
pp. 18

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 6

E. Small arms and light weapons, mines and explosive remnants of war
Condemnation of
illicit trade and
supply of small arms

S/RES/1896 (2009),
pp. 13

Notes that the excessive accumulation and destabilizing effect of small arms and light weapons pose a considerable
impediment to the provision of humanitarian assistance and have a potential to exacerbate and prolong conflicts, endanger
civilians and undermine security and the confidence required for a return to peace and stability ….
Recognizes the deleterious impact of the proliferation of arms, in particular small arms, on the security of civilians,
including refugees and other vulnerable populations, particularly children, and, in this regard, recalls resolution 1209
(1998) of 19 November 1998
Urges Members States, in accordance with the United Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms and Lights Weapons
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons, to take effective action through, inter
alia, conflict resolution and the development and implementation of national legislation, in a manner which is consistent
with existing responsibilities of States under relevant international law, to control the illicit trade of small arms to parties in
armed conflict that do not respect fully the relevant provisions of applicable international law relating to the rights and
protection of children in armed conflict.
Calls for effective international action to prevent the illegal flow of small arms into areas of conflict.

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 29

See also, for example,
S/RES/1919 (2010),
op. 15; S/RES/1296
(2000), op. 21;
S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 17.

S/RES/1261 (1999),
op. 14
S/RES/1460 (2003),
op. 7

27

S/RES/1318 (2000),
op. VI (para. 1)

See also, for example,
S/RES/1209 (1998), op. 3.

S/PRST/2010/25

Call for compliance
with international
measures on small
arms

Condemning the continuing illicit flow of weapons within and into the [affected state] in violation of resolutions
[prescribing sanctions], declaring its determination to continue to monitor closely the implementation of the arms embargo
and other measures set out by its resolutions concerning the [affected state],

Targeted and
graduated measures
as a response to the
illicit trade and
supply of small arms
10-64655

Recognizes the detrimental impact of the proliferation of arms, in particular small arms, on the security of civilians by fuelling
armed conflict, encourages [the mission] to continue its efforts in providing assistance to the Government of [the affected area]
with regard to the civilian disarmament process, in particular by strengthening the capacity of local authorities to deter intercommunal conflicts and by monitoring forced civilian disarmament initiatives in an effort to avert disarmament operations that
could exacerbate insecurity in [the affected area].
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to assist the … Government in developing the transitional security institutions,
including the …Police Force and the National Security Force, and further requests the Secretary-General to support the …
Government in developing a national security strategy including plans for combating illicit arms trafficking, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), justice and corrections capacities.
Decides that [peacekeeping mission] will have the mandate, within the limits of its capabilities and in its areas of deployment,
to assist [the affected State] in establishing a stable security environment in the country, and, to that end, to: …
(h) Seize or collect, as appropriate, the arms and any related materiel whose presence in the territory of [the affected State]
violates the measures imposed by [resolution imposing an arms embargo], and to dispose of such arms and related materiel as
appropriate.
Decides that the mandate of [peacekeeping mission] … shall be the following: …
(m) To monitor the implementation of the measures imposed by [resolution], in cooperation with the Group of Experts … and,
as appropriate, with the [peacekeeping missions in neighbouring States] and Governments concerned, including by inspecting,
as they deem it necessary and without notice, the cargo of aircraft and of any transport vehicle using the ports, airports, airfields,
military bases and border crossings of [affected State];
(n) To collect, as appropriate, arms and any related materiel brought into [the affected State] in violation of the measures
imposed by [resolution], and to dispose of such arms and related materiel as appropriate.
Decides that all Member States shall immediately take the necessary measures to prevent the sale or supply to [the affected
State] by their nationals or from their territories or using their flag vessels or aircraft, of arms and related materiel of all
types, including weapons and ammunition, military vehicles and equipment, paramilitary equipment, and spare parts for
the aforementioned, and technical assistance, training, financial and other assistance, related to the military activities or to
the provision, manufacture, maintenance or use of these items, whether or not originating in their territories;
Decides that all States shall take the measures as previously imposed by [the Security Council’s sanction resolutions on
certain illegal armed groups] and other individuals, groups, undertakings and entities associated with them …:
(c) Prevent the direct or indirect supply, sale, or transfer to these individuals, groups, undertakings and entities from their
territories or by their nationals outside their territories, or using their flag vessels or aircraft, of arms and related materiel of

S/PRST/2010/25

28

Role of United
Nations
peacekeeping
missions and other
relevant actors in
preventing the illicit
trade and supply of
small arms

Stresses the importance of all Member States, and in particular States involved in manufacturing and marketing of
weapons, restricting arms transfers which could provoke or prolong armed conflicts or aggravate existing tensions or
armed conflicts …
[S]tresses the need to implement the United Nations Program of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the international instrument to enable States to identify and trace,
in a timely manner, illicit small arms and light weapons, in order to make real progress in preventing, combating and
eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. In particular, States are encouraged to strengthen physical
security and stockpile management, destroy surplus and obsolete small arms and light weapons, ensure all small arms and
light weapons are marked at the time of manufacture and import, and strengthen export and border controls and control
brokering activities.
Expresses deep concern over the persistent localized conflicts and violence and their effect on civilians, and the
proliferation of arms, in particular small arms, and, in this regard, requests [the mission] to continue to support local
conflict resolution mechanisms and to monitor whether any arms or related material are present in [the affected region] …

S/RES/1209 (1998),
op. 3
S/PRST/2007/24

S/RES/1935 (2010),
op. 17

S/RES/1919 (2010),
op. 15

S/RES/1872 (2009),
op. 9

S/RES/1756 (2007),
op. 2(h)

S/RES/1609 (2005),
op. 2

S/RES/1907 (2009),
op. 5

S/RES/1904 (2009),
op. 1

See also for example
S/RES/1521 (2003), op. 2
a), S/RES/1907, op. 12

10-64655

International and
regional cooperation
in preventing the
illicit trade and
supply of small arms

Mine action and
explosive remnants
of war

S/RES/1612 (2005),
op. 9

S/RES/1379 (2001),
op. 6

S/RES/1916 (2010),
op. 12

S/RES/1907 (2009),
op. 7

S/RES/1896 (2009),
op. 10

S/RES/1896 (2009),
op. 12
S/RES/1653 (2006),
op. 16

S/RES/1545 (2004),
op. 20

S/RES/1917 (2010),
op. 19

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 29

S/RES/1868 (2009),
pp. 18

29

S/PRST/2010/25

all types including weapons and ammunition, military vehicles and equipment, paramilitary equipment, and spare parts for
the aforementioned, and technical advice, assistance, or training related to military activities;
[R]eaffirms its intention to consider imposing, through country-specific resolutions, targeted and graduated measures, such
as, inter alia, a ban on the export and supply of small arms and light weapons and of other military equipment and on
military assistance, against parties to situations of armed conflict which are on the Security Council’s agenda and are in
violation of applicable international law relating to the rights and protection of children in armed conflict.
Expresses its intention to consider taking appropriate steps, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, to
address the linkages between armed conflict and terrorism, the illicit trade in precious minerals, the illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons, and other criminal activities, which can prolong armed conflict or intensify its impact on
civilian populations, including children.
Urges that all parties and all States, particularly those in the region, including international, regional and subregional
organizations, cooperate fully with the work of the Monitoring Group [on the arm embargo] and ensure the safety of its
members, and unhindered access, in particular to persons, documents and sites the Monitoring Group deems relevant to
the execution of its mandate;
Calls upon all Member States to inspect, in their territory, including seaports and airports, in accordance with their national
authorities and legislation, and consistent with international law, all cargo to and from [the affected States], if the State
concerned has information that provides reasonable grounds to believe the cargo contains items the supply, transfer, or
export of which is prohibited [by Security Council resolutions].
Requests the Governments of the [affected State] and of all States, particularly those in the region, the United Nations
Organization Mission in the [affected State] and the Group of Experts to cooperate intensively, including by exchanging
information regarding arms shipments, trading routes and strategic mines known to be controlled or used by armed groups,
flights from the … region to the [affected State] and from the [affected State] to the … region, the illegal exploitation and
trafficking in natural resources, and activities of individuals and entities designated by the [Sanction] Committee pursuant
to paragraph 4 of resolution 1857 (2008);
Further demands that all parties and all States ensure cooperation with the Group of Experts by individuals and entities
within their jurisdiction or under their control, and requests in this regard all States to identify a focal point to the
Committee in order to enhance cooperation and information sharing with the Group of Experts;
Calls upon the countries of the region to reinforce their cooperation with the Security Council’s Committee and with the
Group of Experts … in enforcing the arms embargo in [the affected State] and to combat cross-border trafficking of illicit
small arms, light weapons and illicit natural resources as well as the movement of combatants, and reiterates its demand
that [States in the region] take measures to prevent the use of their respective territories in support of the activities of armed
groups present in the region.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that his [Special Representatives for neighbouring countries] coordinate the
activities of [their respective missions], share military information at their disposal, in particular concerning cross-border
movements of armed elements and arms trafficking, and pool their logistic and administrative resources, to an extent that
does not affect the ability to carry out their respective mandates, in order to maximize efficiency and cost-effectiveness.
Welcomes the achievements to date in the implementation of the Mine Action Programme of [the affected country], and
encourages the Government of [the affected country], with the support of the United Nations and all the relevant actors, to
continue its efforts towards the removal of anti-personnel landmines, anti-tank landmines and explosive remnants of war in
order to reduce the threats posed to human life and peace and security in the country; and expresses the need to provide
assistance for the care, rehabilitation, and economic and social reintegration of victims, including persons with disabilities.
[C]alls on parties to armed conflict to take all feasible precautions to protect the civilian population, including children,
from the effects of landmines and other explosive remnants of war, and in this regard, encourages the international
community to support country efforts in clearing landmines and other explosive remnants of war and to provide assistance
for the care, rehabilitation and economic and social reintegration of victims, including persons with disabilities;
Expressing also concern with the serious threat that anti-personnel mines, remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices may pose to the civilian population, and stressing the need to refrain from the use of weapons and devices
prohibited by international law.

S/PRST/2010/25

30

Welcomes the continued contribution of [peacekeeping mission] to operational de-mining…, encourages further assistance
in mine action by the United Nations to [the affected State] in support of both the continued development of its national
mine action capacity and emergency de-mining activities … commends donor countries for supporting these efforts
through financial and in-kind contributions and encourages further international contributions, takes note of the
communication to [the affected State] and [peacekeeping mission] of maps and information on the location of mines and
stresses the necessity to provide [the affected State] and [peacekeeping mission] with any additional maps and records on
the location of mines.
The Security Council expresses deepest worry at the presence in very high numbers of unexploded ordnance in [region of
the affected country], including cluster munitions. It deplores the death and injury of dozens of civilians, as well as of
several de-miners, caused by those munitions since the cessation of hostilities. It supports in this context the SecretaryGeneral’s request to [party to conflict] to provide to the United Nations detailed data on its use of cluster munitions in
[territory of the affected State].

S/RES/1525 (2004),
op. 9

S/PRST/2007/12

F. Compliance, accountability and the rule of law
Dissemination of,
and training on,
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law standards

Promoting
compliance through
targeted and
graduated measures

10-64655

Reiterates its call on States that have not already done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the relevant
instruments of international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, and to take appropriate legislative,
judicial and administrative measures to implement their obligations under these instruments;
Calls upon all parties concerned,
(a) to ensure the widest possible dissemination of information about international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law;
(b) to provide training for public officials, members of armed forces and armed groups, personnel associated to armed
forces, civilian police and law enforcement personnel, and members of the judicial and legal professions; and to raise
awareness among civil society and the civilian population on relevant international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law, as well as on the protection, special needs and human rights of women and children in conflict situations, to
achieve full and effective compliance;
(d) to seek, where appropriate, support from United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions, as well as United
Nations Country Teams and the International Committee of the Red Cross and, where appropriate, other members of the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, on training and awareness raising on international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law;
Underlines that it is fully prepared to impose targeted measures against persons to be designated by the [sanction]
Committee who are determined to be, among other things:
…
(d) Responsible for serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law committed in [the affected
country];
(e) Inciting publicly hatred and violence;
…
All States shall take the necessary measures to prevent the entry into or transit through their territories of all persons
designated by [the Sanctions Committee]…
Decides that all States shall, during the period of enforcement of the measures…, immediately freeze the funds, other
financial assets and economic resources which are on their territories from the date of adoption of this resolution, which are
owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by persons or entities designated by [the Committee], or that are held by entities
owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by them or by any persons or entities acting on their behalf or at their
direction…, and decides further that all States shall ensure that no funds, financial assets or economic resources are made
available by their nationals or by any persons within their territories, to or for the benefit of such persons or entities.
Decides that [these] provisions shall apply to … individuals operating in the [affected State] and committing serious
violations of international law involving the targeting of children or women in situations of armed conflict, including
killing and maiming, sexual violence, abduction and forced displacement.
Decides … that those individuals … who … commit violations of international humanitarian or human rights law or other
atrocities … shall be subject to the [following] measures: that all States shall take the necessary measures to prevent entry
into or transit through their territories of all persons as designated by [the Sanctions Committee]…, provided that nothing

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 5
S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 7

S/RES/1893 (2009),
op. 20

S/RES/1807 (2008),
op. 9, 11, and 13(d)
and (e)

S/RES/1591 (2005),
op. 3(c)

See also, for example,
S/RES/1265 (1999), op. 5
and pp. 8

See also, for example,
S/RES/1727 (2006),
op. 12.

10-64655

Accountability

in this paragraph shall obligate a State to refuse entry into its territory to its own nationals; that all States shall freeze all
funds, financial assets and economic resources that are on their territories on the date of adoption of this resolution or at
any time thereafter, that are owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the persons designated by [the Sanctions
Committee], or that are held by entities owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by such persons or by persons acting on
their behalf or at their direction, and decides further that all States shall ensure that no funds, financial assets or economic
resources are made available by their nationals or by any persons within their territories to or for the benefit of such
persons or entities.
Decides that all States shall take the necessary measures, for a period of twelve months, to prevent the entry into or transit
through their territories of all persons … who constitute a threat to the peace and national reconciliation process in [the
affected State], [including] any other person determined as responsible for serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law… provided that nothing in this paragraph shall oblige a State to refuse entry into its territory
to its own nationals.
[U]rges the Government of the [affected country] to ensure the full implementation of its “zero-tolerance policy” with
respect to discipline and human rights violations, including sexual and gender-based violence, committed by elements of
the [armed forces] and further urges that all reports of such violations be thoroughly investigated, with the support of [the
mission], and that all those responsible be brought to justice through a robust and independent process.
Affirms its strong opposition to impunity for serious violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law
and emphasizes in this context the responsibility of States to comply with their relevant obligations to end impunity and to
thoroughly investigate and prosecute persons responsible for war crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity or other
serious violations of international humanitarian law in order to prevent violations, avoid their recurrence and seek
sustainable peace, justice, truth and reconciliation;

S/RES/1572 (2004),
op. 9

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 11

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 10

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 7

Recalling the responsibilities of States to end impunity and to prosecute those responsible for genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and other egregious crimes perpetrated against civilians, and in this regard, noting with concern that
only limited numbers of perpetrators of sexual violence have been brought to justice, while recognizing that in conflict and
in post conflict situations national justice systems may be significantly weakened.
Reiterates its call upon the [national] authorities to put an end to impunity, including by bringing to justice without delay
perpetrators of grave violations of human rights and of international humanitarian law, and to take into account when they
select candidates for official positions, including key posts in the armed forces, national police and other security services,
the candidates’ past actions in terms of respect for international humanitarian law and human rights.

S/RES/1888 (2009),
pp. 7

S/RES/1756 (2007),
op. 12

31

S/PRST/2010/25

Reaffirms that ending impunity is essential if a society in conflict or recovering from conflict is to come to terms with past
abuses committed against civilians affected by armed conflict and to prevent future such abuses

See also, for example,
S/RES/1906 (2009), pp. 8;
S/RES/1902 (2009), pp.
11, op. 18; S/RES/1863
(2009), pp. 10;
S/RES/1828 (2008), pp. 8;
S/RES/1826 (2008), pp. 9;
S/RES/1816 (2008),
op. 16; S/RES/1769
(2007), pp. 12;
S/RES/1674 (2006), op. 8,
op. 11; S/RES/1591
(2005), pp. 5; S/RES/1577
(2004), op. 2; S/RES/1565
(2004), op. 19;
S/RES/1564 (2004), pp. 9
and op. 7; S/RES/1556
(2004), pp. 10 and op. 6;
S/RES/1479 (2003), op. 8;
S/RES/1468 (2003), op. 2;
S/RES/1296 (2000), op.
17; S/RES/1291 (2000),
op. 15; S/RES/1289
(2000), op. 17.

Establishment of
ad hoc judicial
mechanisms and
commissions of
inquiry

Referral of situations
involving genocide,
crimes against
humanity or war
crimes to the
International
Criminal Court

Recalls that accountability for … serious crimes must be ensured by taking measures at the national level, and by
enhancing international cooperation in support of national mechanisms, draws attention to the full range of justice and
reconciliation mechanisms to be considered, including national, international and “mixed” criminal courts and tribunals,
and truth and reconciliation commissions, as well as national reparation programs for victims and institutional reforms; and
underlines the Security Council’s role in ending impunity;
Recognizing the importance of transitional justice in promoting lasting reconciliation among all the people of [the affected
state] and welcoming the process of national consultations on the establishment of transitional justice mechanisms ….
Requests that the Secretary-General rapidly establish an international commission of inquiry in order immediately to
investigate reports of violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law … by all parties, to determine also
whether or not acts of genocide have occurred, and to identify the perpetrators of such violations with a view to ensuring
that those responsible are held accountable, calls on all parties to cooperate fully with such a commission.
Emphasizes the responsibility of States to end impunity and to prosecute those responsible for genocide, crimes against
humanity and serious violations of international humanitarian law, affirms the possibility, to this end, of using the
International Fact-Finding Commission established by Article 90 of the First Additional Protocol to the Geneva
Conventions.
Decides hereby, having received the request of [the affected State], to establish an international tribunal for the sole purpose
of prosecuting persons responsible for genocide and other serious violations of international humanitarian law committed
in the territory [of the affected State] and citizens [of the affected State] responsible for genocide and other such violations
committed in the territory of neighboring States, between [dates].
Decides hereby to establish an international tribunal for the sole purpose of prosecuting persons responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law committed in the territory of [the affected State] between [dates].
Welcoming the commitments made by the Government of the [affected country] to hold accountable those responsible for
atrocities in the country, noting the cooperation of the Government of [the affected country] with the International Criminal
Court, and stressing the importance of actively seeking to hold accountable those responsible for war crimes and crimes
against humanity in the country and of regional cooperation to this end.

10-64655

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
Decides to refer the situation … to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court;
Decides that [the affected State] and all other parties to the conflict … shall cooperate fully with and provide any necessary
assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor pursuant to this resolution and, while recognizing that States not party to the
Rome Statute have no obligation under the Statute, urges all States and concerned regional and other international
organizations to cooperate fully;
Invites the Court and [relevant regional organization] to discuss practical arrangements that will facilitate the work of the
Prosecutor and of the Court, including the possibility of conducting proceedings in the region, which would contribute to
regional efforts in the fight against impunity;

S/PRST/2010/25

32

Strongly condemns the acts of violence systematically perpetrated against civilians, including the massacres, as well as
other atrocities and violations of international humanitarian law and human rights, in particular, sexual violence against
women and girls, stresses the need to bring to justice those responsible, including those at the command level, and urges all
parties, including the [the affected State], to take all necessary steps to prevent further violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, in particular those committed against civilians.
Reaffirms that all parties to the conflict are bound to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law
and in particular the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and that persons who commit or order the commission of
grave breaches of the Conventions are individually responsible in respect of such breaches.

S/RES/1493 (2003),
op. 8

S/RES/1193 (1998),
op. 12

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 11

See also, for example,
S/RES/1902 (2009),
op. 17; S/RES/1888
(2009), pp. 8; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 6

S/RES/1902 (2009),
pp. 9
S/RES/1564 (2004),
op. 12

S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 6

S/RES/955 (1994),
op. 1

S/RES/827 (1993),
op. 2
S/RES/1925 (2010),
pp. 12

S/RES/1593 (2005),
op. 1-3

See also, for example,
S/RES/1906 (2009),
pp. 10

10-64655

Restoration of the
rule of law

Disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration

Security sector
reform

S/RES/1892 (2009),
op. 15

S/RES/1890 (2009),
pp. 18
S/RES/1746 (2007),
op. 13

See also, for example,
S/RES/1917 (2010),
op. 33; S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 3; S/RES/1896
(2009), pp. 11;
S/RES/1892 (2009), pp. 7,
pp. 9 and pp. 16;
S/RES/1868 (2009), pp. 5
and op. 23

S/RES/1702 (2006),
pp. 9
S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 11
S/RES/1925 (2010),
pp. 4

S/RES/1906 (2009),
pp. 3
S/RES/1880 (2009),
op. 13
S/RES/1917 (2010),
op. 23

S/RES/1910 (2010),
op. 12

See also, for example,
S/RES/1925 (2010), op. 5;
S/RES/1906 (2009), pp. 3.
op. 3 and op. 4;
S/RES/1896 (2009),
pp. 10; S/RES/1872
(2009), pp. 9

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 32

S/RES/1902 (2009),
op. 14
S/RES/1872 (2009),
op. 10

33

S/PRST/2010/25

Welcomes the steps taken towards the reform of rule of law institutions, requests [the mission] to continue to provide
necessary support in this regard, and encourages the … authorities [of the affected country] to take full advantage of that
support, notably in modernizing key legislation and in the implementation of the justice reform plan, to take the necessary
steps, including nominations, that will allow superior judicial institutions to function adequately, and to address the issue of
prolonged pretrial detentions and prison overcrowding, with special regard to children.
Stressing in this context the importance of further progress by the Government [of the affected country] in ending impunity
and strengthening judicial institutions, the rule of law and respect for human rights within [the affected country], including
for women and girls and in the reconstruction and reform of the prison sector in [the affected country].
[I]nvites [the affected State], with the assistance of the international community, to continue to work towards the
establishment of a fair and transparent justice system, including the reconstruction and reform of the correctional system, in
order to strengthen the rule of law throughout the country and eliminate impunity.
Urging [the affected State] to undertake, in coordination with the international community, a comprehensive reform of the
police, judiciary and correctional systems, to protect and promote human rights and fundamental freedoms, and to end
impunity.
Calls upon all parties concerned to ensure that all peace processes, peace agreements and post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction planning … include specific measures for the protection of civilians including the re-establishment of the
rule of law.
[S]tressing … the urgency of implementing comprehensive security sector reform and of achieving as appropriate the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration (DDR) of [national] armed groups, and the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration (DDRRR) of foreign armed groups for the long-term stabilization of the
[affected country], considering the need to create the security conditions for ensuring sustainable economic development,
and stressing the importance of the contribution made by international partners in these fields.
[S]tressing the importance of permanently disarming, demobilizing, resettling or repatriating, as appropriate, and
reintegrating [national] and foreign armed groups for the long-term stabilization of the [affected country], and of the
contribution made by international partners in this field.
[U]rges the … parties to make further progress to advance the reunification and disarmament processes, and encourages
the international donors to continue to provide their support to them, as appropriate.
Reiterates the importance of increasing, in a comprehensive framework, the functionality, professionalism and
accountability of the [affected country’s] security sector through appropriate vetting procedures, training, mentoring,
equipping and empowerment efforts, for both women and men, in order to accelerate progress towards the goal of selfsufficient and ethnically balanced [affected country’s] security forces providing security and ensuring the rule of law
throughout the country.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue … to support the Government [of the affected country] in developing a
national security strategy, which reflects respect for the rule of law and the protection of human rights, including … the
legal and policy framework for the operation of its security forces including governance, vetting and oversight
mechanisms.
Reiterates its call upon the … authorities [of the affected state], with the support of [the mission], to establish an effective
vetting mechanism, in accordance with international standards, for the [armed forces] and the national security forces, to
ensure the exclusion of those persons associated with violations of international humanitarian law and human rights abuses
and to trigger the judicial process against such persons where appropriate.
Underscores the importance of security sector reform and urges all international partners … to support the
Government…’s efforts to professionalize and enhance the capacity of the national security services and the police, in
particular in the fields of training on human rights and sexual and gender-based violence.
Calls on the … Government to develop … the legal and policy framework for the operation of its security forces including
governance, vetting and oversight mechanisms, ensuring respect for the rule of law and the protection of human rights.

Role of United
Nations
peacekeeping
missions and other
relevant actors in
Disarmament,
Demobilization and
Reintegration
Programmes and in
Security Sector
Reforms

Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate in this order of priority:
Protection of civilians
(c) Support the efforts of the Government of the [affected country] to ensure the protection of civilians from violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights abuses, including all forms of sexual and gender-based violence, to
promote and protect human rights and to fight impunity, including through the implementation of the Government’s “zerotolerance policy” with respect to discipline and human rights and humanitarian law violations, committed by elements of
the security forces, in particular its newly integrated elements;
(d) Support national and international efforts to bring perpetrators to justice, including by establishing Prosecution Support
Cells to assist the … military justice authorities in prosecuting persons arrested by the [military forces];
…
Stabilization and peace consolidation
(l) Taking fully into account the leading role of the Government of the [affected country], support, in close cooperation
with other international partners, the efforts of the [national] authorities to strengthen and reform security and judicial
institutions;
(o) Develop and implement, in close consultation with the [national] authorities …, a multi-year joint United Nations
justice support programme in order to develop the criminal justice chain, the police, the judiciary and prisons in conflictaffected areas and a strategic programmatic support at the central level ….
(p) Support, in close cooperation with other international partners, the efforts by the Government [of the affected country]
to consolidate State authority in the territory freed from armed groups through the deployment of trained [national police
forces], and to develop rule of law institutions and territorial administration …
Requests [the mission] to continue to contribute … to the promotion and protection of human rights in [the affected
country], with special attention to violence committed against children and women, to monitor and help investigate human
rights violations with a view to ending impunity …, and further requests the Secretary-General to continue to include in his
reports to the Security Council relevant information on progress in this area.
Decides that [peacekeeping mission], consistent with its existing mandate … [will] assist with the restructuring and
maintenance of the rule of law, public safety and public order, will provide assistance and advice to the [national
authorities], in consultation with relevant actors, in monitoring, restructuring, reforming and strengthening of the justice
sector, including through technical assistance to review all relevant legislation, the provision of experts to serve as
professional resources, the rapid identification and implementation of mechanisms to address prison overcrowding and
prolonged pre-trial detention and the coordination and planning of these activities, and invites [the affected State] to take
full advantage of that assistance.
Underlines the importance of civilian police as a component of peacekeeping operations, recognizes the role of police in
assuring the safety and well-being of civilians and, in this regard, acknowledges the need to enhance the capacity of the
United Nations for the rapid deployment of qualified and well-trained civilian police.
Decides that (…) [the mission] shall have the following mandate …:
(k) Reform of the security sector
– To advise the Government …, as appropriate, on security sector reform and the organization of the future National Army,
including on establishing an effective vetting mechanism, in accordance with international standards,
– To contribute, as appropriate, to the development by the Ivorian authorities of the capacities of the police and
gendarmerie, in particular through crowd control training, and to restoring their presence throughout [the affected country].

S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 12

See also, for example,
S/RES/1923 (2010), op. 8;
S/RES/1927 (2010), op. 6;
S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 39; S/RES/1892
(2009), op. 10;
S/RES/1890 (2009), op. 6;
S/RES/1872 (2009), op. 9;
S/RES/1868 (2009), op. 4;
S/RES/1756 (2007), op. 3;
S/RES/1589 (2005), op. 9;
S/RES/1564 (2004), op. 9;
S/RES/1547 (2004), op. 4;
and S/RES/1528 (2004),
op. 6.

S/RES/1880 (2009),
op. 26

S/RES/1702 (2006),
op. 14

S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 15
S/RES/1933 (2010),
op. 16

See also, for example,
S/RES/1880 (2009),
op. 27

S/PRST/2010/25

34

Role of United
Nations
peacekeeping
missions and other
relevant actors in
restoring the rule of
law and promoting
accountability

10-64655

10-64655

Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate in this order of priority:
(i) Support, including through its political mediation efforts, the completion of activities of DDR of [national] armed
groups or their effective integration in the army, which would remain subject to prior adequate training and equipment;
(j) Support activities of DDRRR of foreign armed groups members …
(m) In line with the relevant legislation on the reform of the [national armed forces] …, assist the Government, along with
international and bilateral partners, in strengthening its military capacity, including military justice and military police, in
particular by harmonizing efforts and facilitating exchanges of information and lessons learned and, as the Government
requests it, assist in the training of [national armed forces] and military police battalions, support military justice institutions
and mobilize donors to provide equipment and other required resources;
(n) Support the reform of the police led by the Government of the [affected country], including by providing training to
battalions of the … national police and mobilizing donors to provide basic supplies, recalling the urgent need for the …
authorities to adopt the appropriate legal framework;
Encourages [the mission] to work closely with the [national] Armed Forces … to reinvigorate the disarmament,
demobilization, and reintegration (DDR) process and to assist in voluntary disarmament and weapons collection and
destruction efforts in implementation of DDR … and to ensure the timely provisions of sustainable reintegration
programmes, which will help to promote continued and enhanced funding support from donors for the reintegration phase,
and to coordinate with local authorities and with the United Nations agencies programmes and funds, initiatives that
strengthen DDR with the creation of economic opportunities for reintegrated individuals and further urges donors to
respond to calls for assistance to the DDR process, in particular the reintegration phase, and calls on donors to honour all
obligations and pledges of assistance, and takes note in this context of the need to also assist the victims in conflict-affected
communities.
Encourages [the mission], consistent with its mandate, and within authorized levels of civilian police, to continue efforts to
assist the parties to the [peace agreement] in promoting the rule of law, restructuring the police and corrections services
throughout [the affected country], particularly in the south due to lack of development of the police services, and assisting
in the training of civilian police and corrections officers;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to assist the Government [of the affected country] in developing the
transitional security institutions, including the [national] police force, and the national security force, and to continue to
support the Government [of the affected country] in developing a national security strategy, which reflects respect for the
rule of law and the protection of human rights, including plans for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR),
justice and corrections capacities, as well as the legal and policy framework for the operation of its security forces
including governance, vetting and oversight mechanisms.
Further requests [the mission] to provide military training, including in the area of human rights, international humanitarian
law, child protection and the prevention of gender-based and sexual violence, to the [armed forces] …, as part of broader
international efforts to support security sector reform.
Requests [the mission] … to also continue to contribute … to assist the Government of [the affected country] in restoring a
civilian policing presence throughout [the affected country], and to advise the Government of [the affected country] on the
restructuring of the internal security services and in re-establishing the authority of the judiciary and the rule of law
throughout [the affected country].

S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 12

S/RES/1919 (2010),
op. 18

S/RES/1919 (2010),
op. 17

S/RES/1910 (2010),
op. 12

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 31
S/RES/1880 (2009),
op. 27

G. Media and information
Protection of
journalists

S/RES/1917 (2010),
op. 34
S/RES/1738 (2006),
op. 1
S/RES/1738 (2006),
op. 2

See also S/RES/1738
(2006), op. 7.

S/PRST/2010/25

35

Calls for full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and international humanitarian law throughout [the
affected country], notes with concern the restrictions on freedom of media, and attacks against journalists.
Condemns intentional attacks against journalists, media professionals and associated personnel, as such, in situations of
armed conflict, and calls upon all parties to put an end to such practices.
Recalls … that journalists, media professionals and associated personnel engaged in dangerous professional missions in
areas of armed conflict shall be considered as civilians and shall be respected and protected as such, provided that they take
no action adversely affecting their status as civilians. This is without prejudice to the right of war correspondents accredited
to the armed forces to the status of prisoners of war provided for in article 4(A)(4) of the Third Geneva Convention.

Accurate
management of
information on the
conflict

S/RES/1738 (2006),
op. 3
S/RES/1738 (2006),
op. 6
S/RES/1933 (2010),
op. 10

See also, for example,
S/RES/1727 (2006), op.
12

S/RES/1738 (2006),
op. 4

S/RES/1572 (2004),
op. 9

S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 17

S/RES/1738 (2006),
op. 8
S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 18

II. SPECIFIC PROTECTION CONCERNS ARISING FROM SECURITY COUNCIL DISCUSSIONS ON
CHILDREN AFFECTED BY ARMED CONFLICT
Condemn, and call
for the cessation of,
violations against
children

10-64655

Expresses its strong concern about the recruitment and use of children by [anti-government] forces in [the affected
country] as well as the killing and maiming of children as a result of the conflict, reiterates its strong condemnation of the
recruitment and use of child soldiers in violation of applicable international law and all other violations and abuses
committed against children in situations of armed conflict, in particular attacks against schools, and the use of children in
suicide attacks, calls for those responsible to be brought to justice
Strongly condemns the grave violations against children affected by armed violence, as well as widespread rape and other
sexual abuse of women and girls ….
Strongly condemns all violations of applicable international law involving the recruitment and use of children by parties to
armed conflict as well as their re-recruitment, killing and maiming, rape and other sexual violence, abductions, attacks
against schools or hospitals and denial of humanitarian access by parties to armed conflict and all other violations of
international law committed against children in situations of armed conflict;
[S]trongly condemns continuing forms of discrimination and violence against women and girls, in particular violence
aimed at preventing girls from attending schools …
Strongly condemns the recruitment and use of child soldiers by parties to armed conflict in violation of international
obligations applicable to them and all other violations and abuses committed against children in armed conflict.

S/RES/1917 (2010),
op. 22

S/RES/1892 (2009),
op. 19
S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 1

S/RES/1868 (2009),
op. 29
S/RES/1612 (2005),
op. 1

See also, for example,
S/RES/1840 (2008),
op. 17; S/RES/1806
(2008), op. 14;
S/RES/1780 (2007),
op. 17; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 5;
S/RES/1539 (2004), op. 1;
and S/RES/1493 (2003),
op. 13.

S/PRST/2010/25

36

Countering
incitement to
violence

Recalls … that media equipment and installations constitute civilian objects, and in this respect shall not be the object of
attack or of reprisals, unless they are military objectives.
Urges States and all other parties to an armed conflict to do their utmost to prevent violations of international humanitarian
law against civilians, including journalists, media professionals and associated personnel.
Urges every [citizen of the affected state] to refrain from any call for hatred, intolerance and violence, notes with interest
that in his report … the Secretary-General encouraged the Security Council to impose targeted sanctions against media
actors who fan political tension and incite violence and reiterates that it is fully prepared to impose targeted measures …,
including among other things against persons who are determined to be a threat to the peace and national reconciliation
process in [the affected country] or to be publicly inciting hatred and violence;
Reaffirms its condemnation of all incitements to violence against civilians in situations of armed conflict, further reaffirms
the need to bring to justice, in accordance with applicable international law, individuals who incite such violence, and
indicates its willingness, when authorizing missions, to consider, where appropriate, steps in response to media broadcast
inciting genocide, crimes against humanity and serious violations of international humanitarian law.
Decides that all States shall take the necessary measures, for a period of twelve months, to prevent the entry into or transit
through their territories of all persons … who constitute a threat to the peace and national reconciliation process in [the
affected State], [including] any other person who incites publicly hatred and violence … provided that nothing in this
paragraph shall oblige a State to refuse entry into its territory to its own nationals.
Reaffirms its condemnation of all incitements to violence against civilians in situations of armed conflict, further reaffirms
the need to bring to justice individuals who incite or otherwise cause such violence, and indicates its willingness, when
authorizing missions, to consider, where appropriate, steps in response to media broadcasts inciting genocide, crimes
against humanity and serious violations of international humanitarian law.
Urges all parties involved in situations of armed conflict to respect the professional independence and rights of journalists,
media professionals and associated personnel as civilians.
Affirms that, where appropriate, United Nations peacekeeping missions should include a mass-media component that can
disseminate information about international humanitarian law and human rights law, including peace education and
children’s protection, while also giving objective information about the activities of the United Nations, and further affirms
that, where appropriate, regional peacekeeping operations should be encouraged to include such mass-media components.

10-64655

Call for compliance
with applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law

Accountability for
perpetrators of
grave violations
against children
Role of United
Nations
peacekeeping and
other relevant
missions and actors

Calling on all parties to armed conflicts to comply strictly with the obligations applicable to them under international law
for the protection of children in armed conflict, including those contained in the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
its Optional Protocol on the involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, as well as the Geneva Conventions of 12th
August 1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977,
[D]emands … that all armed groups … immediately stop recruiting and using children and release all children associated
with them.
Calls upon all parties concerned to abide by the international obligations applicable to them relating to the protection of
children affected by armed conflict as well as the concrete commitments they have made to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, to UNICEF and other United Nations agencies and to cooperate
fully with the United Nations peacekeeping missions and United Nations country teams … in the follow-up and
implementation of these commitments.
[R]eiterates its call on parties to armed conflict [listed in the relevant Secretary-General’s report] that have not already done
so to prepare and implement, without further delay, concrete time-bound action plans to halt recruitment and use of
children in violation of applicable international law, and to address all violations and abuses against children in close
cooperation with the [Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict], as well as with
UNICEF and the UN Country Task Forces on Monitoring and Reporting.
[C]alls upon concerned Member States to take decisive and immediate action against persistent perpetrators of violations
and abuses committed against children in situations of armed conflict, and further calls upon them to bring to justice those
responsible for such violations that are prohibited under applicable international law, including with regard to recruitment
and use of children, killing and maiming and rape and other sexual violence, through national justice systems, and where
applicable, international justice mechanisms and mixed criminal courts and tribunals, with a view to ending impunity for
those committing crimes against children
[R]equests [the mission], consistent with its mandate and in coordination with the relevant parties and with particular
emphasis on the protection, release and reintegration with their families of children recruited to and participating with
armed forces and armed groups, to increase its support for the National DDR Coordination Council and the (…) DDR
Commissions and to monitor the reintegration process.
[R]equests the Secretary-General to continue to strengthen the child protection component of [the mission], in particular
through the appointment of child protection advisers.

S/RES/1794 (2007),
op. 3
S/RES/1612 (2005),
op. 15

See also, for example,
S/RES/1923 (2010),
op. 24; S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 15;
S/RES/1868 (2009), op.
29; S/RES/1479 (2003),
op. 15; and S/RES/1296
(2000), op. 10.

S/PRST/2008/6

S/PRST/2010/10

S/RES/1919 (2010),
op. 19

S/RES/1917 (2010),
op. 22
S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 8

S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 9
S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 17

S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 11

See also, for example,
S/RES/1936 (2010),
pp. 13; S/RES/1923
(2010), op. 23;
S/RES/1882 (2009).
op. 12; S/RES/1828
(2008), op. 14;
S/RES/1806 (2008),
op. 14; S/RES/1780
(2007), op. 17;
S/RES/1612 (2005),
op. 12 and op. 18;
S/RES/1565 (2004),
op. 5(g); S/RES/1509
(2003), op. 3; S/RES/1460
(2003), op. 15;
S/RES/1296 (2000), op. 9;
and S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 13.

37

S/PRST/2010/25

Stresses the responsibility of the United Nations country-level task forces on monitoring and reporting and United Nations
country teams, consistent with their respective mandates, to ensure effective follow-up to Security Council resolutions on
children and armed conflict, to monitor and report progress to the Secretary-General in close cooperation with his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and ensure a coordinated response to issues related to children and armed
conflict;
Requests the Secretary-General to include more systematically in his reports on children and armed conflict specific
information regarding the implementation of the [Security Council’s] Working Group [on Children And Armed Conflict]
recommendations
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take the necessary measures including, where applicable, to bring the
monitoring and reporting mechanism to its full capacity, to allow for prompt advocacy and effective response to all
violations and abuses committed against children and to ensure that information collected and communicated by the
mechanism is accurate, objective, reliable and verifiable;
Welcomes the efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in mainstreaming child protection into peacekeeping
missions, in line with that Department’s recently adopted Child Protection Policy directive, and encourages the
deployment of Child Protection Advisers to peacekeeping operations, as well as into relevant peacebuilding and political
missions, and decides to continue the inclusion of specific provisions for the protection of children in such mandates;

S/RES/1882 (2009),
pp. 8

S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 10

Welcomes recent initiatives by regional and sub-regional organizations and arrangements for the protection of children
affected by armed conflict, and encourages continued mainstreaming of child protection into their advocacy, policies and
programmes; development of peer review and monitoring and reporting mechanisms; establishment, within their
secretariats, of child-protection mechanisms; inclusion of child-protection staff and training in their peace and field
operations; sub- and inter-regional initiatives to end activities harmful to children in times of conflict, in particular crossborder recruitment and abduction of children, illicit movement of small arms, and illicit trade in natural resources through
the development and implementation of guidelines on children and armed conflict..
Urges all parties concerned, including Member States, United Nations entities and financial institutions, to support the
development and strengthening of the capacities of national institutions and local civil society networks for advocacy,
protection and rehabilitation of children affected by armed conflict to ensure the sustainability of local child-protection
initiatives.
The Security Council reiterates the need for stronger focus by all parties concerned, including Governments and the donor
community, on the long-term effects of armed conflict on children and the impediments to their full rehabilitation and
reintegration into their families and communities, through, inter alia, addressing the need for providing appropriate health
care, enhancing their exchange of information about programmes and best practices, and ensuring the availability of
adequate resources, funding and technical assistance to support national strategies or action plans in the area of child
protection and welfare, and community-based programmes, bearing in mind the ‘Paris principles to protect children from
unlawful recruitment by armed forces or groups’, with a view to ensuring the long-term sustainability and success of their
programmatic response to the release, rehabilitation and reintegration of all children associated with armed forces and
armed groups.
Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate …:
(e) Work closely with the Government to ensure the implementation of its commitments to address serious violations
against children, in particular the finalization of the Action Plan to release children present in the [armed forces] and to
prevent further recruitment, with the support of the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism;
Welcomes the adoption of an action plan by the [armed group] to release all children still associated with its forces by the
end of [the year] and in order to achieve this goal, calls for a timely implementation of this action plan.
While noting that some parties to armed conflict have responded to its call upon them to prepare and implement concrete
time-bound action plans to halt recruitment and use of children in violation of applicable international law;
(a) Reiterates its call on parties to armed conflict listed in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s report on children and
armed conflict that have not already done so to prepare and implement, without further delay, action plans to halt
recruitment and use of children in violation of applicable international law;
(b) Calls upon those parties listed in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s report on children and armed conflict that
commit, in contravention of applicable international law, killing and maiming of children and/or rape and other sexual
violence against children, in situations of armed conflict, to prepare concrete time-bound action plans to halt those
violations and abuses;
(c) Further calls upon all parties listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s report on children and armed conflict to
address all other violations and abuses committed against children and undertake specific commitments and measures in
this regard;
(d) Urges those parties listed in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s report on children and armed conflict to implement
the provisions contained in this paragraph in close cooperation with the Special Representative of the Secretary- General
for Children and Armed Conflict and the United Nations country-level task forces on monitoring and reporting;

S/RES/1612 (2005),
op. 13

S/PRST/2010/25

38

Action plans

Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that, in all his reports on country-specific situations, the matter of
children and armed conflict is included as a specific aspect of the report, and expresses its intention to give its full attention
to the information provided therein, including the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions and of the
recommendations of its Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, when dealing with those situations on its agenda

S/RES/1612 (2005),
op. 17

S/PRST/2008/28

S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 12

S/RES/1919 (2010),
op. 19
S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 5

See also, for example,
S/RES/1935 (2010),
op. 19; S/RES/1612
(2005), op. 16.

10-64655

10-64655

Training for
peacekeeping
personnel

Children and peace
processes

Targeted and
graduated measures
as a response to
violations of
applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law obligations
relating to children

S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 6

S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 13

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 31
S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 19

S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 15

S/RES/1769 (2007),
op. 17

See also, for example,
S/RES/1325 (2000), op. 6;
and S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 14.

See also, for example,
S/RES/1826 (2008), op. 6;
and S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 11; S/RES/1612
(2005), op. 14.

S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 7

S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 3

S/RES/1807 (2008),
op. 9, 11, and 13(d)
and (e)

S/PRST/2010/25

39

In this context, encourages Member States to devise ways, in close consultations with the United Nations country-level
task force on monitoring and reporting and United Nations country teams, to facilitate the development and
implementation of time-bound action plans, and the review and monitoring by the United Nations country-level task force
of obligations and commitments relating to the protection of children in armed conflict;
Stresses that effective disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes for children, building on best practices
identified by UNICEF and other relevant child protection actors, are crucial for the well-being of all children who, in
contravention of applicable international law, have been recruited or used by armed forces and groups, and are a critical
factor for durable peace and security, and urges national Governments and donors to ensure that these community-based
programmes receive timely, sustained and adequate resources and funding.
Further requests [the mission] to provide military training, including in the area of human rights, international humanitarian
law, child protection and the prevention of gender-based and sexual violence, to the [armed forces] … as part of broader
international efforts to support security sector reform.
Reiterates the importance of compliance with relevant provisions of international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law and of providing appropriate training in such law, including child and gender-related provisions, as well as in
negotiation and communications skills, cultural awareness, civil-military coordination and sensitivity in the prevention of
HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases, to personnel involved in peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building
activities, requests the Secretary-General to disseminate appropriate guidance and to ensure that such United Nations
personnel have the appropriate training, and urges relevant Member States, as necessary and feasible, to disseminate
appropriate instructions and to ensure that appropriate training is included in their programs for personnel involved in
similar activities.
Calls upon Member States, United Nations entities, including the Peacebuilding Commission and other parties concerned
to ensure that the protection, rights, well-being and empowerment of children affected by armed conflict are integrated into
all peace processes and that post-conflict recovery and reconstruction planning, programmes and strategies prioritize issues
concerning children affected by armed conflict;
Calls on all concerned parties to ensure that the protection of children is addressed in the implementation of the [peace
agreement], and requests the Secretary-General to ensure continued monitoring and reporting of the situation of children
and continued dialogue with parties to the conflict towards the preparations of time-bound action plans to end recruitment
and use of child soldiers and other violations against children.
Reiterates its determination to ensure respect for its resolutions on children and armed conflict, and in this regard:
(a) Welcomes the sustained activity and recommendations of its Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict as called
for in paragraph 8 of its resolution 1612 (2005), and invites it to continue reporting regularly to the Security Council;
(b) Requests enhanced communication between the Working Group and relevant Security Council Sanctions Committees,
including through the exchange of pertinent information on violations and abuses committed against children in armed
conflict;
(c) Reaffirms its intention to take action against persistent perpetrators in line with paragraph 9 of its resolution 1612
(2005);
[R]equests the Secretary-General also to include in the annexes to his reports on children and armed conflict those parties
to armed conflict that engage, in contravention of applicable international law, in patterns of killing and maiming of
children and/or rape and other sexual violence against children, in situations of armed conflict, bearing in mind all other
violations and abuses against children, and notes that the present paragraph will apply to situations in accordance with the
conditions set out in paragraph 16 of its resolution 1379 (2001);
All States shall take the necessary measures to prevent the entry into or transit through their territories of all persons
designated by [the Sanctions Committee]…
Decides that all States shall, during the period of enforcement of the measures…, immediately freeze the funds, other
financial assets and economic resources which are on their territories from the date of adoption of this resolution, which are
owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by persons or entities designated by [the Sanctions Committee], or that are held
by entities owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by them or by any persons or entities acting on their behalf or at their
direction…, and decides further that all States shall ensure that no funds, financial assets or economic resources are made
available by their nationals or by any persons within their territories, to or for the benefit of such persons or entities.

III. SPECIFIC PROTECTION CONCERNS ARISING FROM SECURITY COUNCIL DISCUSSIONS ON WOMEN
AFFECTED BY ARMED CONFLICT
Condemn, and call
for the cessation of,
violations against
women and girls

Call for compliance
with applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law

Women and the
prevention and
resolution of conflict

Recognizes that despite progress achieved on gender equality, enhanced efforts are necessary to secure the rights of women
and girls, strongly condemns continuing forms of discrimination and violence against women and girls, in particular
violence aimed at preventing girls from attending schools, … welcomes the commitment of the [affected country]’s
Government to strengthen the participation of women in all … governance institutions, including elected and appointed
bodies and the civil service ….
Strongly condemns all violations of applicable international law committed against women and girls in situations of armed
conflicts and post-conflict situations, demands all parties to conflicts to cease such acts with immediate effect, and
emphasizes the responsibility of all States to put an end to impunity and to prosecute those responsible for all forms of
violence committed against women and girls in armed conflicts, including rape and other sexual violence.
Reiterating deep concern that, despite its repeated condemnation of violence against women and children including all
forms of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict, and despite its calls addressed to all parties to armed conflict for
the cessation of such acts with immediate effect, such acts continue to occur, and in some situations have become
systematic or widespread.
Recalling that international humanitarian law affords general protection to women and children as part of the civilian
population during armed conflicts and special protection due to the fact that they can be placed particularly at risk.

S/RES/1917 (2010),
op. 35

Calls upon all parties to armed conflict to respect fully international law applicable to the rights and protection of women
and girls, especially as civilians, in particular the obligations applicable to them under the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and the Additional Protocols thereto of 1977, the Refugee Convention of 1951 and the Protocol thereto of 1967,
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women of 1979 and the Optional Protocol
thereto of 1999 and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989 and the two Optional Protocols
thereto of … 2000, and to bear in mind the relevant provisions of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Urges Member States, international and regional organisations to take further measures to improve women’s participation
during all stages of peace processes, particularly in conflict resolution, post-conflict planning and peacebuilding, including
by enhancing their engagement in political and economic decision-making at early stages of recovery processes, through
inter alia promoting women’s leadership and capacity to engage in aid management and planning, supporting women’s
organizations, and countering negative societal attitudes about women’s capacity to participate equally.

S/RES/1325 (2000),
op. 9

See also, for example,
S/RES/1882, op. 1;
S/RES/1820 (2008), pp. 8;
S/RES/1806 (2008),
op. 28;

S/RES/1889 (2009),
op. 3

S/RES/1888 (2009),
pp. 3
S/RES/1888 (2009),
pp. 6

S/RES/1889 (2009),
op. 1

S/RES/1889 (2009), op. 2;
S/RES/1888 (2009),
pp. 10;

See also, for example,
S/RES/1935 (2010), op. 3;
S/RES/1889 (2009), op. 8;
S/RES/1888 (2009),
pp. 13, pp. 14 and op. 7;

S/PRST/2010/25

40

[D]ecides that [these] provisions shall apply to … political and military leaders operating in the [affected State] and
recruiting or using children in armed conflicts in violation of applicable international law; [and] individuals operating in the
[affected State] and committing serious violations of international law involving the targeting of children.

10-64655

10-64655

Role of United
Nations
peacekeeping and
other relevant
missions and actors

Encourages Member States in post-conflict situations, in consultation with civil society, including women’s organizations,
to specify in detail women and girls’ needs and priorities and design concrete strategies, in accordance with their legal
systems, to address those needs and priorities, which cover inter alia support for greater physical security and better socioeconomic conditions, through education, income generating activities, access to basic services, in particular health services,
including sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights and mental health, gender-responsive law enforcement
and access to justice, as well as enhancing capacity to engage in public decision-making at all levels
Emphasizing the importance of addressing sexual violence issues from the outset of peace processes and mediation efforts,
in order to protect populations at risk and promote full stability, in particular in the areas of pre-ceasefire humanitarian
access and human rights agreements, ceasefires and ceasefire monitoring, Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
(DDR), Security Sector Reform (SSR) arrangements, justice and reparations, post-conflict recovery and development.
Calls upon all concerned parties to ensure that the protection of women and children is addressed in the implementation of
the [peace agreement] as well as the post-conflict reconstruction and recovery phases, including continued monitoring and
reporting of the situation of women and children and that all reported abuses are investigated and those responsible brought
to justice.
Urges the Secretary-General and his Special Envoys to invite women to participate in discussions pertinent to the
prevention and resolution of conflict, the maintenance of peace and security, and post-conflict peace building, and
encourages all parties to such talks to facilitate the equal and full participation of women at decision-making levels.
Calls on all actors involved, when negotiating and implementing peace agreements, to adopt a gender perspective,
including, inter alia:
(a) The special needs of women and girls during repatriation and resettlement and for rehabilitation, reintegration and postconflict reconstruction;
(b) Measures that support local women’s peace initiatives and indigenous processes for conflict resolution, and that involve
women in all of the implementation mechanisms of the peace agreements;
(c) Measures that ensure the protection of and respect for human rights of women and girls, particularly as they relate to the
constitution, the electoral system, the police and the judiciary.
Requests the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to identify women’s protection advisers (WPAs) among [the
mission]’s gender advisers and human rights protection units in line with [the mission]’s comprehensive strategy against
sexual violence.
Welcoming the inclusion of women in peacekeeping missions in civil, military and police functions, and recognizing that
women and children affected by armed conflict may feel more secure working with and reporting abuse to women in
peacekeeping missions, and that the presence of women peacekeepers may encourage local women to participate in the
national armed and security forces, thereby helping to build a security sector that is accessible and responsive to all,
especially women.
Decides to include specific provisions as appropriate for the protection of women and children from rape and other sexual
violence in the mandate of UN peacekeeping operations, including, on a case by case basis, the identification of women’s
protection advisers …

S/RES/1888 (2009),
pp. 12

S/RES/1880 (2009),
op. 14

S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 12
S/RES/1325 (2000),
op. 8

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 18
S/RES/1888 (2009),
pp. 15

S/RES/1888 (2009),
op. 12

See also, for example,
S/RES/1889 (2009),
pp. 14; S/RES/1828
(2008), op. 15;
S/RES/1590 (2005),
op. 15; S/RES/1528
(2004), op. 6 (n);
S/RES/1325 (2000), op. 5
and op. 7; and
S/PRST/2007/40.

S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 9

S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 10

S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 13

S/PRST/2010/25

41

Requests the Secretary-General to develop effective guidelines and strategies to enhance the ability of relevant UN
peacekeeping operations, consistent with their mandates, to protect civilians, including women and girls, from all forms of
sexual violence and to systematically include in his written reports to the Council on conflict situations his observations
concerning the protection of women and girls and recommendations in this regard.
Requests the Secretary-General and relevant United Nations agencies, inter alia, through consultation with women and
women-led organizations as appropriate, to develop effective mechanisms for providing protection from violence,
including in particular sexual violence, to women and girls in and around UN managed refugee and internally displaced
persons camps, as well as in all disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration processes, and in justice and security sector
reform efforts assisted by the United Nations.
Urges all parties concerned, including Member States, United Nations entities and financial institutions, to support the
development and strengthening of the capacities of national institutions, in particular of judicial and health systems, and of

S/RES/1889 (2009),
op. 10

Training for
peacekeeping
personnel

S/PRST/2010/25

42

Comprehensive
strategies

10-64655

local civil society networks in order to provide sustainable assistance to victims of sexual violence in armed conflict and
post-conflict situations.
Urges appropriate regional and sub-regional bodies in particular to consider developing and implementing policies,
activities, and advocacy for the benefit of women and girls affected by sexual violence in armed conflict.
Requests [peacekeeping mission], in view of the scale and severity of sexual violence committed especially by armed
elements in [country], to undertake a thorough review of its efforts to prevent and respond to sexual violence, and to pursue
a comprehensive mission-wide strategy, in close cooperation with the United Nations Country Team and other partners, to
strengthen prevention, protection, and response to sexual violence, including through training for the [national] security
forces in accordance with its mandate, and to regularly report, including in a separate annex if necessary, on actions taken
in this regard, including factual data and trend analyses of the problem.
Condemns in the strongest terms all sexual and other forms of violence committed against civilians in armed conflict, in
particular women and children, and undertakes to ensure that all peace support operations employ all feasible measures to
prevent such violence and to address its impact where it takes place.
Decides that [peacekeeping mission] will … assist in the promotion and protection of human rights, with particular
attention to women, children and vulnerable persons, investigate human rights violations to put an end to impunity, and …
cooperate with efforts to ensure that those responsible for serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law are brought to justice, while working closely with the relevant [United Nations] agencies.
Further urges the Secretary-General to seek to expand the role and contribution of women in United Nations field-based
operations, and especially among military observers, civilian police, human rights and humanitarian personnel.
Notes the importance of including in the mandates of peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building operations special
protection and assistance provisions for groups requiring particular attention, including women and children.
Demands that the parties to the conflict immediately take appropriate measures to protect civilians, including women and
children, from all forms of sexual violence; and requests [the mission] to report on the implementation of its
comprehensive strategy for providing protection to women and children from sexual violence and gender based violence,
as well as to assess progress towards the elimination of sexual and gender-based violence, requests the Secretary-General
to ensure that the relevant provisions of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) are
implemented by [the mission] and to include information on this in his reporting to the Council;
[C]alls upon all (…) parties, with the continued support of [the mission], to ensure the protection of civilians, especially
women, children and displaced persons, to fully implement the recommendations of its working group on Children and
Armed Conflict in [the affected country] …, notably to adopt and implement a national action plan to address sexual
violence, and to ensure that rule of law is strengthened and that all reported abuses are investigated and those responsible
for such violations be brought to justice, calls further upon all parties to take appropriate measures to refrain from, prevent
and protect civilians from all forms of sexual violence …
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that technical support is provided, in pre-deployment and in theatre, to [the
mission’s] troop- and police-contributing countries to include guidance and training for military and police personnel on
the protection of civilians from imminent threat and appropriate responses, including on human rights, sexual violence and
gender issues.
Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Security Council, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and its Working Group and relevant States, as appropriate, to develop and implement appropriate training
programs for all peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel deployed by the United Nations in the context of missions as
mandated by the Council to help them better prevent, recognize and respond to sexual violence and other forms of
violence against civilians.
Encourages troop and police contributing countries, in consultation with the Secretary-General, to consider steps they
could take to heighten awareness and the responsiveness of their personnel participating in UN peacekeeping operations to
protect civilians, including women and children, and prevent sexual violence against women and girls in conflict and postconflict situations, including wherever possible the deployment of a higher percentage of women peacekeepers or police.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide to Member States training guidelines and materials on the protection, rights and
the particular needs of women, as well as on the importance of involving women in all peacekeeping and peace-building

S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 14
S/RES/1794 (2007),
op. 18

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 19
S/RES/1565 (2004),
op. 5(g)

S/RES/1325 (2000),
op. 4
S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 13
S/RES/1935 (2010).
op. 18

S/RES/1933 (2010),
op. 13

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 13

S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 6

S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 8

S/RES/1325 (2000),
op. 6

See also, for example,
S/RES/1889 (2009), op. 4;
S/RES/1885 (2009),
pp. 14; S/RES/1880
(2009), op. 16;
S/RES/1881 (2009),
op. 14.

See also, for example,
S/RES/1898 (2009),
op. 10; S/RES/1296
(2000), op. 19; and
S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 14.

10-64655

Condemn and call
for the cessation of
sexual violence

Targeted and
graduated measures
as a response to
violations of
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law obligations
relating to women

Accountability for
the perpetrators of
sexual violence

measures, invites Member States to incorporate these elements as well as HIV/AIDS awareness training into their national
training programs for military and civilian police personnel in preparation for deployment, and further requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that civilian personnel of peacekeeping operations receive similar training.
Demands that the parties to the conflict immediately take appropriate measures to protect civilians, including women and
children, from all forms of sexual violence, in line with resolution 1820 (2008).
Demands that all armed groups … immediately cease all forms of violence and human rights abuse against the civilian
population in the [affected country], in particular gender-based violence, including rape and other forms of sexual abuse.
Demands that all parties to armed conflict immediately take appropriate measures to protect civilians, including women
and children, from all forms of sexual violence, including measures such as, inter alia, enforcing appropriate military
disciplinary measures and upholding the principle of command responsibility, training troops on the categorical prohibition
of all forms of sexual violence against civilians, debunking myths that fuel sexual violence and vetting candidates for
national armies and security forces to ensure the exclusion of those associated with serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, including sexual violence.
Calls also upon all … parties to take appropriate measures to refrain from, prevent and protect civilians from all forms of
sexual violence, which could include, inter alia, enforcing appropriate military disciplinary measures, upholding the
principle of command responsibility, and training troops on the categorical prohibition of all forms of sexual violence.
Affirms its intention, when establishing and renewing state-specific sanctions regimes, to take into consideration the
appropriateness of targeted and graduated measures against parties to situations of armed conflict who commit rape and
other forms of sexual violence against women and girls in situations of armed conflict.
All States shall take the necessary measures to prevent the entry into or transit through their territories of all persons
designated by [the Sanctions Committee]…
Decides that all States shall, during the period of enforcement of the measures…, immediately freeze the funds, other
financial assets and economic resources which are on their territories from the date of adoption of this resolution, which are
owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by persons or entities designated by [the Sanctions Committee], or that are held
by entities owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by them or by any persons or entities acting on their behalf or at their
direction…, and decides further that all States shall ensure that no funds, financial assets or economic resources are made
available by their nationals or by any persons within their territories, to or for the benefit of such persons or entities;
[D]ecides that [these] provisions shall apply to … individuals operating in the [affected State] and committing serious
violations of international law involving the targeting of children or women in situations of armed conflict.
Expresses in particular its concern at the continuing sexual and gender based violence, and urges the Government to
continue to take the necessary steps to prevent further violations and to ensure that those responsible are brought to justice.
Recognizing the need for civilian and military leaders, consistent with the principle of command responsibility, to
demonstrate commitment and political will to prevent sexual violence and to combat impunity and enforce accountability,
and that inaction can send a message that the incidence of sexual violence in conflicts is tolerated

S/RES/1880 (2009),
op. 15

See also, for example,
S/RES/1933 (2010), pp. 9
and op. 13; S/RES/1888
(2009), op. 2; S/RES/1828
(2008), op. 15;
S/RES/1820 (2008), op. 2
and op. 3; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 5 and op. 19;
S/RES/1591 (2005),
pp. 10; S/RES/1545
(2004), pp. 8; S/RES/1468
(2003), op. 2; and
S/RES/1325 (2000),
op. 10.

S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 5
S/RES/1807 (2008),
op. 9, 11, and 13(d)
and (e)

S/RES/1902 (2009),
op. 19
S/RES/1888 (2009),
pp. 11

See also, for example,
S/RES/1591 (2005),
pp. 10; S/RES/1493
(2003), op. 8; and
S/RES/1468 (2003), op. 2.

S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 4

S/RES/1794 (2007),
pp .14

43

S/PRST/2010/25

Notes that rape and other forms of sexual violence can constitute a war crime, a crime against humanity, or a constitutive
act with respect to genocide, stresses the need for the exclusion of sexual violence crimes from amnesty provisions in the
context of conflict resolution processes, and calls upon Member States to comply with their obligations for prosecuting
persons responsible for such acts, to ensure that all victims of sexual violence, particularly women and girls, have equal
protection under the law and equal access to justice, and stresses the importance of ending impunity for such acts as part of
a comprehensive approach to seeking sustainable peace, justice, truth, and national reconciliation.
Condemning in particular sexual violence perpetrated by [militias and armed groups as well as elements of the national
armed and police forces] and other security and intelligence services, stressing the urgent need for the [the affected State],
in cooperation with [peacekeeping mission] and other relevant actors, to end such violence and bring the perpetrators, as
well as the senior commanders under whom they serve, to justice, and calling on Member States to assist in this regard and
to continue to provide medical, humanitarian and other assistance to victims.

S/RES/1935 (2010),
op. 18
S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 18
S/RES/1888 (2009),
op. 3

Requests the Secretary-General to continue to fully investigate the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by civilian
and military personnel of [the mission], and to take the appropriate measures set out in the Secretary-General’s bulletin on
special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue and strengthen efforts to implement the policy of zero tolerance of sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations; and urges troop and police contributing countries to
take appropriate preventative action, including pre-deployment and in-theatre awareness training, and other action to
ensure full accountability in cases of such conduct involving their personnel.
Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to achieve actual compliance in [peacekeeping mission]
with the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, including the development of strategies
and appropriate mechanisms to prevent, identify and respond to all forms of misconduct, including sexual exploitation
and abuse, and the enhancement of training for personnel to prevent misconduct and ensure full compliance with the
United Nations code of conduct, and to further take all necessary action in accordance with the Secretary-General’s
Bulletin on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse (ST/SGB/2003/13) and to keep the
Council informed, and urges troop-contributing countries to take appropriate preventive action including the
conduct of pre-deployment awareness training and … post-deployment awareness training, and to take disciplinary action
and other action to ensure full accountability in cases of such conduct involving their personnel.

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 12
S/RES/1820 (2008),
op. 7

S/RES/1769 (2007),
op. 16

See also, for example,
S/RES/1840 (2008),
op. 22; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 20;
S/RES/1565 (2004),
op. 25; S/RES/1460
(2003), op. 10; and
S/RES/1436 (2002),
op. 15.

S/PRST/2010/25

44

Sexual exploitation
and abuse

10-64655
