TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th

MEETING: 8DECEMBER1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

......,.. ... ..,..............

1

Adoption of the agenda . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaints by Senegal:
fa) Letter dated 27 November 1969 from the Permanent Representative of
Senegal addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/95 13);
(b) Letter dated 7 December 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9541) . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisionalagenda (S/Agenda/l518)

SIPV.1518

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
jigures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutity Council. The new system, which, has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTEENTH MEETING
eid in New York on Monday, 8 December 1969, at IO.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. V.J. MWAANGA(Z~~&).

PreseW The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, Fratm,
Hungary,
Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 518)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. Complaints by Senegal:
(a) Letter dated 27 November 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/95 13);
(bl Letter dated 7 December 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9541).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Complaints by Senegal
la) Letter dated 27 November 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/951 3);
/bJ Letter dated 7 December 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of. Senegal addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9541)
1. The PRESIDENT:. In accordance with the usual practice of the Council and the provisional rules of procedure,
and with the decision taken at the 1516th meeting
yesterday afternoon, I propose now, with the consent of
the Council, to invite the representatives of Portugal,
Guinea and Morocco to take seats at the Council table in
order to participate in our discussion, without the right to
vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. F, B. de Miranda
{Portugal), Mr. A. Tour& (Guinea) and Mr. A. T. Benhim
(Morocco) took places at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT:In accordance with further decisions
taken at the 15 17th meeting and in accordance with the
usual practice of the Council and of the provisional rules Of
procedure, I propose, if I hear no objection, to invite the

representatives of Liberia, Madagascar, Sierra bone, Tutisia, Mali, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Syria and the United Arab
Republic to take part in our discussion without the right to
vote. Owing to the lack of space at the Council table I shall
invite those representatives to take seats at the side of the
Council chamber, it being understood that they will be
invited to take a place at the Council table when it comes
their turn to take the floor,
At the invitation of the President. Mr. L. H. D&s
(Liberia), Mr. B. RabetaJika (Madagascar), Mr. D. Nicol
(Sierra Leone), Mr. S. El Goulli (Tunisia), Mr. G. SOW
(Mali), Mr. J. M. Baroody (SaudiArabia), Mr. M. S.Ala ftar
(Yemen),Mr. G.J. Tomeh(Syria) andMr, M. ff. El-Zayyat
(United Arab Republic)took the placesreservedfor them.
3. The PRESIDENT: Since our last meetinga letter has
been received from the representativeof Mauritania
[S/9539] asking for permissionto participate in the
discussion
on the questionbefore the Council.If I hearno
objection, in accordancewith the usual practice of the
Council and of the provisionalrules of procedure,I shall
invite the representativeof Mauritaniato participatein our
discussion,
without the right to vote. Owingto the lack of
spaceat the CounciltableI shallinvite the representativeof
Mauritania to take his seat at the side of the Council
chamber,it beingunderstoodthat he will be invited to take
a seat at the Counciltable whenit comeshis turn to take
the floor.
At the invitation of the FVesident,Mr. A. Ould Daddah
(Mauritania) took the placereservedfor him.
4. The PRESIDENT: I shouldlike to inform membersof
the Council that last night the representativeof Senegal
informed me that a new incident had occurred in his
country. He hassent me a letter to this effect. The letter
was received by the Secretariat and copies have been
circulatedto membersof the Councilon their arrivalhere.
The letter will shortly be translatedand circulated in
documents/9541. It is my understandingthat the representative of Senegalwould like to take the floor first to
explain his secondcomplaint which will be considered
togetherwith the earliercomplaint[S/9513] for which this
meetinghad been called. The Security CouncilWill NJW
continueits deliberationson the item beforeit.
5. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated fronz fienchl.
Mr. President,I shouldlike to thank you andmy colleagues
on the Council for agreeingto meet urgently to consider
the new complaint which, becauseof extremely serious
reasons,Senegalsubmittedlastnight againstPortugal-

12. It will be recalled that the President of the Republic of
Senegal had publicly proposed the following peace plan for
Guinea (Bissau): the two parties would proclaim a ceasefire; negotiations would begin immediately between the
Government of Portugal on the one hand and all the
nationalist movements on the other; Portugal would grant
internal autonomy, which would last several years; after a
period of autonomy, Guinea (Bissau) would accede to
independence within a Lusitanian African community, But
the only answer to this peace plan from the Portuguese
Government has been the shelling of Senegalesevillages,

6. The situation is deteriorating further every day and
Portuguese provocations are becoming more and more
serious. We solemnly declare that Portugal wishes to create
in Africa another hot-bed of dangerous tension similar to
those already existing in Viet-Nam and the Middle East.
Portugal appears to have chosen Senegal for this purpose,
and to have done this undoubtedly after mature reflexion.

:: :
i ‘i
‘. :
:, :

7. As I explained in the letter that I addressed last night to
the Security Council [S/9541], the regular Portuguese
forces on Sunday, 7 December 1969, shelled the small
village of Samine from 11.10 to 11.30 a.m. A Portuguese
helicopter flew over the village unceasingly directing the
shelling. Shells fell in the centre of the village and on the
building of the Gendarmerie.

13. In these circumstances we ask the Security Council, if
it wishes to avoid a catastrophe in West Africa and a new
Viet-Nam or a new Middle East, to adopt today, without
any delay, a decision strongly condemning Portugal for its
acts of aggression against the village of Samine on 25
November 1969, as a result of which one person was killed
and eight were seriously wounded, and on 7 December
1969, when five persons were killed and one woman was
seriously wounded.

8. The intense shelling handicapped rescue work and the
search for victims. The known results of this new aggression
so far are as follows: five persons killed and one seriously
wounded, and one home and five shops burnt down.

14. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Madagascar. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and make his statement.

9. The identities of those killed are as follows: Mrs. Gossa
Dabo, aged 23, daughter of Arphan and Sirra N’Diaye,
married, one child; Mr. Sounama C&C, son of Malang and
Gossa Dabo; Mrs. Aminata Sadlo, aged 60, daughter of
Abdou and Fatoumata Masaly; Mr. Sana Camara, aged 35,
son of Malang and Khady Cisse; one body not yet
identified, The seriously wounded person is Miss Rosa
Diatta, aged 50, daughter of Abdoulaye and Ai’ssatou Mane.

15. Mr. RABETAFIKA
(Madagascar) (translated froar
French): On behalf of my delegation I would like to thank
you and through you all the members of the Security
Council for allowing us to participate in the consideration
of the complaint of Senegal against Portugal, as contained
in document S/9513 and the document just mentioned by
the representative of Senegal. Several reasons have
prompted my delegation to participate in this important
debate. The first is our sincere and genuine friendship for
Senegal with whom we share our past and which, since
independence, has chosen the same course as ourselves,
because we have common aspirations and similar approaches, This means that anything that affects the
interests of Senegal as well as their legitimate defence
cannot leave us indifferent. If I have right at the start
mentioned the special relations we have with Senegal and
other countries belonging to a common regional organha.
tion, that does not mean that we want to reject outright
any objective or impartial consideration of the problem
before us, but simply that we want to stress that since WC
know the Senegalese people and the philosophy which
inspires its Government in the conduct of its international
relations, we deem it an honour to be able to understand
the motives which prompted Senegal to seize the Security
Council of this problem.

10. The President and members of the Council will
note-and will, I am sure, draw the appropriate conelusions-that at the moment when we are continuing the
debate on the previous complaint of Senegal, Portugal is
defying the Security Council and has committed a new and
odious aggression against the population of Senegal. I
should like to stress the fact that Portugal had announced,
shortly before the attack on Samine, its intention of
shelling Ziguinchor, a city of considerable size and the
capital of the Casamance region in the southern part of
Senegal, The entire population of this prosperous area of
Senegal is living in a state of fear, and Portugal has
deliberately chosen the time when, throughout the rural
areas of Senegal, the marketing season for ground-nuts and
food crops is beginning.
11, While certain people are searching in the corridors of
the United Nations for ways of reaching an honourable
solution for Portugal in the Security Council, Portugal is
pursuing its cowardly policy of aggression and provocation
against a peaceful people. Senegal, in this difficult moment
of its life, thanks those delegations that have already
expressed unequivocally their feelings of solidarity with it.
A great country can be recognized by its strong sense of the
responsibilities it must assume in grave circumstances. The
true friendship of one country for another is recognized
only when the latter country is going through a period of
trial. In any case, in this matter Senegal will know where its
true friends, on whom it may count in the future, are to be
found. This new aggression is, of course, directed against
Senegal, which in lives and property is affected, but it is
also directed against the Security Council for which
Portugal is openly showing its contempt.

16. The other reasons for our participation have been set
out in the letter of 2 December 1969 [S/9.524], signed by
35 African States, and in the letter of 4 December 1969
[S/9531], in which we recall the collective authorization
given us since 1963 by the Heads of State of the
Grganization of African Unity whereby, whenever a prob.
lem affecting African Territories under Portuguese adrnlnls~
tration is examined by the Council, the representatives of
Liberia, Sierra Leone, Tunisia and Madagascar are to COIM
to defend African interests.
17. My delegation was struck by the series of prOVOCatiolls
and attacks of which Senegal has been a victim since 1963,
2

some of Which have already been the subject of two
Security Council resolutions (178 (1963), 204 (lg65)],
even as far back as 1963 and 196.5. It is to be deeply
deplored that a country such as Senegal, which wishes to
devote all its efforts to the social and economic advancement of its people, should not be able to do so in the
requisite atmosphere of security and serenity, We have been
all the more struck because, since 1967, no less than 27
incidents occurred in the southem area of Senegal, and
despite the number of victims, abductions, violations of air
space and national territory, bombings and other acts,
Senegal has so far evinced patience and moderation to such
an extent that the international community seems to have
forgotten that a situation of that kind cannot in the long
run be endured without affecting international peace and
security. The grave incidents at Samine-including that of
7 December, which is the most serious if only because it has
occurred while the Security Council is still considering the
previous complaint-are simply the culminating point in
this long list, and the concise accounts made by the
representative of Senegal show us, in their truth and
poignancy, that any responsible State cannot in fact ignore
the sufferings of its people and the repeated violations of its
sovereignty and territorial integrity,

21. We take note of the statement made by the representative of Portugal who told us: “We have no intention or
desire to disrespect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of anY country” [1516th meeting, para. 1261, In brief, this
is a reaffirf?MiOn
of the declared intention which is already
referred to in resolution 178 (1963) of 24 April 1963, and
if this intention had been followed by effective action, we
should not now have before us the complaint from Senegal,
On the contrary, everything seems to show that since this
resolution was voted on, Senegal has constantly been the
victim of deliberate acts of provocation.
22. In resolution 204 (1965) of 19 May 1965, the
Security Council requested “once againthe Government of
Portugal to take all effective and necessary action to
prevent any violation of Senegal’s sovereignty and terri.
torial integrity”. We maintain that the 27 grave incidents
which the representative of Senegalhas mentioned before
the Council last week, and those which have occurred since,
prove that such action has not been taken, or, if by any
chance it has been, then it has led to a paradoxical renewal
of the acts which we condemned,

19. I should like to revert for a minute to the rights of the
administering Power. My delegation believes that if we are
to recognize these rights we must needs also invoke the
duties of that Power. We maintain that an administering
Power has the imperative duty to lead the people for which
it is responsible to independence by way of self-determination. We are convinced that the people of Guinea (Bissau)
would be happier if they were accorded the right to
self-determination at the same time as the right to security,
even though it would seem normal that for a dependent
people the former should be of more immediate importance
than the latter.

23. We hope that the Security Council will examine the
complaint of Senegal and act on its just request in the light
of the facts stated and of the implementation or non-implementation of the said resolutions and that a line of
action will be decided on in accordance with the indications
given by the representative of Senegal at the 1516th
meeting of the Security Council, in which the Council was
asked to pronounce itself clearly and unequivocally on the
basis of the provisions of the Charter.
B
I- 24. .:‘It remains for my delegation to clarify its position on
&he’ procedural question. It has been stated here that
Senegal should have exhausted all the resources provided
for under Article 33 of the Charter before approa&h$the
Se?%ii$y-Cm,-T
believe I can affirm that, like Madagascar, Senegal is one of those countries which attaches
most importance to the intrinsic values of negotiations and
dialogue. For our part we in no way doubt the commitments of Senegal in this connexion on several occasions
and at many international meetings. Thus I shall merely say
what I said in the Security Council at its 1489th meeting,
when we considered the complaint of Zambia against
Portugal.-mggeq,
the virtues of which were recog
nized in the Charter and in the practices of this Organization a e binding to the extent that all the parties so decide
ondition that the situation to which the
and’onk
dispute has given rise lends itself to a settlement. This
implies that, for reasons inherent in the defence of its
interests and respect for its other commitments, one Party
may choose the procedure which seems to it to be most
appropriate.

20. Furthermore, among the principles that have been
examined in this Grganization and which bear on friendly
relations and co-operation among States, there is one to
which the countries of the third world are particularly
devoted, namely the legitimacy of the struggle being waged
by the movements of national liberation. The attitude of
my delegation on this has been quite formal, and we have
declared that it is difficult to admit that repression of such
a struggle should be included among acts of legitimate
self-defence.

25. In view of the fact that the Security Council resolutions were not complied with and in view of the recurrence
of events which seems to show that they were probably
deliberate and premeditated, Senegal has, in our View,
rightly turned to the Security Council. We cannot reproach
it for its patience or its moderation and it is even less
desirable to take such a pretext to lead it along a Course
which the present situation and facts prevent it from
following.

18. It has been alleged here that all these acts were
perpetrated in the exercise of the right of legitimate
self-defence. In all logic we recognize that the Africans of
Guinea (Bissau) have the right to live in security, but we do
not think that they are the authors of these acts of so-called
legitimate self-defence. Mention has also been made of the
right of the administering Power to ensure the safety of the
peoples for which it is responsible, but should this right be
exercised to the detriment of the security and sovereignty
of neighbouring States? If such a concept were to be
accepted as part of the exercise of the right to legitimate
self-defence, we would be trampling underfoot all standards
governing relations among States. What is more, in the
particular case being considered by the Security Council, no
one can allege that Senegal has committed any act of
aggression whatsoever.

3

26. The representative of Senegal in his preliminary
statement emphasized, “if Portugal deliberately violates the
territorial integrity of African countries it must be admitted
that”-we
must say it frankly-“it is because it is sure of its
impunity and of the support it receives from its allies”
(1516th meeting, para. 641.

32. Mr. President, I should like to end on a personal note
and congratulate you on your accession to the Presidency
of the Council. Our brotherly feelings go with you in your
delicate task.
33. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Madagascar for his brotherly compliments addressed to the
Chair. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Tunisia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
make his statement.

27. We have already addressed an appeal to certain great
Powers and drawn their attention to resolutions 180 (1963)
of 31 July 1963 and 218(1965) of 23 November 1965
regarding the assistance given to Portugal which enabled it
to continue reprisals against populations on the territories
administered by it. We renew these appeals today because it
is obvious that all these reprehensible acts could not have
occurred if in good faith certain Powers had agreed to carry
out these resolutions. Generous sentiments are sometimes
not enough. The will to help to put an end to situations
based on obsolete concepts should be translated into deeds.
It is easy enough to shut oneself up within the strict bounds
of legality and to be concerned only about formal
compliance with the law. But is it not true that such an
attitude in political matters may lead those who adopt it
onto the dangerous path of acceptance of flagrant violations of the very principles of our Charter?

34. Mr. EL GOULLI (Tunisia) (translated fromfiench):
Mr. President, I should like first to express to you my
thanks and my appreciation for kindly allowing me to
speak at this stage of the debate on the complaint of
Senegal. I wish to state the position of the Government of
the Tunisian Republic on the tragic and painful situation
caused by the military action of Portuguese forces on the
territory of the Republic of Senegal.
35. I could give a number of reasons for our participation
in the debate, The main purpose of our participation is to
state clearly and unambiguously to this important organ of
the United Nations and, through it, to the entire world,
that what affects Senegal affects us, and that in these
difficult moments when Senegal is struggling for its dignity
as an independent and sovereign nation, Tunisia gives
Senegal its full support and assures it of its entire sympathy
and solidarity.

28. The fact that a country like Senegal, with whose
philosophy we are familiar, recognizes that there are limits
to its patience and that it may have no choice but to resort
to the use of force to impose respect for its sovereignty and
territorial integrity, deserves our careful consideration.

36. We could also mention the close and brotherly
relations of our two countries in all fields of activity and
the joint action which has encouraged us to co-operate on a
sound basis for the promotion of our mutual interests and
for the maintenance of peace and tranquillity in Africa
which, unfortunately, remains a prey to colonialist wars
that are still rife in some of its areas. We could also give as a
reason that we belong to a single organization that unites all
the independent countries of Africa, and which last
September in Addis Ababa, energetically and unequivocally
condemned the actions of the colonialist diehards who have
still not learned anything from the teachings of history. We
could also say that we realize and feel convinced that this
brotherly and peace-loving people wishes only to hasten its
development on the basis of a higlzly humanistic philosophy
which makes the advancement of man its main concern.
The actions of President Leopold Senghor, who is highly
esteemed by the President, Government and people of
Tunisia, need no comment, because they are so well known,
both in Africa and in the world. This great son of Africa has
been able to direct first his struggle and then his constructive work along universal lines, for his actions are based
essentially upon the love of peace, freedom and prosperity
for all, in a world wherein co-operation, brotherhood and
justice are not vain words.

29. We support Senegal in its confidence in and respect for
the Security Council, and we are convinced that the time
has come to ensure that the principles on which normal
relations between States are based will be strictly respected
and that in the present case the conditions essential to the
existence of such relations should be established.
30. The representative of Portugal, in his statement at the
1814th plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the
Manifesto on Southern Africa of the Organization of
African Unity, extended the hand of friendship to the
African States. Without false shame, we can say that we
have no prejudice against any State whatsoever, but we
shall always oppose any manifestation of an obsolete form
of colonialism, Let this gesture of friendship, then, not take
the form of continued acts of aggression, and let this appeal
echo our concern, particularly that of seeing our brothers
under Portuguese administration enjoy the right of freedom, self-determination and independence.
31, Senegal requests that its sovereignty and territorial
integrity should be preserved on the basis of the principles
of justice, equality and dignity. Africa continues to ask that
the security of the continent and the right of the still
dependent peoples of Africa to self-determination should
be recognized. Nothing in the Charter can prevent the
Security Council from considering these requests, which are
closely and inextricably inter-linked, in all equity. Nor is
there anything in the Charter which does not authorize the
great Powers to do everything in their power to pursuade
Portugal to reach more realistic and less doctrinaire
attitudes, taking into account the evolution of problems
dealing wit11 relations among States and peoples.

37. But, in addition to all these considerations, we feel
justified in speaking because of our conviction, as a Member
of the United Nations respectful of its Charter and the
obligations it imposes on us, that it is the duty of the
United Nations and the Security Council, when evellts
reach such a grave and dangerous point, to defend the
interest of a small country and help it to do away fiallY
with the vestiges of colonialism, which are one of the most
4

serious threats to peace and security in the world. Comequently, it is of the utmost urgency that the Security
Council should shoulder its responsibilities and quickly put
an end to this situation which threatens the security and
integrity of one of the Members of this Organization and
also threatens peace in an area of Africa which has been
tried enough already.

Peoples under Portuguese domination to self-determination,
freedom and independence. It has recognized the legitimacy
of the struggle waged by national liberation movements
against COlOnid Powers. On several occasions, and as
recently
as in November 1969, the General Assembly has
reiterated [resolution 2507 (XXIV)J its serious concern at
Portugal’s refusal to comply with the pertinent resolutions
of the Organization. This situation is of a nature to strike
seriously at international peace and security, The case we
are considering today is the penultimate one in a long list.
Recently another independent African country-Guineawas the victim of military action by Portuguese forces
stationed in Africa. Tomorrow, another action may be
directed against another independent country of Africa,
simply because, in the eyes of the Lisbon authorities, it will
be guilty of conforming to the resolutions of the United
Nations dealing with territories still under Portuguese
domination.

38. The representative of Senegal has reviewed the history
of this matter. He has very clearly shown how his
Government made constant efforts over the past few years
to prevent the situation from growing worse, bearing in
mind the obligations of the people and the Government of
Senegal with regard to the populations still living under the
yoke of Portuguese colonialism. We have followed these
peaceful efforts and I must say that we have been impressed
by the patience, realism and sense of international responsibility of the Senegalese leaders in the action they have
taken,

44. Where do we go from here? Are the African States to
be forced to give up the very reason for their existence,
namely, their economic and social development, in order to
cope with what is of immediate urgency and arm themselves to an ever greater extent to repulse by force these
perpetual aggressors? Is this part of the continent to be
engulfed in war? The Council should therefore urgently
adopt here and now the measures necessary to avoid such a
development. However, no genuine peace can exist in that
part of the world so long as African peoples continue to
endure the yoke of colonialism. This is our major concern
and the concern too of many sincerely peace-loving
countries.

39. Unfortunately,
these efforts have met with the incomprehension and intransigence which reflect a colonialist
mentality,
at a moment when the inevitability of decolonization should induce in the Government of Lisbon a
healthier view of things, in a world of the United Nations
wherein the sovereignty of States is equal and respect for
the will of nations is the only guarantee of a fruitful and
lasting co-operation.
40. We have just learned that, yesterday, a new aggression-even
more serious than the previous one-has just
been committed by the air and land forces of Portugal
while the Security Council was in session, thus pointing to
Portugal’s deliberate intention to defy the international
community.
This lack of comprehension and realism and
the persistence
of an obsolete colonialism have, unfortunately,
led to these tragic events and these losses of
buman life, mainly women and children, in any case of
uparmed civilians.

45. I hope that the representative of France will allcw me
to quote one sentence of his speech made before the
Security Council on 23 July 1969, at the time when it was
considering Zambia’s complaint:
“That situation cannot be improved in any truly lasting
manner until the time when all the peoples of that region
are in a position to exercise their right to self-determination,” (1488th meeting, para. 95.J

41. Further, in the face of this attitude of moderation, the
representative of Portugal has found nothing better than to
stress the bilateral discussions which his Government would
have liked to hold with Senegal, as if it were possible to
negotiate successfully with a Government which delib.
erately tramples underfoot the resolutions adopted by an
overwhelming
majority of the United Nations. For what we
are concerned with here is not material reparations, but
essentially
with putting an end to repeated aggressions
committed by Portuguese armed forces.

46. I have referred deliberately to France because mY
country was faced with a similar situation in February
1958, when Sakiet was bombed by the French Air Force;
France was then waging a colonial war in Algeria, tl~ol@
France and Tunisia had succeeded in settling their differences; I am very proud to see the representative of Algeria
now sitting in the Security Council. The co-operation that
exists today between these three countries is truly exemplary, and the relations between France and Tunisia can
be described as privileged, Could this historical precedent
inspire Portugal and make it realize that it is vain to try to
go against the march of history? It is in its inkreSt to sow
seeds of understanding, friendship and co-operation, from
which it would be the first to benefit, rather than to
continue cultivating hate.

42. The Council, which unfortunately has a long experience of this particular kind of situation, is still faced
with the problem of colonial wars spilling over onto
territories of neighbouring, independent States. Sometimes
the right of pursuit is claimed, sometimes the right of selfdefence. Yet Portugal should know that a colonial regime
cannot, without insulting history, claim to possess any tYPe
of legitimacy whatsoever.

47. It is time for peace to spread and replace the horrors
of war jn that part of the world. The new generations in
Portugal and Africa will judge us and will wonder what
motives, vanity or lack of foresight held back the hour of
brotherhood.

43. The General Assembly, since its adoption of resolution
15 I4 (XV)
of 14 December 1960 on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples, has referred on several occasions to the inalienable right of
5

guese)and the CapeVerde Islands, who are fighting the
Portuguesein Guinea and who often enter Senegalfor rest
periodsand to obtain suppliesas he quoted from Agtwce
France-Presseof 28 November 1969. The second point
labouredin the statementof the representativeof Portugal
is the right of the Portugueseto defend themselveswithin
their own territories. “No matter”-he said-“what arethe
theoriesinvoked in this Organization,or elsewhere,wehave
the right to defend ourselves:” [1516th me&g,
para. 121.1

48. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Tunisia for his kind words addressed to the Chair. The next
speaker on my list is the representative of the United Arab
Republic, Ambassador El-Zayyat, and I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and make his statement.
49. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (United Arab Republic): Allow me,
first, Mr. President, to thank you, and through you the
members of the Security Council, for having invited me to
participate in the discussions of the Council and allowing
me to express our views on the complaint brought by the
Republic of Senegal, which the Council is now considering.

55. The Security Council has,indeed, decisively dealtwith
the theory of retaliation, not only in this case, but in
similar notorious cases,such as Israeli aggressionagainst
Jordan and Lebanon, under the same pretext-that of
retaliation. On those occasions,it was made abundantIy
clear that this theory is contrary to the Charter and the
contemporary norms of international law. With regardto
Portugal, the Council hasalready rejectedthis theory when
it condemnedPortugueseattacks in the past.

50. Our delegation, together with 34 African countries,
supported the request for the convening of this Council
[S/9.513] made by the representative of Senegal, Mr. Ibrahima Boye, following the recent Portuguese deliberate
violations of the territorial integrity of the Republic of
Senegal.As well as this initial complaint, we have heard
today the report of other acts of aggression
committed as
recently asyesterday, while the Council wasconsideringthe
complaint of Senegal. In taking this stand besideSenegal,
we were animated by the natural sympathy for the people
of a sisterState: our standrestsupon what we beIieve to be
a basic postulate of the charter of the Organization of
African Unity and the Charter of the United Nations itself;
namely, that peace is indivisible and that aggression,if
allowed to be committed, without deterrence,in one place,
is certain to lead to aggressions
in other placesin Africa and
throughout the world.

S6. Besides,retaliation simply ignoresthe causeof the evil
and seeksa remedy for the diseaseby intensifying the
wounds.The causeof the evil is the injusticeimposedon a
people by colonial rule, the reluctance of the colonial
Powersto free thesepeople at a time when colonialismis,
or should be, dead. The remedy offered is force and
violence. The effective remedy is the eradication of
injustice and the freeing of the subjugated people-or
simply the application of the principles of the United
NationsCharter.

51. Having listened attentively last Thursday, and this
morning to Mr. Boye and having listened attentively last
Thursday to the representative of Portugal, I concluded
that the Portuguese Government does not challenge the
long, unpleasantlist of actsof aggression
committed against
the Republicof Senegal.

57. Self-defenceis hardly a valid excuseto be offered by
the Government of Portugal when there isno pretencethat
Senegalhasattacked or tried to attack or permitted attacks
to be begunfrom its territory againstthe people of Portugal
or the territory of Portugal itself. The representativeof
Portugal saysthat there were several attackson Portuguese
52. The representativeof Senegalhasremindedthe Coun- Guineathis year, and he is sure that “nobody will be so
cil of its resolutions 178 (1963) of 24 April 1963 deploring absurdas to ask us to resign ourselvesto the prospectof
the incursion of Portuguesemilitary forces into Senegalese being killed [ibid., para. 119/. No matter from wherethe
attacksare launched,we have the right to defend ourselves”
territory and requesting the Government of Portugal, in
accordance with its clear intentions, to take whatever [ibid:, para. 1241. Again he says: “we exerciseour right of
action might be necessary to prevent any violation of
self-defencewithin our own territory” [ibid., para. 1261.
Senegal’ssovereignty and territorial integrity, and of
Council resolution 204 (1965) of 19 May 1965 in which
58. Surely, the representativeof Portugal, as well asthe
membersof this Council, are aware that such attacks,as
the Council again deeply deplored such incursions by
Portuguesemilitary forces and againrequestedthe Govern- reported by the representative of Portugal, cannot be
ment of Portugal to take all effective and necessaryaction
consideredattacks on Portuguese Guinea, They are not
even attacks directed especiallyto the Portuguesepeoplein
to safeguardSenegal’ssovereignty and territorial integrity.
Guinea. They are attacks on the forces of colonialism and
53. We have listened to the representative of Senegal the occupiersof Guinea(Bissau),
recording before this Council new actions of the sametype
59. There should simply not be a Portuguese Guinea.
as those deplored’ and censuredby the Council during the
years 1963 and 1965. This morning we heard him report
There should be no colonial forces in Guinea (B&au) or
the murder yesterday of five Senegalese
and the wounding
anywhere else in Africa. We had British Africa, French
and destruction that took place only last night while the
Africa, German Africa, Italian Africa and Portuguese
Council was,as I said, debatingthe complaint of Senegal.
Africa. I think now the only remnant of this old tradition is
the Portugueseand that, I hope, will alsobe ended soon.
54. We have heard the representativeof Portugal insiston
That is the remedy,
two points in his reply, That suchattacks are consideredby
his Government to be reactionsin self-defenceand retalia60. What we are calling for here is neither startling aor
tion againstthe activities of suchnationalistsasthe African
novel. It is what the United Nations Chartersays, the same
Party for the Independence of Guinea (so-called PortuCharter which Portugal has signed, It is what the General
6

:
I
1:

Assembly decided in the famous Declaration contained in
its resolution 1.514 (XV). Portugal refuses to comply with
the provisions of the Charter in Chapter XI, which
establishes one of the basic principles of the Charter,
namely, the accountability of the administering Powers of
the Non-Self-Governing Territories and the pledge on the
part of the administrative Powers to enable the people of
the Non-Self-Governing Territories to attain their independence,

paragraph 5 that: “, . . in the event of failure on the part of
Portugal to comply with paragraph 2 of the present
resolution, the Security Council will meet to consider
further measures;“. The General Assembly has already this
year, in its resolution 2507 (XXIV) of 28 November 1969,
pronounced itself in clear terms, reaffirming the inalienable
rights of the peoples of the territories under Portuguese
domination to self-determination,
freedom and independence.

$1. The Portuguese authorities have sought shelter under
the untenable thesis that the African territories it occupies
are part and parcel of the Portuguese motherland. Such a
thesis has been proved untenable in all other situations. We
have here, as a member of this Council, Algeria, in whose
land that thesis was tried and failed.

67. The representative of Portugal has stated that there is
no hostility between his country and Senegal, In fact, there
is no hostility between the people of Zambia and the
people of Portugal; there is no hostility between the people
of Guinea and the people of Portugal; there is no hostility
between the people of Senegal and the people of Portugal;
and certainly there is no hostility between the people of
Egypt, the United Arab Republic, and the people of
Portugal. However, the battle does exist in which those who
are still under colonial rule in Africa are determined to be
free, and those who still maintain coIonial rule are blindly
resisting. The result of this battle is certain: colonialism will
be eradicated. Do we have to arrive at this certain
conclusion through a trial of blood and suffering?

62. Retaliation is not acceptable nor is self-defence a valid
excuse. Facing the reality of the freedom movement is the
only way of solving the Portuguese problem in Africa. The
line of colonialism in Africa has been receding throughout
this last century-from the Sahara, where the continent has
been divided between black and brown, to the line now
extending from Portuguese-occupied Angola on one African
coast to Portuguese-occupied Mozambique on the other
coast. Behind that line are parts of Africa still dominated
by racism and colonialism, Behind that line the riches of
Africa are being mined away while the yearning of the
Africans for freedom and peace is stifled, the cry for justice
is silenced and their efforts for progress are let waste.
Behind that line the racist Governments of South Africa
and Southern Rhodesia are using the Portuguese to keep
the tide of change from submerging them.

68. The centuries of European expansion saw the men of
Europe in the service of their respective countries penetrate
territories and acquire new lands for their people. Within
the context of the international morality of those days
these were praiseworthy acts and those were brave men to
be remembered. The Portuguese have thus demonstrated
their courage and dedication. The courage and dedication
expected of Portugal today is the courage to heed the tide
of history and to welcome Africans to the family of free
nations, to honour Africans yearning for freedom and
independence. The dedication expected of Portugal today is
its dedication to the principles of the Charter which it
signed, and the realization of man’s dreams for freedom and
justice, for security and peace.

63. While we are preparing for the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, with the slogan “Peace,
Justice and Progress”, surely all the nations of the world,
including, I hope, the great nation of Portugal, should do
their utmost to honour those ideas.
64. The representative of Senegal told the Council on
4 December:

69. Mr. President, it is a pleasure to see you in the Chair
during the final month of your country’s service in this
Council. May I borrow from your opening statement in this
debate your hopes and wishes that the Council will give the
world something of the spirit of Christmas by trying to do
all that it could to end all strife on earth.

“

. . , we are convinced that this time the Security
Council, in which again we express our trust . 1. will be
able to eliminate the weak language it has used in the
past”-referring
to the past two resolutions-“and will set
aside such words as ‘deplores’ and ‘censures’ to find in the
text of the Charter the appropriate words to condemn
severely, and without the possibility of appeal, the
Portuguese authorities and the acts of aggression they
have committed against my country.” [151&h meeting,
para. 67.1

70. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
United Arab Republic, Mr. Zayyat, for the kind words
addressed to the Chair.
71. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Mali, I invite him to take a place at the Council table, and
make his statement.

65. The Security Council is the highest forum before
which such problems are to be submitted. Its central task is
the maintenance of international peace and security. To
achieve that, all forms of colonialism and subjugation must
be ended.

72. Mr. SOW (Mali) (translated from Bench): Mr. President, though the events brought before the Council are
most serious and urgent, I hope I may first be ahowed to
thank you and the members of the Council for having given
us this opportunity to speak in the debate without the right
to vote. In the name of my Government I should also like
to thank the Council for having agreed to consider urgently
the complaint of Senegal against the Portuguese aggression
in the territory of Senegal. Finally, I should like to take this

66. The Council will recall in its resolution 268 (1969) of
28 July 1969 that it strongly censured the same Portuguese
authorities for their violation of the territorial integrity of
another African sister country, Zambia. It declared in
7

opportunity, Mr. President, to congratulate you warmly on
behalf of my delegation on your accession to the Presidency of the Council, the body whose main role is the
maintenance of international peace and security. Although
my country is not at present a member of the Council, you
may be assured that the delegation of Mali will at all times
give YOU its full support, for it feels sure that, with your
customary courtesy and your recognized talents, you will
acquit yourself honourably of your difficult task.

All the attempts to make Portugal co-operate with the
United Nations in order to bring about self-determination
and independence through peaceful means for the Terfitories still under Portuguese domination have met with a
categorical refusal. Those still naiire enough to believe that
negotiations are still possible can see that this refusal 1s
accompanied by acts of aggression against peace-loving
independent States Members of the United Nations, as in
the recent cases of Senegal and Guinea.

73. Unfortunately this is not the first time, and I fear that
it may well not be the last, that Portugal, which is
permanently accused; stands before the bar of the Security
Council, to answer for its most reprehensible aggressions
against Senegal, a peace-loving State, a State Member of the
United Nations and a non-permanent member of the
Security Council.

77. Conclusions should be drawn from the behaviour of
Portugal, and more particularly from its recent acts of
aggression against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republics of Senegal and Guinea. The United Nations
has recognized as legitimate the struggle of the national
liberation movements in Africa and elsewhere, and the duty
of every independent State of Africa is to support those
movements by all possible means. The Security Council
should, in the opinion of my delegation, not only unanimously and energetically condemn Portugal for its aggression against Senegal and Guinea, but also, as I said earlier,
provide for effective measures to ensure that the actions we
deplore today will not be repeated in the future. Africa
needs justice and peace. Peace with justice demands as an
essential precondition the elimination not only of Portuguese colonialism in Africa, but also of Southern Rhodesian
racism and South African apartheid. We hope the Security
Council will realize this and do all in its power in the
interests of peace and justice in Africa.

74. Once again, Portuguese troops have fired on a peaceful
Senegalese village, killing and seriously wounding people
and causing substantial damage, Thus, Portugal’s acts of
aggression against peace-loving States, Members of the
United Nations, are successively or even simultaneously
being multiplied. Last month, Senegal and the Ripublic of
Guinea were the victims of an odious aggression committed
by Portuguese troops. In the past, we have had to deplore
eitremely grave acts of aggression on the part of Portugal
whose victims were your country, Mr. President, Zambia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Republic of Tanzania, and other African States. Hardly had we
heard of this odious aggression by Portuguese troops against
a Senegalese village when we learned, only a few days later,
that Portugal had been guilty of aggression against Guinean
villages. This morning we were further shocked to learn,
from the statement of the representative of Senegal, of a
new aggression committed by Portugal against the same
Senegalese village, causing more deaths, more seriously
wounded and great material damage.

78. Before concluding, I should like again to express to
the Governments and peoples of Senegal and Guinea, who
are victims of the aggression of the Portuguese troops, the
deep sympathy and assurance of total solidarity with and
unconditional support of the government and people of
Mali.
79. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Mali,
Mr. Sow, for his statement and for the brotherly con@
ments addressed to the Chair. The next speaker on my list
is the representative of Yemen, I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and make his statement.

75. We ask ourselves with a certain amount of anxiety
whether the small and undeveloped country of Portugal,
hearing the bell toll for its anachronistic and decadent
colonial system, is not frenziedly trying to commit as many
crimes as it can before its doomed colonialist r&me
expires. This gives us food for thought and we would urge
the Security Council to give the matter careful consideration without delay and in particular to provide for effective
measures that could put an end to the aggressive actions of
Portugal against States Members of the United Nations.

80. Mr. ALATTAR (Yemen) (translated from Frmch):
Mr. President, allow me first of all to extend to you and to
members of the Council my gratitude for allowing me to
participate in the debate on this item on the agenda. 1also
wish to extend to you the brotherly congratulations of my
delegation on your accession to the Presidency of the
Security Council.

76. In reply to the distinguished Senegalese representative’s statement on these extremely grave and painful facts,
the Portuguese representative here who, like his Govemmerit, has never understood anything about the evolution
of African peoples and their determination to free themselves once and for a11 from foreign domination, merely
puts questions to the victim of Portugal’s aggression and
tries to invoke, in defence of the rotten rigime he
represents, the right of self-defence to justify the shameful
acts perpetrated by the Portuguese troops against a Senegalese village. In the opinion of my delegation it would be
in vain for us to try to convince the Portuguese Government in matters of decoionization, and it would be a waste
of time to refute the allegations of its representative here.

81. A sister country, Senegal, has once again suffered from
the colonialist aggression of Portugal. Guinea, another sister
country, has also been a victim. Still other African
countrieshave, on other occasions,found themselvesin the
samesituation.
82. Portugal persists in believing that the international
political situation hasnot changed.That colonialist country
therefore continues to ignore all the evolutions and
revolutions which have led to the inevitable and final
condemnation of the colonialist system and the inhuman
exploitation of free humanbeingsthat goeswith it. Defying
the Charter of the United Nations, General AssemblyamI
8

security
Council I'eSOlUtiOns,
and
particularly
the
last
resolution
adopted by the General Assembly (2507
(XX’V)],
Portugal persists in its behaviour, as in the period
when the colonial countries used to take military action in
complete disregard of international public opinion,
This
period of the past, which Lisbon wishes to perpetuate-and
the same applies to other countries of Africa and Asia,
including the Middle East-is not only past but has been
irrevocably condemned by international public opinion as a
whole and by almost all States, even those that made use of
colonialist methods only a few years ago.

mainobjectiveis to recovertheir nationalterritory, asother
countriesof Asia andAfrica aredoingthat arenow fighting
for the samecause.
87. The Presidentof Portugalhasjust launcheda new
attack againstthe United Nationsby declaringbefore the
tenth Legislative Assemblyof Portugal on 4 December
I969 that: “an Organizationwhichconsiders
the attacksof
irresponsibleterrorist bandsaslegalandthe action of the
Policeto maintainorderasillegal,couldnot permititself to
speakof justice and equity.” The Presidentof Portugal
added:“It is true that no referendumin accordancewith
the rules laid down by the United Nations has been
organized in ‘the PortugueseAfrican Territories to determine whether the peoplesconcernedwish to remain
underPortugueseadministration.”

83. The time of colonialist expansion, of expeditionary
forces, and of the bombardment of sovereign countries and
peoples is at an end, for the world’s new awareness on the
one hand, and the movements of liberation and international solidarity, on the other, are facts of contemporary
history which anyone who is not blind must accept.
Countries
far more powerful than Portugal have drawn the
inevitable conclusions, and others, even more powerful, are
still paying dearly for their expeditionary adventures.
Portugal, the poorest country in Europe, remains intractable on the subject of defiance of our Organization and
of the entire world.

88. If Portugal persistsin its policy of aggression
and
provocation becauseit knows it has the support of the
other membersof NATO, which supply it with weapons,
munitionsand assistance,
it is the colonialistpolicy that is
at issue. Portugal derivesimportant resourcesfrom its
colonial Territories. The report of the SpecialCommittee
on the Implementationof the Declarationon the Granting
of Independenceto ColonialCountriesandPeoplesdated
8 November 19661 quotesfiguresto showthe economic
advantages
that Portugalderivesfrom its colonizedAfrican
Territories. An entire discriminatoryagricultural system
enablesPortuguesesettlers,colonialPortuguese
industries
and foreign intereststo exploit both the resources
of the
soil and African manpower.Agricultural production has
remained traditionally basedon export crops: coffee,
cotton and sisal;and most of the measures
taken by the
Governmentto assistthe productionof export goodshave
beenfavourablemainly to the Europeanproducers.In fact,
only the Europeanslegallyhad the right to be registeredas
producers in the colonial export councils.The colonial
agencies,which are Portuguesecompanies,monopobze
trade, export goodsbeingbought at low prices from the
African peasants-exportgoodsare produceddirectly by
Portugueseenterpriseswhen they canprofit from the low
wagespaid to their farm workers-andimportedproducts
beingsoldat exorbitant prices.

84. It is true that in so doing it has been effectively or
implicitly encouraged by certain countries, which, though
Members of the United Nations, are thereby undermining
the structure of our Organization. The Security Council
itself has been too generous towards Portugal, as it has
towards other countries. I am referring to South Africa,
Southern Rhodesia and Israel, which refuse to implement
resolutions adopted in the Security Council by a majority
or almost unanimously.
85. Faced with the irrefutable facts that the representative
of Senegal, Mr. Boye, submitted here, will the members of
the Council once again content themselves with a resolution
wherein they would use the words “deplores”, “notes”,
“requests”?
Do members of the Council believe that such a
resolution, which would be added to the many that have
already been adopted, could put an end to the actions and
provocations of the Portuguese army?
86. We have been able to observe the arrogance with
which the representative of Portugal replied to the fact of
acts of aggression by using the pretext of “legitimate
self-defence,” as he said: “No matter what are the theories
invoked in this Organization or elsewhere, we have the right
to defend ourselves” [1.51&h
meeting, para.1211. Or,
further: “. . . I must emphasizethat we exerciseour right of
self-defence within our own territory.” [Ibid., para. 126.1
Has he not referred to a region that is severalthousand
miles from his country as “our territory”, a territory
moreover that is African and where the inhabitants are
deprived of the fundamental right to self-determination?
We have seenhim shamelesslydescribethe menwho fight
to preserve that right as“armed bands” or “terrorists”. The
men of the liberation movements in Guinea (Bissau),
Mozambique and Angola believe in the justice of their
struggle and deride what the representativeof Portugal
thinks of them, They know that they will triumph over the
tyranny of coIoniabsm, and other formerly subjugated
countries have now regained their independence.There
9

89. Another kind of trade, noneother than the supplying
of manpower to South Africa and SouthernRhodesia,
representsan important sourceof incomefor the Governmentof Portugal.
90, That “colonial contract” hasbeenestablished
in many
colonized countries, A large part of the wealth of the
mother countriesmay be derivedpreciselyfrom that kind
of colonialexpIoitation.
91. Portugal still derivessubstantialforeignexchangefrom
trade. If the balanceof trade and of paymentsarenot in a
catastrophic situation in Portugal, it is becauseof the
colonizedAfrican Territories.
92. Every means has been and is consideredto be
appropriate if it favours these Portuguesecompanies
1 offi(al Records of the General AssembO, Twenty-first
sesSior;l
Annexes,addendum
to agenda
item23,documellt
A/e300/Rev.l,
chap.V.

operating on a system of forced and unremunerated labour,
so that they may benefit from a fruitful field of investment
for Portuguese capital. In any event, Portuguese capital is
linked to international capital: hence, the support provided
by certain Powers.

peaceful Senegalese village and seriously wounded one
person. As can be seen from the letter of the representative
of Senegal, the victims are mainly women. We thus seehere
a new barbarous act by the Portuguese colonialists, who are
defying not only Senegal and the whole of Africa but also
the Security Council and the United Nations.

93. It would be most interesting to analyse in depth the
national accounts of Portugal, I think it certain that such an
analysis would prove what an immense role the countries
colonized by Portugal play in its national accounts and
would lead us to understand why Portugal obstinately seeks
at all costs to maintain those Territories. However, the
liberation movements show even greater obstinacy in their
endeavours to liberate their countries from colonial domination.

101. The representative of Senegal has, in his statement
and in the documents he has submitted, provided convincing and incontrovertible evidence showing that these
attacks are, first, deliberate acts of aggressionon the part of
Portugal and, secondly, that they are new links in a
continuous chain of such acts. As may be seen from the
information given in his statement, there have recently been
many violations of the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Senegal by Portuguese troops, attacks by Portuguese
mercenaries and regular troops against inhabited Senegalese
areas, incursions by them into Senegalese territory, artillery
shellings and other aggressiveacts by Portugal.

94. The countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America, and
all those who condemn colonialism, cannot remain silent
about the struggles being waged by the men of Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) to conquer their independence and their dignity as free men.

102. The Security Council has on a number of occasions
already considered the military actions of the Portuguese
colonialists against independent African countries bordering
on the Portuguese African colonies. Portuguese armed
forces have attacked not only Senegal but also Guinea, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of Congo
(Brazzaville), Tanzania and Zambia. Quite recently, on 28
July, the Security Council adopted resolution 268 (1969),
in which it decisively condemned the attack by Portuguese
colonialist troops on a village in the territory of Zambia. In
1963 and 1965, the Security Council considered the
question of the violation by Portuguese troops of the
territorial integrity of Senegal and demanded that Portugal
should take all effective action to prevent the repetition of
such acts. Yet, the Portuguese colonialists ignore these
demands and warnings of the Security Council and are
continuing their international criminal actions. Thus the
colonial war that has for many years been waged against the
peoples of Africa by the Portuguese colonizers is becoming
more and more a Portuguese war against the independent
States of Africa.

95. We have, in the First Committee, already said: “there
can be no peace or international security without national
liberation, the abandonment of the policy of foreign
intervention, the condemnation of racism and its corollary
fascism, and the condemnation of colonialism and neocolonialism”.*
96. The Security Council must take energetic measures, on
the one hand, to put an end to the systematic provocations
of Portugal in Senegal and Guinea, and, on the other, to
adopt the sanctions provided for under the Charter when a
country refuses to implement United Nations resolutions,
particularly those that pertain to self-determination.
97. In any case,my delegation expressesits solidarity with
our brothers from Senegal and Guinea, and more particularly with the men who are fighting for their independence.
98. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Yemen for the kind words he addressedto the Chair.

103. There is no doubt that the sovereignty and security
of the independent African States of the southern and
western parts of Africa and, consequently, the peace and
security of the African continent as a whole can be
strengthened only by the immediate cessation of the
colonial war being waged by Portugal against the peoples of
Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau), and by the
granting, without any further delay, of independence to
these peoples in accordance with the United Nations
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples. The proposals of the Soviet Union
for the strengthening of international security, which are
before this session of the General Assembly, take these
circumstances into account when they provide more particularly for, the cessation of all measures taken to put
down the liberation movements of peoples under colonial
domination, and for the granting of independence to them.

99. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The Security Council is obliged
once again to consider new acts of aggression by the
Portuguese colonialists against the young and independent
African States. This time we are considering a report by one
of the members of the Council, the African State of
Senegal, in connexion with the shelling, on 2.5 November
and 7 December, by the artillery of the Portuguese colonial
army, of the Senegalese village of &mine, causing loss of
life and material damage.
100. Today the representative of Senegal has reported on
a new serious act of aggression committed by the Portuguese colonialists against Senegal on 7 December, at the
very moment when the Security Council is considering the
question of armed provocations by Portugal against this
African country. This time, an even greater crime has been
committed, The aggressorshave killed five inhabitants of a

104. The constant and increasingly frequent military
provocations of the Portuguese colonialists against independent African States must inevitably attract the close
attention of the Security Council and all peace-loving

2 Ibid., Twenty-fourth Session, First Committee, 1667th meeting,

para. 55.
10

military expenditure and the size of its army, and has
strengthened its military police force to subdue the
population by terrorism and to fight patriotic forces in
African countries.

States. These aggressive actions are the direct result of
Portugal’s criminal colonialist policy of putting down
national liberation movements in Territories under Portuguese control and keeping the peoples of those Territories
under the colonial yoke, In Angola, Mozambique and
Guinea (Bissau), African patriots are continuing to shed
their blood fighting for the liberty and independence of
their peoples and in defence of their legal rights-rights that
have been recognized by the United Nations and that have
frequently been confirmed in resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council, The inalienable right of
the people of these Territories to self-determination and
independence has again been confirmed in General Assembly resolution 2507 (XXIV), adopted on 21 November
1969.

107. As was stated in the basicdocument adopted by the
International Conference of Communist and Workers’
Parties in Moscow on 17 June 1969, the Portuguese
colonialists are trying to maintain their colonial positions
by force of armsand with the support of NATO. The wide
military and economic assistanceand important protection
accorded to Portugal by its allies in the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) are enabling the Portuguese
colonialiststo sendinto Africa troops and a large quantity
of arms and materials, including aircraft, to crush the
liberation war of the African peoples.

105. In attempting to defend the aggressive actions of the I
Portuguese colonialists, the Portuguese representative has
been juggling with such phrases as the “right of selfdefence”, “penetration into Portuguese territory across the
border”, and so on. But for whom are these verbal
acrobatics intended? Everyone knows that Senegal does
not border on Portugal. It is an African country bordering
on another African country, Guinea (Bissau), which is
maintained by force of arms and the use of terror in a state
of colonial dependence by the Portuguese colonialists
against the will of the people of that country, in violation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples and of many other United
Nations decisions. For these reasons, the presence of
Portugal and its troops in Guinea (B&au) constitutes an
illegal international action, whereas the legality of the just
struggle of the people of this country for independence and
freedom has been proclaimed and recognized by the United
Nations and frequently confirmed by decisions of the
General Assembly, including resolutions adopted at its
current session, In these circumstances, we can speak only
of the right of the people of Guinea (Bissau) to defend
themselves, fighting as they are for their freedom and for
their legal rights against the colonial pirates of the second
half of the twentieth century. On the other hand, the
cynical statements of the representative of Lisbon about
some sort of “right to self-defence” on a foreign territory,
and the “right to retaliation” through aggression and attack
against foreign territories, represent the usual long-familiar
methods of imperialist aggressors to cover up and justify
the crimes they commit against the peace and the security
of peoples.

108. With insolent cynicism the Portugueserepresentative
here tried to act as an accuser and demanded to know
where the African freedom fighters obtain their arms.That
is none of his business.To help the patriots of Africa is a
legitimate action officially recognized and approvedby the
United Nations, whereasthe receipt of armsby Portugal for
its evil deedsand the murder of Africans are international
crimes. The Portugueserepresentative is here not as the
plaintiff but as the defendant. Consequently he must
answer questions, not interrogate. He must answer the
Council and say from where and from whom Portugal has
received military suppliesand continuesto receiveweapons
to wage its long war against the African peoples and
maintain them in a state of colonial bondageand what the
nature and amounts of these weaponsand suppliesare. He
must answerthesequestions,not put other questionsto the
Council.
109. In this assistance
and support receivedby Portuguese
colonizers lie the reasonsfor Portugal’sever more provocative defiance of and aggressiveacts against independent
African countries. In its resolution 2507 (XXIV), the
General Assembly demandsof Statesmembersof NATO to
halt military and any other type of assistanceto Portugal,
since such assistanceenables it to wage a colonial war
against the African peoples.The granting of such military
assistanceto Portugal is a seriousviolation of the decision
of the General Assembly and a crime againstthe African
peoples.
110. The Portuguesecolonialists are backed up by the
military and political bloc which they have formed within
the fascist, racist regimesof South Africa and Southern
Rhodesia. This alliance of the racists who oppressthe
African peoplesis one of the most hateful and most odious
military and political colonialist blocs operatingtoday. The
Africans, quite rightly, call it the “unholy alliance”. Its
purpose is to prevent the liberation of African peopleswho
are stilf oppressedtoday and to maintain considerable
territories of southern Africa as an imperialistbulwark and
as a basefor attack againstindependentAfrican States.The
Security Council is aware of the numerouscriminal acts of
the participants in this plot against the freedom of the
African peoples, While Portugal wagesa colonial war in
Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau), the South
African racists, having establishedthe terrorist regimeOf
apartheid in their own country, not only suppressthe just,

106. In this connexion, it must be pointed out that no
changes have occurred in the colonial policies of Portugal as
far as the peoples of Africa are concerned, though
temporary illusions had been entertained, even by some
Africans, that such changes might occur as a result of the
recent shifts in power in Lisbon. The facts show, however,
that Portugal is increasing its military operations against the
national liberation movements of the peoples of Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau). As may be seen further
from the last report of the Special Committee of the United
Nations on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,3 Portugal is increasing its
3 Ibid.,

Twenty-fourth

Rev.1))chaps.II-IV.

Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/1623/

11

desire of the people of Namibia for independence and
illegally occupy their country but openly grant econormc
and military assistance to the Portuguese colonizers. At the
same time Portugal and the Republic of South Africa are
jointly doing their utmost to prevent the application of
sanctions against the racist r&me of Southern Rhodesia
laid down by a decision of the Security Council [resolution
253 (1968)]
on 29 May 1968. In violating this decision
they grant direct assistance
andsupportto the racistrbgime
in Southern Rhodesia.This is how the fascistracist trio is
operating in southernAfrica. The developmentof evectsin
southernAfrica clearly confirmsthat this colonialbloc is an
arm of imperialismfor the suppression
of national liberation movementsin Africa and is a seriousthreat to the
freedomand security of independentAfrican States.

resolution and of other decisionsof the United Nationson
the situation prevailing in the Territories still under
Portuguesecolonial domination must be an important step
towards the elimination of the last strongholdsof colonialismin Africa, to the liberation of the colonial peoplesand
the strengtheningof the peaceand security of the independent countriesof this continent.

113. The Soviet Union, consistently implementing the
Leninist foreign policy of peace,freedomandindependence
of all peoples,aids and supports the peoplesfighting for
their liberation. In the resolutionI havejust mentioned the
General Assembly once again called upon all States “to
increase. . . their moral and material assistanceto the
peoples of the Territories under Portuguesedomination
who are strugglingfor their freedomand independence”,In
11I. We can easily seewhat the real aimsandsignificance responseto this call of the General Assembly and in
of the aggressiveactions of the Portuguesecolonialists accordancewith its policy, the Soviet Union is grantingall
againstSenegaland other African independentStatesare. possibleassistanceto the peoplesof Africa in their noble
Portugal, with the support from outside of its stronger strugglefor liberation and supporting the consolidationof
allies, is endeavouringto frighten African countries and the political and economic independenceof States that
have achieved their national freedom as a result of the
peoplesstrugglingfor the full and final liberation of Africa
from colonialismand racism,to prevent free Africa from
demolition of colonial empires. The Security Council
helping the national liberation movements which are shouldadopt al1the necessarymeasuresin order resolutely
constantly expanding their just and legal struggleagainst to put an end to the aggressiveactions of the Portuguese
the remainingvestigesof colonialismon the long-suffering colonizerswho are attempting to strike at the sovereignty
soil of Africa. This imperialist attack against southern and independenceof Senegaland other African countries.
Africa is being counteredby the growingunity of African
Through the adoption of such measuresthe Security
countries and their peoplesstandingfor the elimination of
Council will make an important contribution to the
the last vestigesof colonialismin Africa. A clearconfirma- strengtheningof peacein Africa andto the strengtheningof
tion of that unity and solidarityis to be found in the appeal international peaceandsecurity.
to the Security Council by 36 African countries in
connexion with the discussionof Portugueseaggression 114. The Soviet Union fully supports the just and legitimate demandsof Senegalthat the Security Council should
againstSenegal/S/9524 and Add.I]. In this appealAfrica
officially announcesits full support of Senegal,which has condemnin the strongestterms the Portuguesecolonialsts
becomethe victim of imperialistaggression.
In this docu- for their policy of aggressionagainstan African country
ment the countries of Africa equally decisively condemn and that the armed attacks and other violations of the
the Portuguesecolonialistswagingwar againstthe peoples territorial integrity of Senegal should be halted immediately. The Security Counhl should warn Portugal in
of Angola, Mozambiqueand Guinea(Bissau).The Security
Council must give its most seriousconsiderationto the
the most decisivetermsthat if suchactsof aggression
recur
situation thus created and to the facts pertaining to the
the Security Council will adopt further active measures
in
growing number of military provocations by Portugal accordancewith the Charter of the United Nations.
againstthe independentcouritriesof Africa.
115. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): I would like, first of all, to
112. Resolution 218 (1965) adopted by the Security
congratulateyou on your assumptionof the Presidencyof
Council on 23 November 1965 drew the attention of all to
the Security Council, and to assureyou that my delegation
the fact that the situation resultingfrom the policiesof
would endeavourto bring the Christmasspirit to bear on all
Portugal both as regardsthe African population of its
its activities and efforts under your distinguishedleadership
coIonies and the neighbouringAfrican States seriously during this month. I wish to take this occasionalsoto pay
my respectsand complimentsto your eminent predecesdisturbed international peaceand security. At its twentyfourth session,the General Assembly, in its recently
sors,Lord Caradonand AmbassadorYost, Presidentof the
adopted resolution 2507(XXIV), condemnedonce again Security Council for the monthsof October and November
respectively,
the colonial war being waged by the Government of
Portugal againstthe peoplesof the Territories under its
116. The Security Council is seizedof a matter brought
domination. It reaffirmed the inalienable right of the
before it by the Government of Senegal.It is said that,
peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau)to
twice on 25 November 1969, units of the regular Portuself-determination and independencein accordancewith
the United NationsDeclarationon the Granting of Indepen- guesearmy basedin Guinea (Bissau) fired shellsat the
dence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. It strongly village of Saminein Senegal,killing onepersonandinjuring
condemnedPortugal’s policy of usingits colonial posses- several. A considerableloss of property occurred and
sions for violations of the territorial integrity and sover- people were obliged to leave the village. The statement
made by the representative of Senegalshows that the
eignty of independentAfrican States.Only Portugal and a
small group of its political andmilitary alliesopposedthe incident of 25 Novemberwasnot an isolatedone and that
adoption of this resolution. The implementation of this it had taken place in the wake of other similarincidents.
12

This has been confirmed by the incident of yesterday, in
which five persons were killed and one wounded. In his
statement made before the Council the representative of
Portugal has not attempted to deny the allegation: he has
admitted the possibility of the incident of 25 November
having taken place and the result such as that mentioned in
the Senegalesecomplaint having followed. On the contrary,
he has sought to justify Portuguese shelling of the village of
San-tine inside the territory of Senegal on the ground of
self-defence. The representative of Portugal, furthermore,
admonishes the Government of Senegal for not having
taken recourse to conciliatory measures enumerated in
Article 33 of the Charter before submitting the matter to
the Security Council.

Guinea (Bissau). May I recall, in this connexion, that the
Security Council, by its resolution 268 (1969) of 28 July
1969, strongly censured the Portuguese attacks against
Zambia, and called upon Portugal to desist from violating
the territorial integrity and from carrying out unprovoked
raids against Zambia. In pursuance of its colonial designs
which have been universally condemned, the Government
of Portugal appears to have adopted a policy of all-out
hostility and punitive actions against all African States
whose territories adjoin those of its colonial possessions in
Africa. The policies and actions of the Government of
Portugal cannot be regarded as ones taken in defence and
promotion of its legitimate interests. Those are policies and
actions which have been characterized as a “crime against
humanity” and declared to have constituted a “serious
threat to world peace and security” by the General
Assembly. They are designed to maintain and further
Portuguese colonial domination in the colonies of Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau)-Territories
to which the
Declaration on decolonization applies. The General Assembly, in its several decisions, has unreservedly upheld the
right of the peoples of those territories to immediate
independence.

117. My delegation recognizes that in terms of Article 33
of the Charter, it is incumbent on all States Members of the
Organization to seek solutions of all questions by peaceful
means enumerated in that Article. But, in view of Security
Council resolutions 178 (1963) of 24 April 1963 and
204 (1965) of 19 May 1965, both of which requested the
Government of ‘Portugal to ensure the prevention of any
violation of Senegal’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
and also asked the Secretary-General of the Organization to
keep the situation under review, my delegation strongly
feels that the Government of Senegal is justified to address
itself to the Security Council in the present case and seek to
obtain additional protection of the Council against Portugueseincursions into its territory.
118. My delegation further feels that the argument put L,
forward by the representative of Portugal in support of his
Government’s acts in so-called self-defence is fallacious and
unsupported by facts, and therefore cannot be accepted by
the Council. Those acts of self-defence have consisted, in
this specific case, of shelling of a peaceful village across
international frontiers and have resulted in a loss of life and
considerable damage to persons and property. Those who
died or were injured were practically all women, children
and the old. None of them was a freedom fighter.
119. My delegation cannot accept Portugal’s contention of y
self-defence in the particular case, also because by its own
argument the Government of Portugal should have used
various peaceful means available under the Charter to
redress its grievances, if any-whatever their validity-before
taking recourse repeatedly to violent and punitive measures
in violation of the political sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Senegal. But the good faith of the Portuguese
authorities is in question here, because even as the Council
is considering the matter &hey have taken further such
violent measures.
120. Apart from these considerations, the high-handedness
of the Government of Portugal becomes even more apparent when we view the matter in the context of
Portuguese colonial policies in Africa. And it is the
considered opinion of my delegation that the matter cannot
properly be viewed except in that context.

122. However, the Government of Portugal has not paid
the slightest regard to those decisions. It has learned
nothing from the lessons of history. Bolstered up by the
assistance in money and arms as well as the moral sympathy
and political encouragement it habitually receives from
certain quarters, particularly South Africa and Southern
Rhodesia, Portugal has seen fit to cling to its colonial
possessions. May I say that by doing so, the Government of
Portugal has fostered a situation which is a permanent
source of friction in the political horizon of the African
continent. Responsibility for this situation should be placed
where it belongs. The verdict of the Council should not be
ambiguous on this count. For these reasons, my delegation
will be prepared to support any measure calculated to
ensure against further violation of the territorial integrity of
Senegal.
123. The PRESIDENT:
Portugal.

I call on the representative

of

124. Mr. MIRANDA (Portugal): The Council will easily
uriderstand that my delegation is not in a position to
comment right now on the contents of the letter addressed
to you, Sir, earlier this morning by the representative of
Senegal and distributed as document S/9541. This document came to the knowledge of my delegation only a short
while ago and we have naturally had to contact our
Government for information on the subject. We have done
so already, but my delegation can hardly hope for a reply
today since ultimately the information has to be obtained
from Portuguese Guinea. However, my delegation will try
its best to obtain the required information as soon as
possible and place it before the Council. I make this
statement in courtesy to the representative of Senegal and
the members of the Security Council.
125. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Portugal for his statement. The next and last speaker
inscribed on my list this morning is the representative of
Mauritania. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and make his statement.

121. The records of the Security Council are replete with
matters involving justifiable complaints by African States
concerning ,tiolations of their territorial integrity by the
Portuguese armed forces based in Angola, Mozambique and
13

130. This policy of provocation and intimidation will not
deter the countries subjected to aggression from carrying
out a sacred duty owed to the movements of African
liberation struggling to eliminate the obsolete colonialism
which is linked to those who uphold apartheid in Zimbabwe and South Africa.

126. Mr. OULD DADDAH (Mauritania) (translated from
French): It is right and understandable that my delegation
should feel proud on seeing you take on the responsible
duty of guiding the work of this most important body
which was created for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In fact, your competence, your senseof
fairness and the depth of your thinking, which is recognized
by those who have worked with you, make us confident
that you will carry out your duties with the firmness and
courtesy which have characterized the good work you, as a
worthy African, have accomplished in other fields. Allow
pe also to express the gratitude of my delegation to YOU
and through you to the members of the Council, who have
kindly allowed the delegation of the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania to participate without the right to vote in this
debate which has been made necessaryby the repeated acts
of banditry and unmistakable aggression perpetrated by
Portuguese colonialism on the African continent.

131. The representative of Portuguese colonialism has
once again tried to distort the facts in the hope of deceiving
the members of the Council. This representative, whose
country is ruining itself in carrying on an outdated and
hopeless colonialist adventure, has tried to pass himself off
as acting in legitimate self-defence, while seeking to live in
peace with his neighbours, who are threatening his security,
This act, which is in bad taste, has been tried out
unsuccessfully by others, and can deceive no one.
132. Geographically, Portugal is not a neighbour of
Senegal since it is not an African country. Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) are not and do not want
to be provinces of Portugal. If the peoples of these African
territories wanted to share a fiction which exists only in the
imagination of those who obstinately oppose the current of
history by placing themselves beyond the pale of the new
international order, it would not be necessary for the fascist
regime of Lisbon to maintain on African soil at great
expense and thousands of miles from the frontiers of
Portugal an army of more than 150,000 men. It seemsto
me that these are obvious facts which demonstrate the
vanity of all that the Lisbon authorities have said in this
Council, at a time when their unmistakable acts of
aggression endanger the sovereignty of a State Member of
the United Nations, which respects the principles of the
Charter, and call for a meeting of this important international body.

127. Mr. Boye, the permanent representative of Senegal,
our sister republic, firmIy stated, at the 1516th meeting of
the Council, the reasons which led the Government of
Senegal to bring before the Council the most recent
aggression of which his country has been a victim. In a
devastating statement against Portuguese colonialism,
whose acts of banditry and aggressionagainst the people of
Senegal were described with the requisite accuracy and
clearness, Mr. Boye spoke in a dispassionate and restrained
manner, the importance of which will not have escapedany
member of the Council. This attitude has always been
characteristic of the actions of SenegaI, whose leaders have
never ceased to show in their deeds their support for the
principles of the Charter and their desire to contribute to
the maintenance of international peace and their definite
preference for the peaceful settlement of international
disputes.
128. Eminent African representatives have already spoken
in this debate and have stressed that the position of the
African States, when a State member of the Organization of
African Unity is a victim of any aggression, is governed
directly by the Charter of that Organization, which imposes
on us the obligation to strengthen African unity and
solidarity. That is what will enable the peoples of our vast
continent to present a united front that can hasten the
liberation of all the African territories still under foreign
domination.
129. To this sacred obligation, which my country assumes,
there must be added, in the specific case before the
Security Council today and as far as the Islamic RepubIic of
Mauritania is concerned, a special feeling of solidarity
flowing from the many and century-old bonds which make
us feel that any attempt against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of our sister Republic of Senegal is as
though it were a direct attempt against ourselves. This
consideration explains the need which my Government
feels to emphasize before this Council the intolerable
character of the actions of a colonialism at bay, which,
foreseeing its inevitable defeat, does not hesitate to violate
the principles of the Charter in any way it can and
multiplies its perfidious acts of aggression against a peaceloving State, whose villages it shells and whose property it
loots and destroys.
14

133. Mr. Boye, the spokesman of the people and Government of Senegal, has, with the accuracy and clearnessof a
jurist devoted to the cause of peace and to the country he
represents, furnished facts which the representative of the
fascist authorities of Lisbon has not dared to contradict.
The Senegalese village of Samine was shelled with premeditation by Portuguese forces on 25 November 1969. This act
of deliberate aggression caused several victims, among
whom there were women, children and old men. This was
no isolated aggression. The representative of Senegal gavea
long list of aggressionsand stressed before this Council that
he was expressly limiting himself to the most recent cases.
None of these acts of aggression has been denied by the
representative of Lisbon. All that we have heard from the
representative of Portuguese fascism is a justification of an
alleged right of pursuit, which has been condemned by the
international community. The same representative had the
arrogance to give to threats he proferred in this hall a
dimension that went well beyond the bounds of Africa. In
fact, he stated at the 15 16th meeting of the Security
Council that “if these unfriendly actions on the part of
Senegal are sought to be justified in the name of any
resolutions, then so much the worse for those resolutions
and for Senegal” [para. 1341,
134. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania does not merely
want to add yet another statement to those that have
already been made here. We asked to take part in this

j

debate to emphasize the danger that these aggressions,to
which our sister Country of Senegal is being subjected,
would constitute to the United Nations and Africa if they
were to be repeated and become permanent. In the course
of this debate members of the Council have witnessed the
scam in which the fascist authorities of Lisbon hold the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
.Assembly. They have likewise heard the representative of
Portugal threaten in barely veiled terms to let loose his
soldiers on the peoples of the countries that neighbour on
Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau), where those iyho
fight against Portuguese oppression or who have fled from
that aggression find refuge. Such an attitude and such
behaviour cause US to fear that without an energetic
condemnation by the Security Council, accompanied by
provision for specific measures to be taken by the Council
in the event of a repetition of the offence, the Portuguese
colonialists will renew their acts of aggression against the
Republic of Senegal. Indeed, as everyone knows, the fascist
Portuguese rEgime persists in its attempts to bring about tKe
impossible and unrealizable dream of maintaining the
colonial empire on the African continent.

139. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania joins all those
who consider that the Security Council should, when
assessingsituations such as those created by Portuguese
colonialism in Africa, apply itself to re-establishhg justice
on our continent. The Council should energetically and
unequivocally condemn Portuguese aggressionagainst Sene.
gal. Such unequivocal condemnation is necessary,and the
Council should’ ‘see to it that this is accompanied with
specific measures to be taken without delay in the event
that such aggressions,which constitute, as we have said
already, acts of international brigandage, should be renewed.
140. Before I conclude, I should like .to repeat what
eminent representatives of African cduntries have already
emphasized in the courseof this debate, When Portuguese
colonialist authorities proceed to abduct Senegalese nationals and to shell Senegalesevillages, they are committing
an act of aggression,not only agiiinst Senegal, but against
the whole of Africa, and therefore against all those who
signed the letter issued as document S/9524 and Add.1,
including the Islamic Republic of Mauritania.
141. The PRESIDENT: I thank Ambassador Daddah,
representative of Mauritania, for his statement and in
particular for his warm and over-generous compliments
addressedto the Chair.

135. My country, like many other members of the
Organization of African Unity, cannot tolerate a repetition
of such acts of aggression. For us, it is a question of dignity
and respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a
country to which we are bound by many ties which go far
beyond the sharing of a common destiny, though this too is
something very real to us.

142. I wish to draw the Council’s attention to the fact
that, in his intervention this morning, the representative of
Senegal, Mr. Boye, made an urgent request to the effect
that the Council should take a decision on the question
before it today. Mr. Boye, in keeping with his spirit of
accommodation and customary courtesy, has informed me
that he does not wish to insist on his other request for a
continuous meeting, This has been done for humanitarian
reasons,in order to allow representativesto have lunch and,
it is hoped, conduct informal consultations

136. It is time for the Council to emphasize clearly that it
is inadmissible for the fascist Portuguese regime to continue
to benefit from logistics and mateYie1 from its powerful
military allies, while pursuing its policy of aggression and
colonial oppression, whose victims are the peoples and
States of Africa. It is impossible for these peoples and
African States, victims of foreign domination, oppression
and aggression, as well as for the entire international
community,
to see in the tolerance from which the
Portuguese colonialist regime benefits in its abuse and
criminal use of NATO supplies anything other than
complicity, which the Security Council must cease to
tolerate.

143. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated from French):
Mr, President, I should like to thank you for the statement
you have just made, but I should like to make one or two
points clear.

144. First, I have asked, and I am still asking, that the
Security Council should continue to meet. However, for the
reasons that you have just mentioned, I think the Council
should adjourn for luncheon before continuing its work.

137. My country is acutely aware of how slender its means
are to meet its own needs for economic and social
de\relopment . Like all the other countries of Africa we want
peace, But we know too that this peace cannot really exist
on a continent where men cont.&e to fight over vast areas
to achieve their inalienable and indefeasible rights to
dignity and the free choice of their destiny.

145. Secondly, I should like to say again that the
delegation of Senegal requests that the Security Council

should adopt a decision on the question before it today.
146. The PRESIDENT:

I thank the repreSentatiVe of

Senegal, Mr. Boye, for his clarification. I do not know what

came out in French interpretation, but that is precisely
what I said in English.

138. Only Portuguese colonialists can consider for an
instant that the Africans who are fighting for the triumph
of these ideals, ideals which are in the Charter, will not
receive aid and support from their African brothers who
have gained their independence. The Portuguese r@me,
which seems to have understood nothing of the historical
evolution of peoples, denies this profound truth. It engages
in aggression against the sister Republic of Senegal because
that peace-loving country is aware of its responsibility
towards the international community and towards Africa.

147. There are no further speakersinscribed on mY list for
this morning’s meeting and, in accordance with .views
expressed in informal consultations, the next meeting of
the Security Council on this item will be held at 3 o’clock
this afternoon.
me meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

15

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Sales Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNfES

Lea publications
dei Nations
Unies
rant
en vente dons
les librairicr
et les agencer
dbporitaires
du monde entier.
Informez-vour
aup&
de volre librairie
ou odressct-vour
6:
Nations
Uniea, Section
der venter,
New York ou GenLve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicocioner
de las Nociones
Unidas ert6n
en todar parter
del mundo.
Consulte
a so librero
Ventor,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S.

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
o dirijose
a: Nacioner

0.50 (or equivalent

in other

y casas distribuidorar
Unidar,
Secci6n

currencies)

de

822754anuary

1973-2,050
