S/PV.9430

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9430

th meeting
Monday, 2 October 2023, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. França Danese. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Ms. Osei
Mrs. Shino
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Hauri
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Letter dated 14 August 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2023/596)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-28562 (E)
*2328562*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9430

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.

Against:
None

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should also like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council,
to His Excellency Ambassador Ferit Hoxha, Permanent
Representative of Albania, for his service as President
of the Council for the month of September 2023.
I am sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Hoxha
and his team for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Letter dated 14 August 2023 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/596)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica and Kenya to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Jean Victor Généus, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Worship of the Republic of Haiti.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2023/709, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Ecuador and the United States of America.
I should also like to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2023/596, which contains the
text of a letter dated 14 August 2023 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, Ecuador, France, Gabon, Ghana,
Japan, Malta, Mozambique, Switzerland, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
2/12

02/10/2023

Abstaining:
China, Russian Federation
The President: The draft resolution received 13 votes
in favour, none against and two abstentions. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 2699 (2023).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Today Security Council made history in authorizing
the Multinational Security Support Mission to Haiti.
We have stepped up to create a new way of preserving
global peace and security, answering the repeated calls
of a Member State facing a multidimensional crisis
amid alarming, spiralling gang violence.
I would like to acknowledge the presence of Haitian
Foreign Minister Généus, who joins us today, and to
thank Haiti for its partnership. And I welcome the
participation of the representatives of Jamaica, Guyana
and Kenya in today’s meeting. I would also like to
thank Ecuador as the co-penholder for its tireless work
on resolution 2699 (2023).
With participation from countries all over the
world, and with many thanks to Kenya for positively
considering leading the Mission, the international
community can now move forward with the
Multinational Security Support Mission for Haiti. This
Mission comes at the request of the Haitian Government
and Haitian civil society to address the insecurity and
dire humanitarian crisis the country has faced for far
too long. The deployment of the Mission will help to
support Haiti’s critical near-term needs and to foster
the security conditions necessary for the country to
advance long-term stability. Importantly, the resolution
recognizes the need to learn lessons from past missions
and calls for safeguards to promote respect for human
rights and accountability.
The resolution makes clear that the Multinational
Security Support Mission to Haiti will operate in strict
compliance with international law and include dedicated
expertise in anti-gang operations, community-oriented
policing, children and women’s protection and
preventing and responding to sexual and gender-based
violence. The Mission must take necessary action
to ensure appropriate conduct and discipline and to
prevent sexual exploitation and abuse.
23-28562

02/10/2023

The question concerning Haiti

It was a year ago that the Secretary-General called
on the international community to send a mission to
Haiti. It took us one full year to get to where we are
now. But let us be clear: our work is far from finished.
Our focus now turns to making the Mission operational
and successful in restoring the security conditions the
Haitian people have called for.
The Mission will give the Haitian National
Police additional support to secure Haiti’s streets,
but it is only one part of the larger effort to address
the multidimensional crisis in the country, including
acute food insecurity as well as other humanitarian,
economic and political challenges. As part of that
effort, the Mission will coordinate closely with the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and relevant
United Nations agencies. The Mission is an example
of multinational action to address this grave security
crisis. It is designed to be truly multinational in its
resourcing and nature and requires a collective effort if
it is going to succeed.
The response from the region and much of the
world has been united and strong. We extend particular
thanks to the leadership of the Caribbean Community
and countries such as Jamaica, the Bahamas, Barbados
and Antigua and Barbuda, which have all publicly
pledged personnel to the Mission and more, as in the
case of Kenya. Today’s resolution under Chapter VII
is a legal requirement for many of those countries and
others that are willing to contribute and participate.
As President Biden said in his address to the General
Assembly last month, “The people of Haiti cannot wait
much longer”. With the adoption of this resolution, we
can collaborate to realize that vision as we work to help
the Haitian people in their time of dire need.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to express its deep sympathy with the tragic
situation of the Haitian people. We have been working
to increase the Council’s attention to the question of
Haiti, demanding that the Haitian authorities and all
political parties and factions effectively assume their
responsibilities and calling on United Nations agencies
and the relevant international and regional partners to
provide Haiti with targeted assistance. China appreciates
Kenya’s willingness to lead a multinational security
support mission and play an active role in improving
the security situation in Haiti, along with some of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) nations.

S/PV.9430

In the past few weeks we have been engaging
Council members in thorough consultations with the aim
of delivering an appropriate framework to facilitate the
deployment of multinational security support. Among
other issues, the consultations have centred on invoking
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Proceeding from the principles of State sovereignty
and non-interference in internal affairs, China has
always taken a cautious and responsible approach to the
Council’s invocation of Chapter VII in authorizing the
use of force. There have been some precedents for abuse
of that authorization in previous practice. However, in
view of the current security situation in Haiti and the
concerns and appeals of the international community,
especially those of the CARICOM nations, and based
on our trust in friendly countries, China has taken
a constructive position on the Council’s adoption of
resolution 2699 (2023).
In accordance with the resolution, we hope that the
countries leading the Multinational Security Support
Mission to Haiti will hold in-depth consultations with
Haiti on specific arrangements for the deployment of
security forces, with a view to reaching an agreement
and ensuring that the arrangements will have the support
of the Haitian people. Moreover, reporting to the Council
should be done in a timely manner. At the same time,
the implementation of the resolution must comply
with international law and the basic norms governing
international relations, so as to avoid infringing on
other countries’ sovereignty or interfering in their
internal affairs.
Without a legitimate, effective and accountable
Government in place, it is hardly possible for any external
support to have a lasting impact. The Haitian authorities
and all the parties and factions involved should reach the
broadest possible consensus on transitional arrangements
as soon as possible and come up with a feasible and
credible timetable. Regrettably, today’s resolution does
not send the strongest possible message in that regard.
With China’s facilitation, the resolution recognizes
CARICOM’s efforts to promote a political settlement
of the Haitian crisis. We urge the Haitian authorities
and all parties and factions to respond positively to
the mediation efforts of CARICOM and the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), work in the
fundamental interests of the people, show sincerity in
conducting dialogue and taking on their responsibilities,
and create conditions conducive to holding free and fair
elections as soon as possible.

23-285623/12

S/PV.9430

The question concerning Haiti

At China’s strong request, and with the support of
a majority of Council members, the penholders have
finally taken China’s views on board and have used the
resolution to explicitly request that all countries take all
possible steps to cut off at their source the channels by
which Haitian gangs obtain small arms, light weapons
and ammunition. That is a very important decision. If the
Council had taken that step sooner, the security situation
in Haiti might not have deteriorated to where it is today.
From now on all countries are obliged to take concrete
action in accordance with Council resolutions and to
contribute to curbing the gang violence in Haiti and
protecting the safety and lives of its people.
The multiple crises in Haiti are intertwined, and
security issues represent only one dimension of that.
A comprehensive approach is therefore essential to
finding a comprehensive solution. The Council will have
opportunities this month to hold in-depth consultations
and discussions on the political situation in Haiti, the
sanctions regime and the work of BINUH. China looks
forward to working with the international community
and Council members to support and assist the Haitian
people in finding the right path out of their crises.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we congratulate Brazil on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for October and hope it will be a successful one. We
welcome the presence at today’s meeting of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Haiti.
The Russian Federation abstained in the voting
on resolution 2699 (2023), drafted by Ecuador and the
United States, authorizing the Multinational Security
Support Mission to Haiti. At the same time, we are fully
aware of the scale and urgency of the security problems
that Haiti is facing. We have consistently advocated
for offering it responsible international assistance
while taking into account the opinions of the widest
possible cross-section of Haitian society. Against the
backdrop of the authorities’ powerlessness and the
national police’s limited capacities, the violence in
Haiti has reached a level that has compelled Port-auPrince itself to ask the international community for
armed assistance. Considering that request, along with
the appeals from the Secretary-General, the opinions
of countries in the region and the willingness of Kenya
to lead such an international mission, we have no
objections in principle against the initiative as such.
4/12

02/10/2023

Nonetheless, it must be understood that sending
the armed forces of another State to any country, even
at that country’s request, is an extreme measure that
must be thoroughly thought through. However, during
the planning of the Mission and the preparation of the
corresponding resolution, we found that our perfectly
fair requests for more detailed information about the
concept of operations, the modalities for the use of
force and the contingent’s withdrawal strategy went
unanswered. We also got the feeling that attempts were
being made to hastily confer United Nations legitimacy
on a non-United Nations mission with the help of
a decision by the Council that was not fully thought
through or calibrated.
We all realize that authorizing an operation under
Chapter VII is an extremely serious step that requires
a full acknowledgement of the responsibility for it
and its possible consequences. Unfortunately, we
did not feel confident of that during the negotiations
on the draft. As a permanent member of the Security
Council, Russia cannot agree to what is essentially a
blind invocation of Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations. Haiti has historically experienced an
enormous amount of irresponsible foreign interference,
which is precisely what gave rise to the downward
spiral that Haitians have been unable to overcome for
years. Authorizing yet another instance of the use of
force in Haiti without a precise understanding of the
parameters of the Mission being authorized is shortsighted. Moreover, the Security Council should approve
the concept of operations rather than be presented with
it after the fact.
We would nevertheless like to highlight some
positive elements of the resolution, including the
call to all Haitian political forces to reach a broad
consensus through a dialogue, with the assistance of
the United Nations and the Caribbean Community,
and the expansion of the arms embargo to all actors
not operating under State auspices or with the
Organization’s approval. In particular, we hope it will
help to significantly reduce the illegal flow of weapons
to the island and shed light on smuggling sources
and routes.
We hope that the Mission that has been authorized
will help to stabilize the situation in Haiti as soon as
possible, while respecting the country’s sovereignty
and the rights of its people. Any interference in internal
political processes by external forces is unacceptable.
We wish Nairobi successful preparations in composing
23-28562

02/10/2023

The question concerning Haiti

and deploying the forces. We await the detailed
information on the Mission that was requested in
the resolution.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the honour to
deliver this explanation of vote after the voting on
behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council (A3).
Allow me first of all to warmly congratulate Brazil
on its assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of October. I take this opportunity to
commend the Albanian presidency for the work well
done. Let me also recognize the presence here today of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti, which bears
testimony to the importance of the deliberations we are
undertaking in the Chamber.
The A3 fully supported the adoption of resolution
2699 (2023), authorizing the Multinational Security
Support Mission to Haiti under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations. We hold the view that
our action at this time, in support of and at the request
of Haiti, is an action for the country and humankind.
Through our decision today as a Council, we are standing
up together for Haiti and fulfilling our responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
The A3 welcomed the consensus reached by the
members of the Council on the text of the resolution, as
submitted by Ecuador and the United States. The text
responds to the unbearable situation that the people of
Haiti are going through at this moment. We therefore
view the resolution as an important stepping stone
to curtail the activities of criminal actors and gangs,
which are paralysing Haiti and seeking to destroy that
noble and heroic country, which has always stood for
and cherished liberty and independence.
We wish to commend Kenya’s engagement in the
difficult negotiation process of the resolution. We highly
praise Kenya for offering to lead the Multinational
Security Support Mission to Haiti. That allows us to
move from rhetoric to action in a country whose history
should compel us all to examine our consciences. We
reiterate our strong support for Kenya’s important
role and urge all Member States to cooperate with the
Multinational Security Support Mission to Haiti.
The A3 acknowledges and highly appreciates the
important role of the Caribbean Community and other
Latin American States in the region and the confidence
it brings to the process of accompanying the people of

S/PV.9430

Haiti on their path to the restoration of law, order, peace
and stability. Our collective commitment to Haiti today
must also enjoy the support of all partners and friends
of the Haitian people.
We appeal for a national consensus aimed at an
inclusive political process and transition, as well as
transparent elections that fairly and credibly establish
the will of the Haitian people. We call on all segments
of Haitian society that have not yet done so to join the
consensus to chart a path towards the country’s recovery.
Finally, we look forward to the early deployment
of the multinational force in Haiti. We strongly hope
that, in combination with other levers of action, such as
targeted sanctions, a blockade of arms transfers to the
gangs, essential humanitarian support, compliance and
monitoring mechanisms aimed at preventing all forms
of abuse or overreach of the mandate and enhanced
efforts to promote social and economic development,
it will help to restore hope, stability and a better future
for Haiti.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): Since this is the Security
Council’s first formal meeting of the month of
October, I would like to begin by congratulating you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council and thanking Albania for the sterling work it
carried out in the month of September. We welcome
the participation in today’s meeting of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Haiti and the representatives of
Kenya, Jamaica and Guyana. I express our appreciation
to the co-penholders, Ecuador and the United States.
We thank them for their tireless efforts in engaging
with Council members over the past weeks and striving
to incorporate all perspectives and concerns into the
text of the resolution (resolution 2699 (2023)).
Malta voted in favour of the resolution. We did so
considering the desperate situation on the ground and
the Council’s responsibility to respond with urgency.
We welcome Kenya’s offer to consider leading the
Mission. We also commend all Member States that
have pledged their support. The Mission must perform
to exemplary standards. It must implement all aspects
of the resolution and operate fully and transparently
under international law, including human rights law,
to contribute to the protection of Haiti’s population.
Oversight of the resolution will be central to its
successful implementation, as will the clear delineation
between the role of the Mission and humanitarian
action on the ground.

23-285625/12

S/PV.9430

The question concerning Haiti

However, the Mission will not resolve all the issues
the country continues to face. Stabilizing the security
situation will require significant international support.
We also recognize the urgent need for free and fair
elections to restore Haiti’s democratic institutions.
We reiterate our call on the Haitian authorities to
build broad and robust consensus on Haiti’s political
road map.
The adoption of this resolution demonstrates the
seriousness with which the Council is prepared to act
to bring peace and security to Haiti. The international
community must stand with Haiti now. There is no
more time to lose.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): As
this is our first meeting under Brazil’s presidency of
the Security Council, I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, and assure you of Switzerland’s full support to
you, and I also thank Albania for its excellent work in
September. I welcome the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Haiti in today’s meeting.
Switzerland welcomes the Council’s decision
today, which sends a strong message of solidarity
with the Haitian people. We would like to thank the
co-penholders, Ecuador and the United States, as well
as members of the Council for their efforts to reach a
consensus. Today’s authorization of the Multinational
Security Support Mission to Haiti bears witness to
the fact that the appeals for help from Haiti have been
heard. Switzerland is aware of the expectations riding
on the international response and of the precarious
security situation. With that in mind, we welcome the
fact that respect for international law, and for human
rights in particular, is an integral part of the Mission and
reinforces its mandate. We call on all actors to respect
and protect the human rights of every individual. We
welcome the importance afforded to the protection of
children and to considering the dimensions of sexual
and gender-based violence. With today’s resolution
(resolution 2699 (2023)), we therefore mandate the
Mission and the participating States to respect those
principles by setting the best possible example.
Finally, Switzerland welcomes the announcement
by Kenya and other States, particularly those in
Haiti’s region, of their intention to contribute to the
Multinational Mission. We also call on the international
community to ensure that the Mission is coordinated
with the other components, both current and future,
of international aid in the country. Through an
6/12

02/10/2023

integrated, holistic approach they can pave the way for
implementing an inter-Haitian dialogue to respond to
the complex crises affecting the country.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I would like to start by conveying
our best wishes to you, Sir, for your presidency, and
thanking Albania for its successful presidency last month.
I would first like to thank the co-penholders,
Ecuador and the United States, for their leadership
during today’s negotiations on resolution 2699 (2023).
Japan voted in favour of the resolution because of the
gravity of the situation in Haiti, where the levels of
violence and criminal activity are escalating and the
need for effective international support in response to
the Haitian Government’s repeated appeals is urgent.
We are very pleased that the Council was able to come
together today to authorize the deployment of the
Multinational Security Support Mission to Haiti in
support of the efforts of the Haitian National Police.
We welcome Kenya’s willingness to lead the Mission
and other countries’ offers to contribute.
The adoption of the resolution is only the first step.
If the Mission is to operate effectively and successfully,
extensive and thorough preparation is crucial. It should
include careful examination and awareness of the
situation on the ground; an assessment of the capability
and resources that the Mission will need; clarification
of the rules of engagement and the establishment of an
appropriate command structure and division of labour
among the stakeholders. In that regard, we call on
Member States to contribute and share their experiences
and expertise to ensure maximum preparation and
support for the Multinational Security Support Mission’s
operation. For its part, Japan will engage actively with
the international community and will spare no effort to
ensure the Mission’s effective and successful operation.
We also want to emphasize that addressing the issue
of security alone is not sufficient. It should go hand in
hand with Haitian efforts, supported by international
partners, to restore resilient democratic institutions and
accountable governance, as well as to provide people
with basic services and development opportunities.
Those endeavours will help to gain the people’s trust,
which will be crucial to achieving sustainable peace
and security in Haiti, and we will continue to support
such efforts. And let me conclude by reaffirming our
unwavering solidarity with the Government and people
of Haiti.
23-28562

02/10/2023

The question concerning Haiti

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by congratulating Brazil on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council this month. I also want to join
others in welcoming Foreign Minister Généus of Haiti,
and the representatives of Kenya, Jamaica and Guyana,
to our meeting.
The United Kingdom is pleased to have voted in
favour of resolution 2699 (2023), which authorizes
the Multinational Security Support Mission to Haiti,
as requested by the Haitian Government, under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
We are grateful to the United States and Ecuador for
their tireless efforts to build support for it within the
Council. The Multinational Security Support Mission
is an important step in helping the Haitian National
Police address the deteriorating security situation in
their country, and it paves the way for further efforts to
address the connected security, humanitarian, political
and economic crises. We look forward to seeing the
Mission uphold the highest international standards. The
United Kingdom pays tribute to the leadership shown
by Kenya in stepping forward to lead the Mission, and
we also welcome the engagement of States members
of the Caribbean Community and others beyond in the
multinational effort to help the people of Haiti.
We call on all actors in Haiti to engage constructively
in preparing for the holding of inclusive, free and fair
legislative and presidential elections as soon as the
local security situation permits. Today’s adoption is an
important step in helping to address the dire security
situation. But in the longer term, only a political
solution can give the Haitian people the security and
prosperity they deserve.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I
would like to join others in congratulating Brazil
on its assumption of the presidency of the Council
and thanking Albania for its very capable leadership
last month.
When the world met two weeks ago, a clear call rang
out from the General Assembly. It came from Haiti, from
the Caribbean Community and from across the globe.
They all spoke with one voice in acknowledging, in the
words of Prime Minister Mia Mottley of Barbados, that
the world owes Haiti a resolution. Some of the countries
that made that call have joined us here today, and we
welcome the participation of Haiti, Kenya, Jamaica and
Guyana in today’s meeting.

S/PV.9430

The international community called on the
Security Council to take action, and resolution 2699
(2023) answers that call. By voting in favour of it
today, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms the fact that
decisive action, as the Secretary-General has called
for, is necessary to help Haiti back on a path towards
peace and stability. We acknowledge the diligent work
and flexibility of the co-penholders, Ecuador and the
United States, and the constructive engagement of all
Council members on the resolution. As a result, the
resolution includes safeguards that will ensure that
the authorization to deploy the Multinational Security
Support Mission to Haiti will be implemented effectively
and in close coordination with the Government of Haiti.
We welcome Kenya’s willingness to lead the Mission
and that of other Member States to participate in it. We
especially thank Kenya for stepping in so responsibly
to contribute to international peace and security in
this way.
The text of the resolution recognizes that the
situation in Haiti is dynamic and continues to
escalate rapidly. In order to respond effectively and
appropriately to the challenge, the Council should have
entry points to review, adjust and give feedback to the
Mission mandate as the situation and the plans for the
response develop. Because of that, we are pleased to
see a time-bound authorization for 12 months included
in the resolution, along with a mandated review nine
months in and regular reporting to the Council. We
also welcome the fact that the authorization is not
gender-blind. Ensuring that the Mission is adequately
equipped to address the horrific sexual and genderbased violence wielded by armed gangs against the
people of Haiti must be central to its mandate. We
encourage all contributing Member States to invest in
dedicated expertise and training for their contingents
so that they can respond adequately to such crimes. As
the humanitarian situation in Haiti remains dire and is
compounded by the ongoing insecurity in the country,
we also welcome the fact that the Multinational Mission
has a critical role in facilitating the safe and unhindered
access of humanitarian aid.
The security support that the Mission will provide
is critical, but it is not a panacea that by itself can
transform Haiti into a secure and safe country. We
reiterate our call for a holistic, comprehensive and
sustainable response to the challenges Haiti faces. The
relevant stakeholders must work together towards an
inclusive and inter-Haitian dialogue for a Haitian-led

23-285627/12

S/PV.9430

The question concerning Haiti

and -owned political settlement. That should be done in
tandem with efforts to reinstate the rule of law across
the country, for the sake of the people of Haiti and the
region. We also stress the need for the Multinational
Security Support Mission to Haiti to coordinate with
the Caribbean Community and relevant United Nations
agencies, including the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, to complement various efforts to support the
people and Government of Haiti. For its part, the United
Arab Emirates will remain committed to supporting all
efforts towards achieving peace and stability in Haiti.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): Let me start by thanking
you, Sir, and the members of the Security Council
who expressed their appreciation for the presidency of
Albania. At the same time, I would like to congratulate
Brazil on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and wish you and your team the best of luck. We
welcome the presence of Minister Généus of Haiti and
of the representatives of Kenya, Guyana and Jamaica.
Albania expresses its deep appreciation to the
United States and Ecuador as co-penholders for leading
the negotiations and to Council members for engaging
constructively in the resolution authorizing the deployment
of the Multinational Security Support Mission to Haiti
(resolution 2699 (2023)) to support the Haitian National
Police in restoring security. We commend the leadership
shown by Kenya and the readiness of the Caribbean
Community to take part in the Mission, responding
to the Secretary-General’s appeal and Haiti’s request.
Albania voted in favour of the resolution today,
recognizing the vital role that the Mission will play in
re-establishing security and creating the conditions for
free and fair elections in Haiti. That is also a significant
step towards addressing the humanitarian crisis in the
country. We envision the Mission as working closely
with the Government of Haiti in compliance with
international law, international humanitarian rights law
and international standards.
In conclusion, Albania stands firmly with Haiti and
its resilient people and is committed to assisting in the
restoration of normalcy.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
acknowledge the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti at this meeting. I also acknowledge
the presence of the delegations of Jamaica, Guyana
and Kenya. I commend Albania on its presidency for
September, and I wish Brazil every success as President
of the Council for October.
8/12

02/10/2023

What better way to begin the Brazilian presidency
of the Security Council than with the adoption of
the resolution authorizing the deployment of the
Multinational Security Support Mission to Haiti
(resolution 2699 (2023))? I acknowledge Brazil’s
central role in both the adoption of resolution 2692
(2023) of 14 July, which proposed the deployment of a
support mission for the Haitian National Police, and the
negotiations process to adopt the resolution authorizing
United Nations Member States to form and deploy
the Multinational Security Support Mission to Haiti.
I also acknowledge the valuable contributions by all
delegations, which have undeniably strengthened the
resolution authorizing the Mission’s deployment at a
time when Haiti needs it the most. Furthermore, I would
be remiss if I failed to mention African leadership
with regard to Kenya’s willingness to consider leading
the Mission, the broad support provided by the three
African members of the Council and the support
shown by several other member States of the African
Union, all of which clearly exemplifies South-South
cooperation. I am particularly grateful for the close and
continued cooperation of the United States delegation,
as co-penholder of the resolution throughout the
process spanning the months of August, September and
even the first weekend of October. We hope that the
adoption of this resolution will send a clear and strong
message to the leaders and members of the gangs that
are plaguing Haiti. Strategic communications therefore
remain key, including before deployment.
On 14 July, I explained that resolution 2692
(2023) was an important step, but not the end goal (see
S/PV.9377). The crisis in Haiti is multidimensional
and therefore requires a comprehensive response. For
the same reason, I reiterate today that the resolution
that we have just adopted is not the final goal either.
It is a historic and significant milestone on which
we can build. The resolution that we have adopted
reaffirms the Security Council’s strong commitment
to the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity
and unity of Haiti. At all times during the negotiation
process, we bore in mind the importance of not repeating
past mistakes. We also included robust language and
provisions concerning human rights, sexual violence,
prevention, accountability, the protection of children,
and appropriate wastewater management and other
safeguards to guard against the introduction and spread
of communicable diseases. And decisive progress
was made on efforts to prevent the transfer and illicit
trafficking of arms and ammunition into Haiti, which is
23-28562

02/10/2023

The question concerning Haiti

a long-term commitment. We also included provisions such
as the call for the Mission to support the Haitian National
Police in its efforts to protect and guarantee access for
humanitarian aid. We underscored the importance of the
political process, in which the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti will continue to play a key supporting role.
Lastly, we encourage countries able to do so to
support the Mission that we have just authorized, as
requested by Haiti, and to increase their support and
economic and social cooperation, which will enable
the Haitian people to overcome the current — and most
precarious — humanitarian situation.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.
(spoke in French)
I welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti and of the Permanent Representatives of
Guyana, Jamaica and Kenya at this meeting. Brazil thanks
the United States and Ecuador for their tireless work as
co-penholders of the resolution (resolution 2699 (2023))
and all the members of the Security Council that have
intensely and sincerely contributed to its drafting.
At the outset, we would like to reaffirm our firm conviction in the importance of respect for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and unity of Haiti. However, in view of Haiti’s urgent security needs, we voted in
favour of authorizing the Multinational Security Support
Mission to Haiti under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations. We also voted in favour of a resolution
that is comprehensive and addresses the fundamental aspects that must guide and support the operation, which is
grounded in the rules and principles of international law,
including international humanitarian law and international human rights law, and the Charter of the United Nations.
The Council is therefore responding to a formal and clear
request from Haiti, Kenya and other Caribbean countries
that are ready to contribute police forces to this initiative.
The resolution establishes a political and legal framework
for the deployment and the provision of adequate funding for the parties concerned. For its part, Brazil underscores the fact that security assistance is a crucial step
at the moment, but that multiple coordinated efforts will
be key to finding a lasting solution to the Haitian crisis.
In order for security efforts to succeed in the long
term, a comprehensive approach is needed that will garner
support for institutional and socioeconomic progress in
Haiti. It is absolutely imperative to address the structural

S/PV.9430

causes underlying the country’s violence and vulnerability.
It is also clear that a broad national political consensus
in Haiti is urgently needed and inescapable. The Mission
must ensure security conditions so that the Haitian people
can rebuild their country’s democratic and administrative
institutions and resume economic activity. It must be
clear, however, that it is up to the Haitians to forge their
own path. Without a Haitian political solution, based on a
free, fair and transparent electoral process, no amount of
security assistance, humanitarian aid or development aid
will guarantee lasting success.
Our countries have gathered in this Chamber to
assure the Haitians once again of the enormous solidarity
of the international community in general and of the
peoples of Africa and of our region, Latin America and the
Caribbean, in particular. Brazil is prepared to continue its
cooperation activities and to consider ways to contribute
to the Mission. And I insist that this solidarity will be
decidedly insufficient, even useless, if the other measures
and actions it seeks to ensure or on which it depends are
not taken in a committed, sincere and effective manner.
Let me list the measures and actions. First, there
should be a complete embargo on the arms to which
gangs and paramilitary groups continue to have access
with impunity, and those groups must be disarmed.
The security of citizens and social peace in Haiti must
be effectively restored. There must be a broad political
agreement that will enable Haiti’s State institutions
to get back on their feet and focus on normalizing the
country’s political, social and economic life. Free and
fair elections must be held in full security to restore hope
to the brotherly Haitian people and to consolidate a new
phase in the life of the country. There must be a strong
resumption of humanitarian aid. And, finally, generous
assistance, cooperation and support for Haiti’s sustainable
economic and social development are necessary. That is
the only way to ensure that the Haitian people can fully
take their future into their own hands, and that this new
international action of solidarity, endorsed by the Security
Council, will succeed this time.
(spoke in English)
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Worship of Haiti.
Mr. Généus (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow me first
of all to congratulate the Federative Republic of Brazil,
which has assumed the presidency of the Security Council

23-285629/12

S/PV.9430

The question concerning Haiti

for the month of October, and to congratulate Albania
on the excellent work done last month at the head of the
Council. On behalf of the people and the Government of
Haiti, I would like to thank all those who, through their
voices, their efforts, their support and their contributions
of all sorts, have finally made today’s decision possible.
More than a simple vote, it is in fact an expression of
solidarity with a population in distress.
The vote on resolution 2699 (2023) is a significant
step towards resolving Haiti’s multidimensional crisis. It
is a ray of hope for the people who have been suffering
for too long from the consequences of a difficult political, socioeconomic, security and humanitarian situation.
I would therefore like to take this opportunity to publicly
commend Haiti’s courage and resilience. The Security
Council has taken stock of the crisis and understood the
need to act urgently to give hope to millions of defenceless women, men and children, who need liberty, peace
and security to be restored and who have long called on
the international community for help. By adopting the
resolution authorizing the deployment of a Multilateral
Security Support Mission, Council members today took
a decision that was commensurate with the challenges.
On behalf of the people and the Government of
Haiti, I would like to take this opportunity to express
our special thanks to the President of Kenya, his
Government and the brotherly people of Kenya who
agreed to lead this Mission. I also commend the United
States and Ecuador for their leadership in managing this
file, and I welcome the presence of the representatives
of Guyana, Jamaica and Kenya.
The resolution adopted today is of great historic
significance. I urge Member States to make their
contributions as quickly as possible to bring about the
recovery of a safe and stable environment in Haiti,
with a view to re-establishing democratic institutions.
The adoption of this resolution, under Chapter VII of
the fundamental Charter of the United Nations, responds
to the need to provide assistance to a Member of our
Organization that is in danger. The aim is also to prevent
this serious crisis, which has lasted for far too long, from
becoming a threat to peace and security in the region.
I greatly appreciate the fact that the Council, in the
resolution adopted today, reaffirms its commitment to
the sovereignty, independence, integrity and unity of the
Haitian territory, and recognizes that the Government of
Haiti has the primary responsibility to ensure security,
stability and respect for the law and the rights of the
10/12

02/10/2023

people on its territory. In that regard, the text clearly
states that the rules of engagement and the use of force by
the Mission must be carried out in consultation with Haiti
and the other participating States and in strict compliance
with Haitian sovereignty and international law.
Similarly, I noted with great interest that the
resolution fully recognizes the need for the international
community and international financial institutions to
continue to support Haiti, even after the restoration
of its security environment, with a view to sustainable
economic, social and institutional development. It
called on Member States and regional organizations to
contribute personnel, equipment, financial resources
and logistics as required by the Multinational Security
Support Mission. I would like to thank all those countries
that have already expressed their support. And I would like
to take this opportunity to commend the commitment of
our friends and neighbours in the Caribbean Community.
The use of force, as a first step, is essential to create
a security environment conducive to the normal functioning of institutions, but it is not enough. Socioeconomic
development must be taken into account to tackle extreme
poverty, the source of all our problems, in a sustainable
way. In that respect, it is just as necessary to continue
to give greater support to the Government’s social programmes aimed at providing relief to the most destitute
in needy neighbourhoods, which are a breeding ground
for the recruitment of lost and marginalized young people.
I note with satisfaction that the resolution stresses the
importance for States participating in the Mission to ensure the highest level of transparency with regard to the
disciplinary conduct of members of their contingents, and
calls on them to establish strict mechanisms for the prevention and investigation of human rights violations and
abuses of all kinds, as well as for the treatment of wastewater and other environmental controls.
Lastly, I note that the resolution recognizes the need
for all stakeholders in Haiti to reach agreement on the
organization of free and fair presidential, legislative and
municipal elections, as well as the rebuilding of democratic institutions. With that in mind, I reiterate the commitment made by the Prime Minister, His Excellency
Mr. Ariel Henry, during the general debate of the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly, to prioritize
inter-Haitian political dialogue, which is the only way to
achieve sufficient consensus for the organization of those
long-awaited general elections in the country.
23-28562

02/10/2023

The question concerning Haiti

I thank Council members for their kind attention and
their active solidarity with the Haitian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jamaica.
Mr. Wallace (Jamaica): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the 14 member States of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM). And I am grateful
for this opportunity to speak about the support that the
international community must provide to Haiti at this
most difficult time.
I congratulate you, Mr. President, on Brazil’s assumption of the presidency of the Security Council at this
pivotal time. I also wish to thank the penholders of this
important resolution, the United States and Ecuador, for
the tireless work and commitment that has brought us to
this point here this afternoon. The urgency of this moment cannot be overstated. I also wish to thank the other
Council members that supported resolution 2699 (2023),
just adopted, and those that acted to ensure its adoption.
The blatant criminality perpetrated by powerful
gangs and the resulting higher levels of insecurity for
the average Haitian citizen are well documented, with
women and girls being particularly affected and targeted.
One of the direct consequences of this insecurity is that
nearly half of the Haitian population is today in desperate
need of humanitarian aid, with the situation worsening
daily. That is the backdrop against which we are called
to act in order to help restore security and contribute to
a stable political, social and economic environment so as
to foster Haiti’s sustainable development.
The first step towards Haitian-led and -owned
solutions to the multidimensional, multifaceted crises
facing the country must be to alleviate the insecurity that
has rendered impossible the normal functions of a civilized
society. CARICOM therefore welcomes and reiterates its
support for the Multinational Security Support Mission
to Haiti, authorized today by a Security Council Chapter
VII resolution, to provide urgent security assistance to the
Haitian National Police. We commend Kenya’s steadfast
commitment to lead the Mission in a strong demonstration
of regional solidarity. Several CARICOM countries will
also contribute personnel and other support to this cause.
And we thank all the other countries from around the
region and around the globe that have made commitments
of support pending the adoption of resolution 2699 (2023).
We urge more Member States to commit to contributing
security, personnel, logistical and financial support to this
vital effort. We also call on Member States to pledge to

S/PV.9430

the security basket fund aimed at funding the needs of
the Haitian National Police, as well as to contribute to the
humanitarian response plan for Haiti.
As we move forward now to address the insecurity
challenges frontally, CARICOM remains committed
to collaboration, at both the regional and international
levels, in order to restore peace and stability and to
support a long-term development strategy for Haiti.
CARICOM’s Group of Eminent Persons continues to
engage the Haitian Government and stakeholders in a
mediation role in an effort to resolve the political impasse
in Haiti and re-establish political stability. CARICOM
therefore looks forward with clear, but hopeful eyes
to the early deployment of the Multinational Security
Support Mission, which we consider to be a sine qua non
for a Haitian recovery. As we reiterate our commitments
to ensure that the Mission on which we will now embark
will be effective in delivering peace and stability for the
people of Haiti, it is our fervent wish that Haiti, the first
independent black Republic, will soon be able to deliver
for its people the prosperity they have always deserved.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): Kenya’s delegation
congratulates Brazil on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of October. We
recognize His Excellency Mr. Jean Victor Généus,
Haiti’s Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship,
and his Mission, calling on our collective solidarity.
We unreservedly commend the Security Council
and its membership for the judicious adoption of
resolution 2699 (2023). Our special accolades extend to
the co-penholders, the United States and Ecuador, whose
tireless efforts have yielded a balanced resolution that
accords with Haiti’s imperative needs.
With this action, the Council has ignited a beacon of
hope for the beleaguered people of Haiti by authorizing
Member States to inaugurate the Multinational Security
Support Mission to Haiti. We are steadfast in our belief
that the Council’s adoption of this resolution will be
a seminal contribution to the renaissance of Haiti’s
security and a catalyst for the fortification of governance,
socioeconomic uplift and the rule of law.
In the spirit of solidarity and collective responsibility
and in response to the clarion call of the Haitian
authorities and the Secretary-General, Kenya signalled
its willingness to spearhead the Council-mandated

23-2856211/12

S/PV.9430

The question concerning Haiti

initiative. His Excellency President William Ruto, during
his speech to the General Assembly on 21 September,
echoed the call by Haiti and the Secretary-General and
implored the Council to promulgate a tailored Chapter VII
resolution to meet Haiti’s unique requirements. The
members of the Council responded with an exemplary
spirit of cooperation.
We now invite Member States to contribute as active participants, providing personnel, funds, vital
equipment and logistical support to the Multinational
Security Support Mission. Kenya reaffirms its commitment to closely collaborate with Haiti’s allies, especially the member States of the Caribbean Community,
represented here today by Jamaica and Guyana, and
other nations of benevolent disposition, in constituting
and operationalizing this Mission in accordance with
this resolution. In the forthcoming weeks, Kenya, in
concert with other contributing nations, will apprise
the Council on the substantive preparations for the Mission’s deployment.
Once again, Kenya salutes the Security Council
on this accomplishment and reaffirms its unwavering
solidarity with Haiti and its resilient people. We join the
members of the Security Council in again affirming our
respect for the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and unity of Haiti.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guyana.
Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): My delegation
congratulates Brazil on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October. We
acknowledge the presence of His Excellency Mr. Jean
Victor Généus, Foreign Minister of Haiti.
Guyana aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and
joins in commending the penholders, the United States and
Ecuador, for their tireless efforts in bringing forward this
important resolution, which authorizes the Multinational
Security Support Mission to Haiti. The Security Council’s
decisive action today firmly demonstrates the international
community’s commitment to Haiti and to addressing
the security and humanitarian concerns of her people.
I take this opportunity to express Guyana’s unwavering
solidarity with the Haitian people — our Caribbean
brothers and sisters — and our steadfast commitment to
working with the international community in providing
much-needed assistance to the Haitian National Police.

12/12

02/10/2023

We fully support Haiti’s request for the deployment
of a multinational force. We applaud the Member States
that have already extended support to Haiti and those
that have pledged to support the Multinational Security
Support Mission by contributing both human and financial
resources. In particular, we commend Kenya for offering
to lead this Mission, as well as our Caribbean brother
and sisters that have agreed, upfront, to participate.
We urge that this support must be sustained, once
the Mission has achieved its goals, to ensure that the
Haitian National Police is able to effectively rebuild its
resources, restore morale and encourage recruitment
to facilitate the long-term sustainment of peace and
stability throughout the country. While we are gravely
concerned about the security situation in Haiti, we
wish to underscore that the crisis is multidimensional
and requires urgent and coordinated international
action along the political and economic tracks as
well. Those are all inextricably linked and must be
addressed in tandem. For any solution to be successful,
it must not only be comprehensive, focusing on both
security and socioeconomic challenges, but must also
be Haitian-led, Haitian-owned and Haitian-focused.
In addition, our attention must be sustained so that
we are able to address the underlying and persistent
challenges impeding Haiti’s efforts to pursue its own
development path.
My delegation takes this opportunity to underscore
CARICOM’s message that all efforts to contribute to
addressing the situation in Haiti must be undertaken
in good faith and must prioritize the needs and
circumstances of the Haitian people. Such efforts
must also be free from the influence of geopolitics
or political expediency. Moreover, we call for the
humanitarian response plan to be properly funded
and urge humanitarian partners to massively scale up
financial assistance, bearing in mind the need to invest
in agriculture for food security and to strengthen the
resilience of the most vulnerable. For its part, Guyana
is in the process of organizing humanitarian aid in the
form of food and medicine, even as we contemplate
other forms of assistance and support now that this
resolution has been adopted.
In conclusion, I reiterate that the international
community has a crucial role to play in supporting
Haiti in advancing towards a better and brighter future.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

23-28562
