8

General Auemhly~venth Senion

and non-member States by the Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funes.
191 st plenary meeting,
6 November 1952.

6i5 (VII). Treatment of people of lndiau origin
in the Union of South Af riea
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 44 (I). 265 (III), 395 (V)
and S11 (VI) relating to the treatment of people of
Indian origin in the Union of South Africa,
Noting that the Government pf the Union of South
Africa has expressed its inability 3 to accept General
Assembly resolution 511 (VI) in respect of the resumption of negotiations with the Governments of India and Pakistan,
Noting further that the Govemment of the Union
of South Africa has continued to enforce the Group
Areas Act in contravention of the terms of General
Assembly resolutions S11 (VI) and 395 ( V),
1. Establishes a United Nations Good Offices Commission consisting of three members to be nominated
by the President of the General Assembly, with a view
to arranging and assisting in negotiations between the
Government of the Union of South Africa and the
Governments of India and Pakistan in order that a
satisfactory solution of the question in aecor<lance with
the Purposes and Principles of the Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights may be
achieved;
2. Requests the Good Offices Commission to report to the General Assembly at its ejghth session ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
members of the Commission with the necessary staff
and facilities ;
4. Calls upon the Government of the Union of
South Africa fo suspend the implementation or enforcement of the provisions of the Group Areas Act.
pending the conclusion of the negotiations r~fe1·red
to in paragraph 1 above ;
5. Decides to include the item ir the provisional
agenda of the ~hth session of the General Assembly.
401st pie.nary .meeting,
5 Decem6':.r 1952.
The President of the Gttreral Asumbly, at the 411th rl.:ria"''
meeting on 21 December 1952, announced that he had ap,oi,,ted tht following .Members to srr.•e on tlie United Natio11s
Good Offices Commission: CuBA, SYRIA and YucosLAVIA.

616 (VII). The question of race eonftict in South
Africa reaulting from the polieies of a-,,artheid of the Govemment of the Union of
• South Africa
A
The General Assembly,
/laving . taken note of the communication 4 dated
12 September 1952, addressed to the Secretary-Gen• See document A/2218, para. 3.
4

See document A/2183.

eral of the United Nations by the delegations of
Afghanistan, Burma, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Lebanon, Pakistan, the Philippines, Saudi Arabia,
Syn~ a~d Yemen, regarding the question of race
conflict m South Africa resulting from the policies of
apartheid of the Government of the Union of South
Africa,
Considering that one of the purposes of the United
Nations is to achieve international co-operation in
promoting and encouraging respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction
as to race, sex, language or religion,
Recalling that the General Assembly decl,;i:red in its
resolution 103 (I) of 19 November 1946 that it is in
the higher interests of humanity to put an end to
religious and so-called racial persecution, and called
upon all governments tq conform both to the letter
and to the spirit of the Charter and to take the most
prompt and energetic steps to that end,
Considering that the General Assembly has held.
in its resolutions .395 ( V) of 2 December 1950 and
511 (VI) of 12 January 1952, that a polity of "racial
segregation" (apartheid) is necessarily based on doctrines of racial discrimination,
1. Establishes a Commission, consisting of three
members, to study the racial situation in the Union of
South Africa in the light of the Purposes and Principles of the Charter, with due regard to the provision
of Article 2, paragraph 7, as well as the provisic;ms of
Article 1, paragraphs 2 and 3, Article 13, paragraph
1 b, Article SS c, and Article 56 of the Charter, and
the resolutions o_f the United Nations on racial persecution and discrimination, and to report its conclusions
to the General Assembly at its eighth session;
2. Invites the Government of the Union of South
Africa to extend its full co-operation to the Commission;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Commission with the necessary staff and fadlities;
4. Decides to retain the question on the provisional
agenda of the eighth session of the General Assembly.
401st plenary meeting,
5 December 1952.
At its 411th meeting on 21 December 1952, the General
Assembly decided, on the proposal of the President, that the
Commission, established under paragraph 1 of the abO'Ue resolutio11, should be compoud of tlie following persons: Mr.
Ralrh Bunche, M,., Hernan Santa CrUII and Mr. Jaime Torres
Bodct.

B
The General Assembly,
Having taken note of the communication• dated 12
September 1952, addressed to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations by the delegations of Afghanistan,
Burma, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon,
Pakistan, the Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Syria and
Yemen, regarding the question of race conflict in South
Africa resulting from the policies of apartheid of the
Government of the Union of South Africa,
I Ibid.
