THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR
:

,!

nd

MEETING:

16 AUGUST

1976

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1952) . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , . , . , . , , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +

1

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning
the application of the Republic of SeycheIles for admission to membership in the United Nations (S/12177). . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1952

-

*I
i

j

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~IJZJ~~PIHCIILYof the ijfficial Reco,ds c?J’the Sccrlrity C’o~r~~il. The date
bf the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcsolr~tio/u (IN/
Decisions
o.f’ thp Secllrity Corltwil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1952nd MEETING
Held in New York, on Monday,
Pr~,sident:

Mr. Isao ABE (Japan).

3. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with rule 60 of
the provisional rules of procedure, I shall immediately
request the Secretary-General
to transmit this recommendation
to the General Assembly.

PIYTP/I~:
The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.

Provisional

4. A number of representatives have asked to speak
after the vote, and I shall now call on them.
5. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
At the outset
I should like to perform two pleasant tasks. First of
all, I should like to congratulate the representative of
Italy, who presided so well, so expeditiously and so
efficiently over the deliberations of the Council during
the past month. It was a difficult month, as I think all
of us would agree. The fact that the Council emerged
from it as it did is in very large measure due to the
skill with which Ambassador Vinci presided over OUI
discussions. Secondly, Mr. President, 1 should like
to welcome you to your post as President of the Council for the month of August. Your diplomatic skill,
I am sure, will stand us in as good stead for the month
of August as did Ambassador Vinci’s for the month
of July.

agenda (S/Agenda/l952)

I.

Adoption

2.

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee
on the Admission of
New Members concerning the application of
the Republic of Seychelles for admission to
membership in the United Nations (S/12177)

of the agenda

Adoption

of the agenda

6. My delegation is delighted to have this opportunity
to support the application of the Republic of Seychelles. I am only sorry that the Council is not meeting in
Seychelles itself. I have been looking again at some
photographs
which the President
of Seychelles,
Mr. Mancham, left with us when he visited New York
last year, and I can only say that Seychelles must be
one of the most beautiful countries in the world.

Admission of New Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the Republic of Seychelles for admission to membership
in the United Nations (S/12177)

I. The PRESIDENT:
The Council has before it the
report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of Seychelles
for admission to membership in the United Nations
[S//2/77]. In paragraph 3 of its report the Committee
recommends to the Council the adoption of a draft
resolution on the application for admission of the Republic of Seychelles. In accordance with the procedure followed on previous occasions, I propose that
the Council should vote on that draft resolution and
that those who wish to speak should do so after the
vote. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the procedute is acceptable to the members of the Council.
2. Accordingly,
vote.

I shall put the draft resolution

16 August 1976, at 4 p.m.

7. This is perhaps not the occasion to embark upon
a long survey of Seychelles history. These islands in
the Indian Ocean were almost certainly to the
great Arab explorers of the Middle Ages, and we find
them on Portuguese maps as early as 1501. My own
country’s connexion with Seychelles dates from 1609,
when;a naval squadron, under the command of Alexander Sharpleigh, anchored in Seychelles waters. FOI
over a century thereafter the islands were largely
unvisited by the European Powers. In 1756, however,
a French squadron landed on Mah@, the main island
in the group, set up there a Stone of Possession engraved with the arms of France and named the islands
Seychelles, after an eminent Comptroller-General
of
Finances of King Louis XV. It mus be the only country in the world named after a tax collector! During
the Napoleonic wars, the islands came under British
possession, and in 1814 they were formally ceded to
my country under the Treaty of Paris. I mention this

to the

I

Seychelles’ application for membership in the United
Nations, which follows its admission intb the Organization of African Unity, and we look forward to its
participation in the work of the forthcoming session
of the General Assembly. We shall be very pleased to
co-sponsor the usual draft resolution in the Assembly
at the appropriate time. For our part, we deeply treasure the 160 years of friendship between our two
countries, and we look forward to developing a close
and equal association in the years ahead.

only because Seychelles is one of those countries in
which two great European cultures, those of France
and Britain, still run to this day. I can do no better
than quote the elegant words of the President of
Seychelles about his own country: a unique mixture
of all races and an ambassador of all cultures. We hope
that Seychelles, situated as it is in the middle of the
Indian Ocean, will long remain a meeting place of all
civilizations.
8. It was not until 1903 that the territory was detached
from the Government
of Mauritius
and separate
executive and legislative councils established; and it
was only in the post-war period that the pace of constitutional
development
accelerated. My delegation
has had occasion to speak about Seychelles a number
of times in the Special Committee
of 24’ these past
few years, and I need only say here that successive
constitutional
changes in 1967,197O and 1975 prepared
the way for the full independence of SeycheIles at
midnight on 28 June 1976, and that recent discussions
have led to the transfer to Seychelles of the islands
of Aldabra, Farquhar and Desroches. My Government warmly welcomed these developments.
We
believe in self-determination
and we have consistently
respected the wishes of the people of Seychelles. On
this occasion I should like once again to pay a tribute
to the wisdom of the leaders of the two main Seychelles parties, President Mancham and Prime Minister Rem% who last year formed a coalition government
which will remain in being until at least the next elections in 1979.

11. Mr. CHALE (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, allow me first to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of August. Your long experience and dedication are well known to us. We are confident that
under your leadership the Council will benefit greatly
from its deliberations and its efforts to seek solutions
to the problems before it.
12. Allow me also to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Vinci of Italy, on the outstanding way in
which he led the deliberations in the trying month of
July, when the Council was faced with the difficult
and most intricate problems of southern Africa. The
smooth and tactful manner in which he conducted the
debate, which could otherwise have easily been
stormy; was possible only because of his skill as a
diplomat.
13. Now let me turn to the item on the agenda. It
gives my delegation great pleasure and satisfaction
to welcome the application of the newly independent
State of Seychelles for admission to membership in
the United Nations. The independence of Seychelles
is a step in the right direction towards the total elimination of colonialism. The remaining task in decolonization remains one of the most difficult, but with
the liberation of each territory from colonial rule the
world derives ever greater confidence that the day is
near when the entire world will be free. We are very
happy to recommend the admission of the Republic
of Seychelles to membership in the United Nations.
It will not be the first time the Republic of Seychelles
has been a member of an international organization,
Seychelles is already a member of the Organization
of African Unity and a member of the non-aligned
movement. Its membership in the United Nations
will complete its involvement in the affairs of the world
community.

9. I wish also to assure the Seychelles Government,
which is now an equal partner of ours in the Commonwealth, of our continuing support for the economic
and social development of the country. To this end
my Government has agreed to provide some f10 million in capital aid for the first two years after independence, and some &I million annually in technical
assistance for the next few years. In addition, we shall
provide up to f1.7 million in budgetary aid in the
period 1976-1979. We hope that this will assist Seychelles in attaining self-sufficiency
and true economic
independence.
The construction
of an international
airport in MahP. in 1971, with British funds, and the
extension of the port of Victoria in 1974 have both
made Seychelles much more accessible to international traffic and.commerce
than was the case in the
recent past. More and more people have had the opportunity to visit these happy, multiracial
islands and
to enjoy their natural beauty.

14. Not only are Seychelles and Tanzania in the
same geographical area, but both have pledged to
pursue the same foreign policy of non-alignment.
They are both members of the Organization of African
Unity, through which its members fight for the total
liquidation of all forms and manifestations of foreign
and racist domination. Both countries have: the same
ideal of making the Indian Ocean a zone of peace,
as the then Chief Minister of Seychelles, Mr. Mancham, said back in 1974. He said that Seychelles
would follow a policy of non-alignment
and that the

10. We are convinced that the new independent
Government of Seychelles will play its full part in the
affairs of the region and the world as a whole. The
country is small, both in size and in population, but it
has its own unique contribution
to make to the peace
of the area. It is a country where people of African,
Indian, Chinese and European blood five side by side.
Its potential for tourism is great, and its fishing resources are still largely unexploited.
We welcome
2

lndien Ocean should be a zone free of big-Power confrontation. In this respect my delegation is particularly
happy that the former Adpinistering
Power, the
United Kingdom, has honoured the agreement to hand
over the three islands of Aldabra, Farquhar and Desroches to the Government of Seychelles. That was
a wonderful and most commendable gesture. It was
an essential move in recognition of the sovereignty
and the territorial
integrity of a non-aligned Seychelles State. Britain agreed to concede and realized
that the SeychelQ should be .vui jcris,
a master of
its own destiny.

aspirations would serve the best interests of our peoples and further consolidate the solidarity of the third
world.
20. My delegation supports the admission of the
Republic of Seychelles to full membership
in the
United Nations. The admission of Seychelles to the
Organization
will enable the new country to make a
useful contribution
to the United Nations and its
efforts to‘promote peace and justice in the world.
21. We are pleased at the Council’s unanimous adoption of the report of the Committee on the Admission
of New Members, and we look forward to Seychelles
taking its place as a full and sovereign member of the
Organization
when the General Assembly approves,
as we have no doubt it wili, the Council’s recommendation.

15. We lock forward to having stronger ties and
co-operation between our two countries and to OUI
combining our endeavours to promote peace and
security in the world.
16. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): Mr. President, please
accept the warmest congratulations
of my delegation
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of August. It gives my delegation great
pleasure to see a distinguished colleague from Asia
occupying the presidency. The wisdom, tact and skill
you have demonstrated give us confidence that the
Council will be able successfully to tackle the problems which may come before it during the current
month.

22.

Mr.

LECOMPT
(France) finterpretution
Jiw171
Mr. President, may I congratulate .you on
your assumption of the presidency of our Council for
the month of August, which is by reputation a calm
month but which has apparently already given you
quite a lot of work. On behalf of my delegation 1 am
very pleased to promise you the complete co-operation
of France and to express our conviction that you will
conduct our work with the greatest possible skill and
competence.
Fwtd~):

17. I should also like to take this opportunity to convey my delegation’s warmest appreciation and congratulations to your predecessor, Ambassador Vinci,
for the manner in which he guided the Council’s proceedings during the month of July.

23. I should also like to address to Ambassador Vinci
the deep thanks of the French delegation for the devotion, authority and effectiveness he displayed in conducting the particularly difficult work with which we
had to deal in the month of July.

18. The Council is meeting today to consider the
application of the Republic of Seychelles for admission to membership in the United Nations. We are
gratified to note that the accession of Seychelles to
independence was peaceful and orderly. The main
political parties and their leaders have committed
themselves to working together in a spirit of peace and
friendship for the welfare of the country. These circumstances augur well for the evolution of the newly
independent State and the solution of the problems
all such States have to face.

24. The Council has just recommended unanimously
to the General Assembly the admission of the Republic of Seychelles to membership in the United Nations.
I hardly need say that my delegation associated itself
whole-heartedly with this recommendation.
This was
our duty under the Charter. Undoubtedly we must act
in this way as soon as a State agrees to accept the
provisions of the Charter and undertakes to respect
them and as soon as the conditions required by our
Organization
are met. In accordance with its unchanging position, the French delegation could not
but support the admission of this new State, particularly as its admission will bring us even closer to the
goal of universality to which my country is deeply
attached.

19. My country, which attained its independence
through the exercise of the right of self-determination,
welcomes the independence of Seychelles. We accorded recognition to the new republic on the very
day of its birth, and have established diplomatic relations at the ambassadorial level. As a token of the
friendship my people feels for the people of Seychelles,
we have also offered 500 tons of rice to the new country. In a message to the President of the Republic of
Seychelles on the occasion of its independence, the
Prime Minister of my country, Mr. Bhutto, voicing
the profound happiness of the people of Pakistan at
the event, expressed the hope that the friendship and
co-operation between our two countries stemming
from their common historical experience and shared

25. But other, more deep-lying reasons of a more
sentimental
nature enjoined this decision upon us.
The ties between France and the Seychelles Islands
go back a long way in history. France cannot forget
that the very name of those islands was chosen to
perpetuate the memory of the Viscount Moreau de
Seycheiles,
who was the Comptroller-General
of
Finances under Louis XV, nor can the French fail to
be moved at seeing that the numerous islands in this
archipelago extending over the sea often have very
3

tive of the United Kingdom. It is called “The People
of Seychelles”. Now let me quote further from it.

poetical French names. I should like to mention some
of the islands which go to make up the archipelago of
the Seychelles by name: MahC,-the
main island-,
Praslin, S&rite-Anne,
Curieuse, Aride, Anonyme,
Cousin, Felicite, The&e,
Silhouette, Belle-Ombre,
Anse-a-la-Manche,
Port-Launay and Glacis.

“Oh great people of Seychelles,
A unique mixture of all races,
Ambassador of all cultures,
A mirror reflecting all hues,
A crucible of ethnic traditions,
A meeting point of all civilizations...”

26. These are just a few of the islands whose admission we are recommending
today, and I need hardly
emphasize how closely their history, language and
culture bind them to my country, even if this is a
rather ancient history. These particular ties, as President Giscard d’Estaing stressed on 1.5 July last, when
the Head of State of Seychelles made an official visit
to Paris, stem from the “mutual feelings of attachment
and the musical names which adorn our villages”
--I have given a few examples of these-“these
country churchbells which ring out to celebrate the
faith we share and even the family names which are
typical of old France”. President Mancham was kind
enough to recall those ties himself on the occasion
of the celebration of independence at MahC on 28 June
last:

These lines, I believe, testify to the universal vocation of the Republic of Seychelles and justify having
this State and this people among LIS.
30. The French delegation could not conclude its
statement without addressing its very warm and
sincere congratulations
to the President of the Republic of Seychelles as well as to all the members of
his Government. We should also like to express 0111
warm wishes for happiness and prosperity to the people of Seychelles as a whole.
31. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (intc~p/.clatio/z ,/i,~jflr
Frc/rc*/rl: Mr. President, may I at the outset address
to you my warmest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of August. The Romanian delegation welcomes the
opportunity to co-operate closely with you, the distinguished representative
of a country with which
Romania enjoys excellent relations of frienship and
is developing co-operation to our mutual benefit. On
a personal note, Sir, I always recall with great pleasure
the years that I spent in Japan, where I had both the
privilege and the honour to represent my country.

“The 40 years of French administration
in the
eighteenth century, which in fact marked the very
first days on which Seychelles embarked upon the
human adventure, have withstood the test of time.”
27. France is of course desirous not only of maintaining the ties which link it with Seychelles but also
of further developing them in a spirit of co-operation
and mutual respect. President Giscard d’Estaing
further recalled on the same occasion that “despite
the distance between them, France and Seychelles
remained true to each other and continued to keep up
their friendly relationship”.
It is in the spirit of friendship that a general agreement on cultural, scientific
and technical co-operation
was signed between the
two States on 15 July 1976 in Paris.

32. May I express the deep satisfaction that the
delegation of Romania feels following the unanimous
decision just taken by the Council to recommend the
admission of the Republic of Seychelles to membership in the United Nations. Our satisfaction is all the
greater since Romania welcomed from the very beginning the proclamation
of the independence of
Seychelles, a memorable event having deep significance for the future of the country and of the people
of the entire archipelago of Seychelles. Addressing,
on behalf of the Government and people of Romania,
the warmest congratulations and wishes for progress
and prosperity to the people of Seychelles, the President of the Socialist Republic of Romania, Nicolae
Ceaugescu, expressed in the message he transmitted
to the President of Seychelles, Mr. Manchnm, the
hopes of Romania that relations of friendship and
co-operation between the two countries and peoples
would develop and thus contribute to a better mutual
understanding in order to ensure the free and independent development of all peoples and the encorn’agement of a new policy of peace and co-operation
among nations. Imbued with the same spirit, on 30
June last, Romania established diplomatic relations
with the Republic of Seychelles, being deeply convinced that that act would contribute to the development of close co-operation between the two countries.

28. In view of the very close ties and the sincere
friendship which bind our two peoples, the French
delegation would like to announce here and how that
it intends to sponsor the draft resolution which will
be submitted to the General Assembly to admit the
Republic of Seychelles to the United Nations.
29. I should like to add that my delegation has no
doubt that this new State will make a valuable contribution to our Organization.
We are convinced, in
particular, that the exceptional human qualities and
spirit of tolerance which are typical of the people of
Seychelles will be an example and a guiding star to us
all. I am convinced that the delegation of Seychelles,
starting with the next session of the General Assembly, will be able to make the voice of its people heard,
a people which is united in its differences and which
is anxious for a deep understanding of others and for
entry into the world, as was proclaimed in one of his
poems by the President Mancham, some lines of
which have already been quoted by the representa4

33.

The decision of the Council to recommend the
df the Republic of Seychelles to the United
Nations is, in the eyes of the delegation of Romania,
an
act in keeping with the right of all peoples to be
represented in this world forum. Thus, we have taken
another step towards the complete universality of this
Organization,
which is doubtless one of the most
important
conditions for its effective functioning. At
the same time, in granting the application for admission of the Republic of Seychelles, we are enabling
that country to benefit from the fruits of international
co-operation
and the SUpport
of our Organization.
Fllrthermore,
the very fact that all newly independent
States immediately
become Members of the United
Nations
is the most convincing proof that the United
Netions is a vital, irreplaceable instrument of international co-operation.
We believe that the international community-represented
by our Organisation-has
the duty to give assistance in strengthening
the national independence of the Republic of Seychelles und its economic and social development.
dt~~is~i~n

34. It is with those ideas in mind that I wish once
agnin to address to the Government of the Republic
of Seychelles our best wishes for its success in building
up its country’s economy and for the international
activities il will be undertaking with a view to fulfilling
the aspirations for peace, progress and prosperity of
the people of Seychelles.
35.

Mr.

HUANG
Hua (China) (t/vl/l,s/rrtio/z .fi.~/ll
The people of the Seychelles had to carry
on protracted and unremitting
struggles to attain its
national independence.
In recent years they have
continued to advance along the road to complete independence. Having freed themselves from the colonial
rule that had lasted several centuries, the people of
the Seychelles finally proclaimed their independence
and established the Republic of Seychelles on 29 June
1976. This is the result of the protacted struggles of the
people of the Seychelles and another victory of the
national liberation movements which have established
ternselves in Asia, Africa and Latin America and
which support and encourage one another. It is a new
achievement
scored by the African people in their
work of national liberation,
following the indepen&rice of Mozambique and four other African States
last year, and a proof of the success of the current
struggle against imperialism,
colonialism
and hege, monism on the African continent.
Clzimw):

1 36. Aft& independence
the Seychelles solemnly
/ proclaimed its adherence’to the policy of non-alignment, its refusal to provide military bases to anY
country, opposition to the establishment of military
bnses in the Indian Ocean by any big Power and its
desire to see the Indian Ocean become a peace zone.
Furthermore,
it is determined to strengthen the loads
of
unity with other Africans counlries in order to
provide more support for the national liberation movements in the non-independent
regions of southern
Africa. All this demonstrates the political outlook of

that new-born State, which is determined to join with
the Asian, African and Latin American peoples and
to fight by their side,
37. Both China and Seychelles belong to the third
world. The peoples of our two countries have always
supported and sympathized with each other in their
struggles against imperialism and colonialism.
The
Chinese Government
and people sincerely rejoice
over the independence of the Seychelles. Formal
diplomatic
relations were established between the
People’s Republic of Ghina and the Republic of
Seychelles on 30 June of this year. We are deeply
convinced that the friendly relations between our two
Governments and peoples will steadily develop and
grow stronger.
38. At this juncture, we sincerely wish the people
of Seychelles more and more successes in their struggle against imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism
and in their efforts to .safeguard their national independence and State sovereignty and to build their
country.
39. The Chinese delegation is of the opinion that,
in accordance with the relevant provisions and requirements of the Charter relating to the admission
of new Members, Seychelles is fully qualified for
admission to membership in the United Nations.
Therefore, we fully support the Council’s recommendation to the Genera1 Assembly that the Republic
of Seychelles be admitted to membership in the United
Nations. We believe that, upon admission to membership in our Organization, the Republic of Seychelles
will, together with all the other justice-upholding
Member States, make a positive contribution to the
realization of the purposes and principles of the
Charter.
40. Mr. HAMMARSKJijLD
(Sweden): Permit me
first to pay my respects to you, Sir, and to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for August. My delegation is convinced that
under your able leadership the Council will tackle its
business in the most efficient manner.
41. Also, the warm thanks of my delegation go to
Ambassador Vinci of Italy, who so ably conducted
some very difficult deliberations in the Council during
the month of July.
42. The Swedish Government has already, in June of
this year at the independence celebrations in Victoria,
had the opportunity to congratulate the Republic of
Seychelles on its new-won independence. Today, we
were glad to vote for the draft resolution recommending. membership of the Republic of Seychelles
in the United Nations. Sweden has always maintained
that universality is one of the fundamental preconditions for an effective United Nations. We therefore
find it a very happy occasion when we are able to bring
our Organization one step closer to that goal by welcoming a new Member.

My delegation intends to give you its full support and

43. The admission of the Republic of Seychelles is
also a further concrete proof of the rapidly moving
decolonization
process. In this case, the collective
efforts of the people of the Republic of Seychelles, the
former Administering
Power, the United Kingdom,
and the Special Committee
on the Situation
with
regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration
on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples have successfully led to independence.

assistance.
50. I should also like to express our gratitude to your
predecessor, Ambassador Vinci, for his activities in
the previous month when the Council had to discuss
rather complex and difficult problems.
51. Today’s meeting of the Council was convened
to consider the application for membership in the
United Nations of the Republic of Seychelles, The
Soviet delegation had great pleasure in voting in
favour of the admission of the Republic of Seychelles
to membership of the United Nations.

44. My delegation will take great pleasure in welcoming the delegation of the Republic of Seychelles
to the United Nations. We are looking forward to
future close co-operation in the conviction
that the
Republic of Seychelles will make an essential contribution to the work of our Organization.

52. It is both a pleasure and an honour for the Council to recommend the admission of new Members. The
positive decision we have taken will not only increase
the membership of our Organization but at the same
time confirm the most important principles contained
in the Charter, such as the principles of universality
and the equality of States large and small. It is our
hope that, as in the case of the application of Seychelles, the Council will show the same unanimity with
regard to the applications of other States which are
already knocking at the door of the United Nations
and which fulfil all the conditions laid down in the
Charter both in their declarations and in their foreign
relations.

45. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America): At
the outset, let me say how pleased my delegation is
that you, Sir, are occupying the Chair of the presidency this month; indeed, you are already providing
most able and effective leadership to the Council and
we look forward to working with you through this
month.
46. At the same time, let me express appreciation
for the contributions made to the dispatch of the Council’s work last month by Ambassador
Vinci and
members of his staff. As always, he gave us a very
distinguished presidency.

53. The admission of the Republic of Seychelles,
whose people was under the colonial yoke for more
than 200 years, demonstrates once again the historical
significance of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
which was adopted on the initiative of our country.
Mankind is moving ever closer to the end of that
shameful chapter in its history, the era of colonialism,
which was engendered by imperialism.
This progressive movement, this liberation did not occur by itself;
it was the result of an intense and unremitting struggle
on the part of the oppressed peoples for their selfdetermination and independence.

47. The United States delegation
would like to
express its sincere pleasure in supporting the application of the Republic of Seychelles for membership in
this Organization. Since 1971 contacts between our
two countries have increased. A number of Americans
have visited Seychelles. They have been awed by
the magnificent natural beauty of the islands and
intrigued by the unique geology and flora. We understand that tourism is a rapidly expanding part of the
Seychelles economy and that many more visitors will
now have the opportunity to visit that exceptional part
of the world. It is our hope that economic development in that and other sectors of the economy will
lead Seychelles towards a new era of prosperity well
deserved by the hard work of its people.

54. The Soviet Union, true to its policy of supporting
the struggle of colonial peoples for their freedom and
independence, has always been and will continue to
be on the side of these oppressed peoples in their
struggle against colonialism throughout the world. It.
is no accident, therefore, that on the first day when
the independence of the Republic of Seychelles was
proclaimed the Soviet Union recognized that State
and, in a telegram addressed to the President of the
new State of Seychelles, Mr, Mancham, on 29 June
last, the Chairman of the Praesidium of the Supreme:
Soviet of the Soviet Union, Comrade Podgorny, said:

48. The diligence and enthusiasm of the people of
Seychelles will surely facilitate our task here as we
work together in the United Nations towards the goals
of peace, freedoti and the welfare of mankind. The
admission of the Republic of Seychelles furthers the
goal of making this world-wide.
Organization
a universal instrument through which we strive to achieve
the high principles of the Charter.
49. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (itzteqmtrrtion fro/lr Russion): Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation,
I should like first
of all to congratulate you on your assumption of the
lofty responsibility of President of tile Security Council and to wish you success in performing these duties.

“Pursuant to its unwavering policy of equality
and frienship among all peoples and in compliance:
with the principle of se!f-determination,
the Sovielt
Union declares that it recognizes the Republic of
Seychelles as a sovereign and independent Slate
6

/

and that it is ready to establish diplomatic
with that State.”

relations,

Comrade Podgorny went on to express the hope that
relations of friendship and co-operation would develop
between the Soviet Union and the Seychelles Islands
to the benefit of the peoples of both our countries
and of world peace. In the Soviet Union it was noted
with great satisfaction that the Government and the
people of the Seychelles Islands were also anxious to
establish relations of frienship and co-operation with
our country.
55. The path to the independent development of this
young Republic will undoubtedly
be fraught with
many difficulties of different kinds. However, we are
convinced that the resolve which has already been
demonstrated by the Government and the main political parties of the country in settling those matters
connected with the consolidation of their sovereignty
and the removal of foreign and military bases from
their territory will help this young State in time to
overcome its social and economic difficulties.
56. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation would like
to wish the freedom-and
peace-loving people of the
Seychelles Islands every success on its difficult path
to independent and free development.
57. Mr. JOSEPH (Guyana): Mr. President, allow
me at the outset to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of
August. The manner in which your have guided the
deliberations of the Council during the course of last
week eloquently confirms our expectation of your
diplomatic skills. My delegation has every confidence
that under your wise guidance the Council will arrive
at productive decisions during the term of your presidency.
58. May I also take this opportunity to thank Ambassador Vinci of Italy for his able leadership during the
month of July. His successful tenure of office as President of the Council served to confirm our confidence
in him.
59. The Government and people of Guyana ‘have
already formally sent sincere and warm congratulations to the Government and people of the Republic
of Seychelles on that State’s accession to independence. I should like, however, to add the congratulations of my delegation.
60. The date of 29 June 1976 signalled the beginning of a new era for the people of the Republic of
Seychelles. Now that the people of that State has
recovered its fre,edom, it can, as an independent
nation, chart the course of its own future according
to its own dictates and desires. The opportunities as
well as the challenges of nationhood are all too familiar
to the peoples of the developing world, and in this
context the people of Guyana shares with its brothers

and sisters in the Republic of Seychelles the common
goals of peace, justice and progress--the international
imperative.
61. As the frontiers of colonialism
shrink and dwindle away, my delegation has every confidence that
newly emerging States cannot but enhance the effectiveness of this international
body as we seek to find
just and expe’ditious solutions
to the problems which
beset today’s troubled world. Conscious of the determination with which the people of the Republic of
Seychelles has pursued the goal of independence, my
delegation feels it none the less appropriate to take
cognizance of the spirit and manner in which the
Government
of the United Kingdom
successfully
sought to discharge its obligations
to the former
colony. My Government would like to hope that such
an attitude will serve as an example to those who, in
one guise or another, seek to resist the march of other
peoples to freedom and independence.
62. The Government
of Guyana is unwaveringly
committed to the goal of universality of membership
of the United Nations. The completion
of a further
stage and the progress of this august world body towards that goal, coupled with the achievement
of
independence by yet another State which has experienced the degradation of prolonged colonial domination, represents the fulfilment of principles deeply
cherished by all of us and for which we have strenuously fought in the Council and in other international
forums.
63. It was primarily in this context that my delegation welcomed the application now before the Council. We salute the Government and the people of the
Republic of Seychelles in their aspiration to participate in the United Nations as a full Member. My
delegation fully supports that aspiration and thus
voted in favour of the draft resolution.
64. As we seek to intensify our efforts aimed at the
creation of an international organization based on justice and equity, my delegation and the Government
and the people of Guyana look forward to a prolonged
period of friendship and meaningful
co-operation
with the Government and people of the Republic of
Seychelles and with their representatives here in New
York.
65. Mr. BENKHAYAL
(Libyan Arab Republic):
Allow me first of all, Mr. President, to offer you the
compliments
of my delegation on your assumption
of the Presidency of the Council for this month. We
have no doubt that the Council will benefit from your
diplomatic skill and experience. We are delighted that
this important meeting is taking place under your
presidency.
66. I should also like to congratulate the representative of Italy, Mr. Vinci, on the excellent manner
in which he guided our deliberations during the month
of July.

67. The attainment of independence
by the people
of Seychelles is an extremely important phase in the
history of that peace-loving country. It has freed itself
from the final vestiges of colonialism and imperialism,
and has the opportunity to build its life on the basis
of free and independent development.
Seychelles now
has a Government that exercises control over all its
territory, but most importantly its own destiny.

for the exercise of international
sovereignty, the
delegation of the People’s Republic of Benin wholeheartedly supports the admission of the Republic of
Seychelles to membership
in the United Nations.
Having achieved independence on 29 June 1976, after
more than a century and a half of colonial domination,
the Republic of Seychelles fully deserves to be admitted to our Organization. The Council, in unanimously recommending
to the General Assembly the
admission of the Republic of Seychelles to the United
Nations, is taking another step towards achieving the
objective of universality set out in the Charter. My
delegation is furthermore convinced that the Government of the Republic of Seychelles, which accepts the
obligations of the Charter and which solemnly agrees
to carry them out, will do everything in its power to
make its contribution,
even though it may be small,
to the maintenance of peace and security in QUI
changing world.

68. Independence for the people of Seychelles is also
encouragement in the general struggle throughout the
third world to achieve the full and complete elimination of colonialism, racial discrimination
and trpartIrcid, as well as to combat neo-colonialism
and imperialism.
69. Liberty and independence are sacred rights of
all the people of this world, and the application for
admission to membership in the United Nations is a
right of all independent States that accept and undertake to fulfil the obligations contained in the Charter.
Regrettably, occasions arise when this right of admission is met with obstruction. The Council was unable
to take a decision last June on the application of the
People’s Republic of Angola for membership in the
United Nations, even though the People’s Republic
of Angola, as an independent State, accepted all the
obligations laid down by the Charter and the proclaimed objectives and pririciples of its policy are in
harmony with the objectives and principles of the
Charter. The obstruction which prevented a decision,
was the gross misuse by a permanent member of the
right of veto.

74. We should like, in conclusion, to address to the
Government and people of Seychelles the best wishes
for happiness and prosperity of the Government and
people of the People’s Republic of Benin.
75.

Mr. RiOS (Panama) (inte/p~rtrrtion
./~/II S/MI/I should like, on behalf of the delegation of
Panama, to begin my statement by extending to YOU,
Mr. President, our warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. YOUI
experience and skill as a diplomat offer the best proof
that our work will be crowned with success in as
constructive a manner as possible. The ties that link
your people and Government to those of Panama give
me additional reasons for believing that your will be
successful in your task.

isk):

70. In conclusion, I should like on behalf of my
delegation to extend to the new independent State of
the Republic of Seychelles a friendly ,welcome and
enthusiastic congratulations, and wish the people of
Seychelles great success in the development
and
progress of their country.

76. My delegation also wishes to express its deepest
appreciation to Ambassador Vinci of Italy, a country
with which my own enjoys historic and fruitful relalions of friendship, Ambassador Vinci was President
during a difficult period, but with his wisdom and
well-known tact he was able to achieve results that
were satisfactory to all of us.

71. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (intcrpr’etcrtion jj.otn Frcvch):
Mr. President, my delegation is very happy to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. We are particularly
appreciative of
the skilful manner in which you are guiding our work.
Furthermore, my delegation is happy at the excellent
relations of friendship and mutual co-operation that
have existed between Benin and Japan since my
country achieved independence.

77. My delegation is very happy to have cast an
affirmative vote today for the application for admission to membership
submitted
by the Republic
of Seychelles. It is always a source of satisfaction
when we find a people breaking the ties of the past
and, of its own free will, linking itself to the family of
free peoples. We welcome the new State and we are
sure that its membership in the United Nations will
signify a positive step towards peace and a better
understanding among the peoples of the area. With
this step we are also fulfilling another of the goals
of the Organization: that is, we are coming closer to
fulfilling the principle of universality. We can now 0111~
hope that other peoples still languishing under colonial
domination
will soon rise and become full-fledged
members of the community of free nations. Today

72. I should like to take advantage of this opportunity to express to Ambassador Vinci the appreciation
of my delegation for the manner in which he conducted
the work of the Council during the month of July.
73. The agenda of today’s meeting concerns the
application of the Republic of Seychelles for membership in the United Nations. It is with a deep feeling
of happiness that Benin greets the accession of new
States to national and international
sovereignty.
Since belonging to the international
community
calls
8

gives one more proof of the fact that the colonies and
colonial enclaves are doomed to disappear.
78. We welcome Seychelles Islands and we hold out
to them a hand of co-operation and express our hopes
for the prosperity and happiness of their people.
79. In conclusion, my delegation wishes to express
our wish to co-sponsor the draft resolution on the
formal admission of the Republic of Seychelles to the
United Nations which is to be submitted at the next
session of the General Assembly.
80. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Mr. President,
all to fulfil two pleasant duties.

I wish first of

81. First, I should like to convey to you my sincere
and warm congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. Having known for a long
time of your many talents, your open mind and YOUI
deep knowledge of today’s international issues, I feel
that the Council could not be in better hands in dealing
with the items already on its agenda and others with
which we may be confronted this month.
82. Secondly, I wish to thank you and all our colleagues around the table for the over-generous expressions used in speaking of my tenure of office as President during the month of July. Unfortunately,
I never
actually started the quiet vacation in Italy you kindly
referred to and I arrived at the Council’s meeting on
Thursday last a few minutes after your opening words,
but I was able to read them the following morning and
I can assure you that your words and those I have
heard at previous meetings and today have warmed
my heart. At the same time, they turn my mind back
to Adlai Stevenson, a great man with whom, I believe,
our present United States colleague, Governor Scranton, has so much in common besides title, rank and
sense of humour. Governor Stevenson used to say,
very wisely: “Flattery is like smoking cigars; it’s good
for you provide you don’t inhale”.
83. I turn now to the item on our order of business,
namely, the application for admission to membership
by a newly independent country. On the basis of this
application, the Council has just taken the unanimous
decision to recommend to the General Assembly that
Seychelles be admitted as a Member of our Organization. This is a happy event at which we all rejoice.
84. My delegation is particularly glad to welcome to
the United Nations a new African State with which
Italy has already established cordial relations. In 1975
Italy opened a consular office in Seychelles, where an
industrious Italian community
has long been living
in its harmonious multiracial society. We understand
that the descendant of some early settler from my own
country has attained a high position in the Government of Seychelles, a fact which fills us with great
satisfaction and some pride, Since the completion of
the international airport. Alitalia has been considering

the possibility of improved air connexions, to serve an
increasing influx of Italian tourists out to enjoy the
natural beauties and charm of the islands. Also trade
between Seychelles and Italy is steadily increasing.
Italian companies are participating
in major commercial and promotional
activities in the new country.
85. The recent history of the Seychelles Islands and
the process of their advance towards independence
have set a new example of a country entering peacefully and in an orderly way into the international
community. This leads us to pay a tribute to the political
foresight and the wise administration
once again exhibited by the Government of the United Kingdom, which
stated, even before the people of Seychelles expressed
their desire for independence,
that the British Government would not stand in the way of such an aspiration.
86. My delegation voted wholeheartedly
in favour
of the draft resolution just adopted. We are looking
forward to establishing here with the representatives
of Seychelles fruitful co-operation in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter. The universality of the United Nations is today making further
progress.
87. I have the honour to convey, on behalf of the
Italian Government,
the warmest congratulations
to
the Government and people of Seychelles, together
with our sincere wishes for the attainment
of the
crucial tasks they are cafled on to fulfil in order to lead
the new State towards an increasing degree of prosperity and peaceful development.
88. The PRESIDENT:
As the list of speakers is
exhausted, I may be permitted to address the Council
as representative of JAPAN.
59. The Japanese delegation voted wholeheartedly
in favour of the draft resolution recommending
to the
General Assembly the admission of the Republic of
Seychelles to membership
in the United Nations.
Jt is indeed a great pleasure for my delegation that
this Council has adopted this text unanimously.
Let
me express my delegation’s
sincere hope that the
General Assembly at its coming session will decide
equally unanimously to admit the Republic of Seychelles to membership in the United Nations.
30. On this auspicious occasion, we should like to
extend warmest congratulations
to the Government
and people of the Republic of Seychelles on the confidence and assurance accorded them today by the
Council. We should like to express our thanks and
admiration to the Government of the United Kingdom,
which, as Administering
Power, has succesfully and
faithfully fulfilled its responsibility
to co-operate with
the people of Seychelles in achieving their independence. We wish to pay a tribute to the Committee
of 24’ for the valuable services it has rendered in
promoting the independence of the new State.

:f

91. I should like to recall that the Governmen.t, d. ., pubhc., df Seychelles both within and outside the
United Nations.
Jauan decided to recognize the new and independent
Ripublic of Seychelles-as early as 1.5 June of this year,
and on Indeoendence Dav, 28 June, an ambassador
Notr
on special mission was sent to Victoria to convey to
Seychelles the felicitations and good wishes of the
’ Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the ImpleGovernment and people of Japan. We are very much
mentation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
ColoniA Countries and Peoples.
looking forward to close co-operation with the Re-

10
Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

83-60801-February

1985-2,200
