Resolutions adopted on reports of the Sixth Committee
sible and desirable, with a view to ensuring international peace and security and to developing international criminal law, to define aggression by reference
to the elements which constitute it,
Considerin(l further that it would be of definite advantage if directives were formulated for the future
guidance of such international bodies as may be called
upon to determine the aggressor,
1. Decides to include in the agenda of its seventh
session the question of defining aggression;
2. Instructs the Secretary-General to submit to· the
General Assembly at its seventh session a report in
which the question of defining aggression shall be thoroughly discussed in the light of the views expressed
in the Sixth Committee at the sixth session of the General Assembly and which shall duly take into account
the draft resolutions and amendments submitted concerning this question;
3. Requests States Members, when transmitting
their observations on the draft Code to the SecretaryGeneral, to give in particular their views on the problem of defining aggression.
368th plenary meeting,
31 January 1952.
600 (VI). Review of the Statute of the
International Law CommiHion
The General Assembly,
Referring to its resolution 484 (V) of 12 December
1950 in which it asked the International Law Commission for "recommendations. . .concerning revisions of
the Statute which may appear desirable, in the light of
experience, for the promotion of the Commission's
work",
Considering that, according to the report covering
the work of its third session, the said Commission, in
pursuance of the General Assembly's resolution, recommended7 that, at the time of the next election of its
members, the Commission should be placed on a fulltime basis,
1. Notes tj,e observations and recommendations
contained in chapter V of the report of the International Law Commission;
2. Expresses appreciation for the work done by the
Commission pursuant to the terms of its Statute;
. 3.. Decides, for the tir.n~ being, not to take any action m respect of the rev1s10n of the said Statute until
it has acquired further experience of the functioning
of the Commission.
368th plenary meeting,
31 January 1952.
601 (VI). Report of the International Law Commission covering the work of its third session
( chapters VI, VII and VIII)
The General Assembly,
Pending its consideration of the questions dealt with
in chapters VI, VII and VIII of the reports of the In'Ibid., Supplement No. 9, para. 67.

85

ternational Law Commission covering the work of its
third session,
·
Notes the progress of the Commission's work on
those questions.
368th plenary mettfflg,
31 Janurwy 1952.

602 (VI), Ways and means for making the evidence of customary international law more
readily available
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 9 of the Secretary-General on ways and means for making the evidence of
customary international law more readily available.
1. Notes with satisfaction that a repertoire relating
to the interpretation of the Charter is already under
way;

2. Instructs the Secretary-General to continue his
studies relating to the best methods for securing for the
United Nations the required national legislative material;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its seventh session a report containing detailed plans as to the form, contents and
budgetary implications in regard to the possible publication of:
(a) A United Nations juridical yearbook, taking
into account the suggestions made during the debates
in the Sixth Committee ;
( b) A consolidated index to the League of Nations
Treaty Series;
~ c) A list of treaty collections supplementary to
those already existing;

( d) A volume containing a repertoire of the practice of the Security Council.
369th plenary meeting,
1 February 1952.

603 (VI). Designation of non-member States to
which a certified copy of the Revised General
Act for the Pacific Settlement of International
Disputes shall be communicated by the Secretary-General for the purpose of acceuion
to this Act
The General Assembly,
Considering that only three Members of the United
Nations have become parties to the Revised General
Act for the Pacific Settlement of International Dis• Ibid., Supplement No. 9.
"Ibid., Sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 53, document

A/1934.
