General Assembly-Forty-third Session

140

vide updated information on the proposals for convening
an international conference on monetary issues made in
recent years by Governments, prominent persons and organizations.

83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988

43/188.

Report of the Trade and Development Board

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December
I 964, as amended, 26 on the establishment of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the
Final Act adopted by the Conference at its seventh session, held at Geneva from g July to 3 August 1987, 27
Recalling also its resolution 42/175 of 11 December
1987 on the seventh session of the Conference,
Noting that the ·rrade and Development Report, 19882 8
has made a constructive contribution to the consideration
by the Trade and Development Board, at the first part of
its thirty-fifth session, of the interdependence of problems
oftrade, development finance and the international monetary system, as well as to the Board's consideration of the
debt and development problems of the developing countries,
l. Takes note of the report of the Trade and Development Board on the second part of its thirty-fourth
session, 29 and the first part of its thirty-fifth session; 30
2. Welcomes the review of the implementation of the
guidelines contained in the annex to Board resolution 222
(XXI) of27 September 1980 31 undertaken by the Board at
its thirty-fifth session and urges the Governments concerned to implement fully the relevant provisions contained in Board resolution 358 (XXXV) of 5 October
1988;3 2
3. Urges ali Governments, bearing in mind their particular contributions, commensurate with their economic
weight, and their commitments as embodied in the Final
Act, 27 to give full and prompt etfect to the policies and
measures agreed to therein through continuing action, individually and collectively and in competent international
organizations, in pursuit of the objective of revitalizing development, growth and international trade;
4. Requests the Board, in accordance with its mandate,
to keep under review the implementation of the relevan!
provisions of the Final Act;
5. Welcomes the contribution ofthe Board to intergovernmental discussions on the interdependence of economic issues and policies, particularly in the interrelated
areas oftrade, money, finance, debt, commodities and development, and notes the etforts under way to enhance the
outcome of the Board's debates on interdependence, as
well as the substantive linkages with other discussions on
related questions in the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development and other organizations;

26 See resolut10ns 2904 (XXVII), 31/2 A and B and 34/3.

27 See TD/350.
28 United Nations publication, Sales "Jo.

E.88.11.D.8 and corrigcn-

dum.
29

Official Records of the Ge11.,ral A."emhly. Forty-third Se,sion.
SufJ"ement No. 15 (A/4.l/l'>), vol. 1
• Ih,d., vol. 11.
31
/bid., Thiny-Jijih Session. Suppl<'me111 No. 15 (A/35/15). vol. 11,
annex l.
32
[bid., For!y-third Session. Supplem<'nt No. 15 (A/43/15), vol. II,
sect. 11.A.

6. Stresses that it is important that the Uruguay Round
of multilateral trade negotiations respond positively to the
interests and concerns of ali parties thereto, in accordance
with its objectives, and that it promote growth and development, particularly in developing countries;
7. Invites the Board to continue to follow closely developments and issues in the Uruguay Round that are of particular concern to the developing countries;
8. Notes that the Board has been requested to review
and study, in depth, developments in the international
trading system; in doing so it could, respecting the principies of most-favoured-nation treatment and nondiscrimination, make recommendations on principies and
policies related to international trade and make proposals
as to the strengthening and improvement of the trading
system, with a view to giving it a more universal and dynamic character, as well as to making it more responsive
to the needs of developing countries and supportive of accelerated economic growth and development, particularly
of developing countries;
9. Notes also the imminent entry into force of the
Agreement Establishing the Common Fund for Commodities 33 and invites the ratifying States, with the active
support of the secretariat of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to take the necessary action to bring the Common Fund into operation at an early
date as an important and useful instrument of international co-operation on commodities;
10. Takes note of Board decision 356 (XXXIV) of
10 May 1988 containing agreed conclusions regarding
trade relations among countries having ditferent economic
and social systems, urges the Board to elaborate further a
programme for the promotion of trade and economic cooperation among countries having ditferent economic and
social systems, in particular East-South trade, and requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in his consultations
referred to in paragraph 105 (2 7) of the Final Act, to seek
ways and means of broadening and strengthening intersystem trade relations, in particular East-South trade;
11. Invites the Board to contribute etfectively to the
preparations for the international development strategy
for the fourth United Nations development decade, in
close co-operation with the Ad Hoc Committee of the
Whole for the Preparation of the International Development Strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade.

83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988

43/189.

Specific measures in favour of island developing
countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of Action
011 the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order, contained in its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of I May 1974, the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, contained in its resolution 3281
(XXIX) of 12 December 1974, resolution 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation, and the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development

.n llnilcd Natíons puhhca11011, Sales No. E.81.11.D.8.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Decade, contained in the annex to its resolution 35/56 of 5
December 1980,
Reiterating the call for specific action in favour of island
developing countries contained in its resolution 41/ 163 of
5 December 1986, and in resolutions 98 (IV) of 31 May
1976, 34 111 (V) of 3 June 19793 5 and 138 (VI) of 2 July
1983 36 of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, as well as decision 86/33 of27 June 1986 of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme on the special needs ofisland developing
countries, 37
Recognizing that, in addition to the general problems
facing developing countries, island developing countries
also suffer handicaps arising from the interplay of such
factors as their smallness, remoteness, geographical dispersion, vulnerability to natural disasters, the fragility of
their ecosystems, constraints in transport and communications, great distances from market centres, a highly limited interna! market, lack of natural resources, weak indigenous technological capacity, the acute problem of
obtaining fresh water supplies, heavy dependence on imports and a small number of commodities, depletion of
non-renewable resources, migration, particularly of personnel with high-level skills, shortage of administrative
personnel and heavy financia! burdens,
Recognizing also that many of the above factors occur
concurrently in island developing countries, resulting in
economic and social vulnerability and dependence, particularly in those countries which are small and/or geographically dispersed,
l. Reaffirms its resolution 41 / 163 and other relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and calls
for their immediate and effective implementation;
2. Expresses its appreciation to States and to organizations and bodies within and outside the United Nations
system that have responded to the special needs of island
developing countries;
3. Welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-General of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in convening a meeting of the Group of Experts on
Island Developing Countries at Valletta on 24 and 25 May
1988, and expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Malta for acting as host to the meeting;
4. Takes note of the report of the Valletta meeting 38
and of the report of the Secretary-General on specific
problems and special needs of island developing
countries; 39
5. Welcomes the efforts made by island developing
countries to adopt policies that address their specific problems, including efforts at regional co-operation and integration, and calls upon those countries to continue to pursue, in accordance with their national objectives, policies
and priorities, further measures to render their economies
less vulnerable to the adverse consequences of their specific situations;
6. Appeals to the international community:
34 See Proceedings of the United Natiom Conference on Trade and
Development, Fourth Session, vol. 1, Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D. IO and corrigendurn), part one. sect. A.
35 /bid., Fifth Session, vol. 1, Report and Annexes (lJnited Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), part one, sect. A.
36 /bid., Sixth Session, vol. 1, Report and Anncxe.1 (lJnited Nations
publication, Sales No. E.83.11.D.6), part one, sed. A.
37 See Official Rccords of the Economic and Social Counál, 1986,
Supp/ement No. 9 and corrigendurn (E/1986/29 and Corr.1 ). annex l.
~g UNCTAD/ST/LDC/9.
39 A/43/513 and Corr l.

141

(a) To maintain and, if possible, increase the leve! of
concessional financia) and technical assistance provided to
island developing countries;
(b) To maximize access ofisland developing countries
to concessional financia! and technical assistance by taking into account the specific development needs and problems facing those countries;
(e) To consider reviewing the mechanisms of existing
procedures used in providing concessional resources to island developing countries;
(d) To ensure that assistance conforms to the national
and, as appropriate, regional priorities of island developing countries;
(e) To provide support to island developing countries
over a mutually agreed and, where appropriate, longer
time-frame to enable them to achieve economic growth
and development;

(j) To consider improving existing arrangements for
the compensation of island developing countries for adverse effects on their export earnings and to consider wider
adoption of such arrangements;
(g) To continue to ensure that a concerted effort is
made to assist island developing countries, at their request, in improving their administrative capacities and in
satisfying their overall needs with regard to the development of human resources;
7. Calls upan the international community to consider
improving measures, within existing trade arrangements,
in favour ofisland developing countries according to their
special circumstances, taking into account particularly the
special needs and problems of small island developing
countries;
8. Urges once again relevant organizations of the
United Nations system to take adequate measures to respond positively to the particular needs of island developing countries and to report on such measures, as appropriate:
9. Urges the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development to strengthen its role as the focal point for
specific action at the global leve) in favour of island developing countries and to act as a catalyst in this regard, ínter alia, by organizing and facilitating the cross-regional
interchange of information and experience in full cooperation with regional and subregional organizations,
both within and outside the United Nations system, as appropriate:
IO. Calls upan the Secretary-General, taking into account work already done on this issue, including that envisaged in paragraph 9 above, to identify within the appropriate inter-agency framework the problems of island
developing countries, in particular those of small island
developing countries, in order to elaborate specific measures that the international community might take to address those problems;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to convene a meeting of governmental experts of island developing countries
and donor countries and organizations to review the problems of island developing countries and propose appropriate concrete action with respect to those countries;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its forty-fifth session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December !98R
