S/PV.7426

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7426th meeting

Tuesday, 14 April 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kawar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Jordan)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

15-10344 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1510344*

S/PV.7426

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/245, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Jordan, France, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria, Spain,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)
Abstaining:
Russian Federation
The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution received 14 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 2216 (2015).
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2216 (2015).
In February, the Security Council made it very
clear that further measures would be taken if the
Houthis failed to cease their intimidation, aggression
and expansion. As their actions have shown, the
Houthis ignored this warning. The United Kingdom
therefore supports the Saudi-led military intervention
in Yemen taking place at the request of President Hadi,
but ultimately the solution to this crisis must be a
2/10

14/04/2015

political one, and the United Kingdom stands with the
international community in its call in this resolution for
an inclusive political process.
We call on all Yemeni parties to engage in the United
Nations-led dialogue in good faith. This resolution
adopts sanctions against individuals who have chosen
not to do so but instead continue to destabilize Yemen.
It is right that the international community increase the
cost of their unacceptable behaviour.
A political solution in Yemen remains the best way
to counter the growing threat from terrorist groups such
as Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula. It is imperative
that the international community not lose sight of the
growing threat that they pose. A political solution is
also the best way to arrest the worsening economic and
humanitarian situation. Free and unfettered access for
humanitarian supplies is critical. The United Kingdom
is providing additional humanitarian support to Yemen
and we urge the international community to do likewise.
The security and stability of Yemen is in the interest
of all Yemenis and all in the international community.
It is right that the Security Council has taken this action
today and the United Kingdom will continue to use all
of the tools at our disposal to support a lasting political
solution in Yemen.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation abstained in the
voting on resolution 2216 (2015), concerning the
conflict in Yemen, as, in our view, it is not fully in
line with the requirements that were put forth to the
international community or dictated by the current
crisis in the country.
During consultations on the resolution, the
constructive proposals of the Russian delegation were
not given due consideration. The resolution refers to the
need to resume negotiations between the parties to the
Yemeni conflict, and expresses support to the relevant
United Nations efforts. However, the ponsors refused
to include the requirements insisted upon by Russia,
which were addressed to all parties to the conflict, to
swiftly halt fire and begin peace talks.
The resolution contains no due reflection on the
difficulties caused by the fighting for Yemeni civilians,
nor does it provide a sufficiently clear expression of
the instatement of obligations or regular humanitarian
pauses.

15-10344

14/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

Given the situation in Yemen, the resolution makes
inappropriate reference to the sanctions aspect. We
insisted on the necessity of a comprehensive arms
embargo. It is well known that Yemen is awash in
weapons. In that regard, we think it necessary to stress
that the resolution adopted should not be used to further
escalate the armed conflict, which could result in
serious consequences for Yemen and the entire region.
Without a doubt, the current chaos in Yemen
is playing environment xclusively into the hands of
terrorist organizations. There is no alternative to a
political solution to the conflict in Yemen. We expect
dynamic activities from the United Nations with a view
to the resumption of peace talks between all parties
to the Yemeni conflict. That work, based on already
existing documents, should begin swiftly.
Ms. Power (United States of America): For months
the Security Council has clearly and unequivocally
demanded that the Houthi withdraw from Government
institutions, cease hostilities and return to Yemen’s
agreed-upon political transition. As recently as our
22 March presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/8), we
condemned unilateral actions taken by the Houthi to
undermine Yemen’s security, stability and unity. In
response, the Houthis, working in close coordination
with former President Ali Abdullah Saleh, have
intensified their military campaign, bombed Aden
and extended their offensive to Yemen’s south. Those
actions have caused widespread violence and instability
that threaten the security and welfare of the Yemeni
people, as well as the region’s security.
As a result, the United States strongly supports
the adoption of today’s resolution 2216 (2015), which
imposes consequences on the Houthi and former
President Saleh, demands that the Houthi cease
military operations and calls on all sides to once again
return to the negotiating table. The imposition of a
global assets freeze and travel ban on Ahmed Ali Saleh
and Abdulmalik al-Houthi, as well as a targeted arms
embargo, show that the Security Council will take
action against those who continue to undermine efforts
towards reconciliation.
The resolution further recognizes the costs of
Yemen’s rapidly deteriorating humanitarian conditions.
In response, the resolution affirms that all parties
must comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law, and it urges all parties to facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to civilians in
need, including by working with the Secretary-General

S/PV.7426

to establish humanitarian pauses. The Council cannot
lose sight of the human consequences of this conflict.
A legitimate transition in Yemen can be achieved
only through political negotiations and a consensus
agreement among all political parties based on the
Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and the outcomes
of Yemen’s National Dialogue Conference. The United
Nations must continue its efforts to hold talks to find
a consensus solution to this crisis, and all parties
must commit to taking part in the talks. There is no
alternative.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain would like to express its full support for
resolution 2216 (2015), on the situation in Yemen,
submitted by the delegation of Jordan. We trust that the
message of the Security Council will be clear to all the
parties to the conflict, and help to halt the escalation of
violence. In particular, I would like to underscore the
call to dialogue and the appeal for a political solution
based on consensus. Inclusive dialogue is the only way
to achieve the goals of unity and prosperity for Yemen
that we all desire.
We also have faith in the full involvement of the
Secretary-General and his team, with a view to helping
to resolve this crisis as early as possible and facilitating
the path to a return to a democratic transition led by the
Yemenis themselves.
We share the concern of the other members of the
Council over the longstanding humanitarian crisis that
has affected the Yemeni population, which can only
worsen with further the armed clashes. We therefore
emphasize the importance of complying with the
requirements set out in this and other resolutions on
Yemen.
Lastly, I would like to point out the importance
of transparency in negotiations in order to ensure the
constructive contribution of the 15 members of the
Security Council. Such will allow us to achieve the
highest level of consensus possible in this as well as in
other matters.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Security Council just adopted resolution 2216
(2015), which reiterates the Council’s support for
the sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial
integrity of Yemen. The resolution also calls upon the
parties concerned to reach agreement on a ceasefire
as soon as possible. And it clearly requires the parties
concerned in Yemen to solve their differences in a

15-103443/10

S/PV.7426

The situation in the Middle East

peaceful manner through dialogue and consultation.
The resolution is extremely important for restoring
stability in Yemen and promoting a political settlement
of the issue. China is profoundly concerned by recent
developments in Yemen. If allowed to continue, the
fighting and chaos in Yemen will not only plunge
the people of Yemen into profound calamity, but will
also spill over, affecting the entire region. There is no
military solution; political negotiation is the only way
out.
China calls upon the parties concerned to work in
the interests of the nation and the people of Yemen,
to take to heart the overall interests of regional peace
and stability and to truly comply with and implement
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in
particular resolution 2216 (2015), in order to achieve
a prompt ceasefire. Furthermore, we urge the parties
to resolve the crisis through political dialogue on the
basis of Security Council resolutions and the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative, to restore stability
and order, as soon as possible, and to to promote an
inclusive political transition led by the Yemeni people.
China hopes that all parties will, on the basis of
satisfy the requirements of the resolution, focus on the
humanitarian issues on the ground in order to provide
security and facilitate humanitarian assistance and
the evacuation of expatriates in Yemen. The parties
should also commit to protect the safety and security of
diplomatic establishments and personnel in accordance
with relevant international law. China supports the
ongoing role of the United Nations in mediating a
political solution and calls upon the parties to ease the
tension, facilitate the humanitarian situation and play
a constructive role in the political solution. China is
ready to join the rest of the international community in
unremitting efforts for a political settlement.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I take the floor to explain
my delegation’s vote today on resolution 2216 (2015),
on the situation in Yemen. I would also like to take this
opportunity to commend you, Madam President, for the
way in which you have guided the Council towards the
resolution’s successful adoption today. In that regard,
Malaysia thanks the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
for its engagement with the Security Council.
We consider it most unfortunate that the
deteriorating situation in Yemen has compelled us to
adopt this resolution. Today the parties in Yemen seem
ever further from the promising steps they had taken
towards a peaceful transition. Today the conflicting
4/10

14/04/2015

parties are no longer engaging in dialogue, and the
situation has degenerated into an all-out war.
Malaysia wishes to emphasize that the success of
a Yemeni political transition hinges on the political
will to negotiate of the parties in Yemen themselves.
However, without good faith, sincere commitment and
political will on all sides, any such negotiations are
doomed to failure. Nevertheless, in his role in leading
the negotiation process on behalf of the international
community and the United Nations, Malaysia would
like to pay tribute to Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General, for his tireless efforts
to salvage the dialogue between all the parties. We
strongly condemn the spoilers of Yemen’s democratic
transition for their disregard for previous commitments
and their pursuit of a power struggle at the expense
of the country’s unity and stability. In our view, their
pursuit of narrow self-interest has betrayed the hopes
and aspirations of the Yemeni people for a brighter
future.
The brazen attack last month by the Houthi
militias, in collaboration with forces loyal to former
President Ali Abdullah Saleh, on the presidential palace
of President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour in Aden
was simply unacceptable. In the face of such blatant
disregard for various Security Council resolutions, the
Council must discharge its duty and responsibility by
calling on the parties to exercise restraint and return
to the country’s road map for an inclusive, democratic
transition. For that and other reasons, Malaysia supports
resolution 2216 (2015), including its provision for
expanding targeted sanctions against Yemen’s peace
spoilers.
At the same time, we are deeply concerned about
the worsening humanitarian situation in Yemen owing
to the escalation of the conflict. Even prior to the latest
escalation, 16 million of Yemen’s 25 million citizens
required humanitarian assistance to meet their basic
needs. The already dire humanitarian situation has now
worsened as the population faces severe food insecurity
and a lack of basic needs, such as drinking water and
health services.
Malaysia is deeply concerned about reports from
humanitarian agencies such as UNICEF, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) on
the difficulties they are encountering in their efforts to
provide emergency assistance and deliver humanitarian
aid, including medical supplies, to those in need. We
15-10344

14/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

have seen reports of ICRC workers being shot and killed
while trying to retrieve the bodies of victims left lying
in the streets after military clashes. UNICEF has also
highlighted that children continue to be killed, injured,
displaced and put at increasing risk of disease as the
conflict continues in Yemen. Almost a quarter of those
killed in the recent conflict have been children. Schools
and hospitals have also been attacked. In view of the
deteriorating situation on the ground, we urge all parties
to the conflict to make every effort to protect civilians
from violence, especially women and children, who are
the most vulnerable in any armed conflict. We call on
all the parties to adhere to international law, including
international humanitarian and human-rights law.
Malaysia welcomes the ongoing mediation efforts of
some countries aimed at arriving at a peaceful solution
to the conflict. We reiterate the call in resolution 2216
(2015) to all Yemeni parties to resume United Nationsbrokered negotiations for completing the final phases of
the road map for Yemen’s democratic transition, based on
the GCC Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference
and the Peace and National Partnership Agreement.
We believe that this remains the only legitimate path
towards a democratic, stable and inclusive Yemen, and
we will continue to support Yemen in that endeavour.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): It is
clear that different interpretations exist of the situation
affecting Yemen, but we all agree that the violence is
having a serious effect on the civilian population. For
that reason, we appreciate the fact that the final version
of the resolution we have adopted today (resolution 2216
(2015)) includes stronger language on the humanitarian
situation than was originally proposed, as well as
incorporating the concept of humanitarian pauses,
which has been requested by various humanitarian
agencies and organizations. However, the humanitarian
situation will not improve if the violence does not stop
and if no progress is made with the political dialogue,
which is why we call for speedy implementation of
the ceasefire envisaged in today’s resolution. The
continued use of force will eliminate any possibility of
an inclusive and sustainable political dialogue.
We regret the fact that the resolution’s text does
not include references to the impact of the growing
violence on young people, including the killing and
maiming of children and their ongoing recruitment
and use in the fighting, as well the obstacles posed to
access to schooling and hospitals, in contravention of

S/PV.7426

the principles laid out in resolution 2143 (2014). That is
an aspect of the crisis that we cannot overlook.
Lastly, my country feels that it is important, as
has been mentioned, that the negotiation process be
transparent from the very beginning, and that applies
to all members of the Council.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela voted in favour of today’s resolution 2216
(2015), in the firm conviction that it is the responsibility
of the Security Council to encourage a peaceful,
negotiated settlement of the conflict in Yemen. We
emphasize that there can be no military solution to the
conflict affecting the country. The only solution is a
political, negotiated and peaceful one. In that regard,
we reaffirm our support for the mediation efforts of
Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Yemen, aimed at helping the parties to
arrive at a peace agreement within the framework of a
political transition.
We hoped that today’s resolution would include
stronger language on a cessation of hostilities — and
indeed of every kind of military action — in Yemen.
The escalating violence has resulted in the death of
civilians, including women and children, and the
growing number of clashes has exacerbated the already
complex humanitarian situation that our Arab brother
country has been dealing with for many years, which
has left more than 60 per cent of the population in need
of aid. The current situation is only worsening the
already delicate and critical situation on the ground.
We condemn the attacks on hospitals and schools, in
violation of international humanitarian law, and in that
regard we call on the parties to fully comply with the
standards set by international humanitarian and humanrights law so as to ensure the protection of civilians.
We also appeal to them to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to Yemenis in urgent need of
food, medicine and basic services.
We reaffirm our condemnation of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. The only people who benefit
from the current conflict are the terrorist groups of
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, since
institutional collapse and sectarian tensions help them
to realize their aims. It is therefore essential that there
be a return to dialogue and negotiation with a view
to achieving peace and stability in Yemen. Likewise,
we urge Member States to refrain from taking any

15-103445/10

S/PV.7426

The situation in the Middle East

measures that would prevent the achievement of those
objectives.
Lastly, we agree with what was said by
other delegations. Our country will always work
constructively within the Security Council in order to
achieve the proposed objectives. However, we would
like to express our concern at the fact that the negotiating
process lacked the required inclusiveness, limiting the
discussions on the items in the resolution to a group of
actors and excluding the other non-permanent members
of the Council, whose proposals were not discussed
properly. We hope that this type of situation will not
happen again, because it affects the Council’s working
methods and in particular undermines its transparency
and credibility.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Lithuania voted
in favour of resolution 2216 (2015), which was just
adopted and sends a strong and much-needed signal
from the international community that all parties in
Yemen should quickly come back to the negotiating
table, relaunch the transition process as per the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and the outcomes of
the National Dialogue Conference, and thus spare the
lives and livelihoods of the hundreds of thousands of
Yemenis affected by the fighting.
As we all know, the humanitarian situation in
Yemen is dire: 16 million people, almost a third of the
population, are in need of humanitarian assistance. Due
to the conflict, hundreds of civilians have been killed or
wounded, and 100,000 civilians have fled their homes.
Lithuania underscores the call of the resolution on
all sides to strictly observe international humanitarian
and human rights law. Humanitarian aid must be allowed
to reach those in need without delay. The Council has a
responsibility to do everything in its power to prevent
Yemen from falling into a disastrous spiral of civil war,
sectarian division and disintegration. The Council’s
message should be united and clear: a political solution
can be found, violence is not the answer, and those
who continue their spoiling acts will face serious
consequences. We believe that an arms embargo
against the spoilers and their associates, as well as the
designation of the Houthi leader, Abdulmalik al-Houthi,
and the former head of the Republican Guard, Ahmed
Saleh, will send a strong signal that the use of violence
against peaceful transition, in defiance of Security
Council resolutions, will not be tolerated.

6/10

14/04/2015

At the same time, the Council must now make sure
that both existing and new sanctions are vigorously and
fully implemented by all. The United Nations has been
able to pull Yemen away from the brink before through
its good offices and mediation. We must not forget that
the role of the United Nations remains vital if a return
to sustainable peace in Yemen is to stand a chance.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): We would
like to thank Jordan for having taken the initiative
to prepare and coordinate negotiations on the draft
resolution on the situation in Yemen. France voted
in favour of resolution 2216 (2015), of which it
was a sponsor, as it deals with the root cause of the
current situation, which is a political one: the ongoing
destabilization of the country by the Houthi rebels.
At issue is the militia’s refusal to abide by the
Security Council’s requests, in particular those
contained in resolution 2201 (2015), adopted on
15 February, and presidential statement S/PRST/2015/8,
adopted on 22 March, as well as by the various
agreements negotiated in recent months under the
auspices of the United Nations, which have not been
upheld. The threat posed by the Houthis to the unity,
integrity, stability and sovereignty of Yemen can
benefit only the terrorists, beginning with Al-Qaida but
also, more recently, Daesh.
We have tirelessly for many months now indicated
to spoilers of the political transition that we were
determined to bring growing pressure to bear upon
them in order that they cease their unilateral actions
and return to the negotiating table. It was important
for us to confirm our determination to translate that
message into action, and this is what we have just done
by imposing sanctions on Mr. Abdulmalik al-Houthi
and Mr. Ahmed Ali Abdullah Saleh as well as a targeted
arms embargo. Our collective credibility was at stake.
However, these necessary sanctions are not a means
in and of themselves, but, rather, an instrument aimed
at promoting the achievement of a political goal: an end
to the crisis, the resumption of an inclusive political
dialogue, agreement on the formation of a national
unity Government and a phased relaunching of the
Yemeni transition. That is the political goal that we are
seeking. Here the United Nations has a key role to play,
as its expertise and its neutrality makes it irreplaceable.
That is why we support the role of the Organization in
Yemen and call for the relaunching of the inter-Yemeni
dialogue under its auspices as soon as possible.

15-10344

14/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

Given the worsening humanitarian situation on
the ground, France also calls for compliance with
international humanitarian law and the protection of
civilians. Free and unimpeded access to those in need
of assistance must be guaranteed, as set out in the
resolution.
France supports the Council’s steadfast approach to
Yemen: the backing of Yemen’s legitimate President,
Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour; its firm stance
on spoilers; its support for the achievements of the
transition and the country’s institutions; its call for a
politically inclusive settlement that alone will allow the
challenges in the country to be met; and the combat
against terrorist groups. We express the hope that
this approach will produce speedy results and are
certain that we can count on the determination of the
United Nations in that respect. We call upon all actors
concerned — Yemeni parties, regional actors and
influential countries — to work along those lines.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand is
pleased that the Council has now been able to agree
a response to the conflict in Yemen. It has been a
challenging and difficult process to get us to this point,
in which you, Madam President, have led us with great
patience — infinite patience, I might say.
It is important that the Council be seen to be united
in this crisis and equally important that we send a clear
signal about the urgent need for an end to hostilities
and for a return to dialogue and to an inclusive political
process, as agreed previously by the Council.
Resolution 2216 (2015), which the Council just
adopted, imposes consequences for non-compliance.
We hope that that will create further incentives for the
parties to return to the negotiating table, so we reiterate
and support the resolution’s call for a resumption of the
United Nations-led political dialogue. That would be in
the best interests of all parties and of the long-suffering
people of Yemen. This time the parties must listen.
We are also very deeply concerned at the
humanitarian situation in Yemen and the impact of the
conflict on civilians, and we re-echo the resolution’s
call for all parties involved in military operations to
comply with international humanitarian and human
rights law. That is not an option; it is an obligation.
Absent a political solution to this crisis, that
humanitarian situation will only continue to deteriorate.
So we reiterate the call for all parties to facilitate the

S/PV.7426

delivery of humanitarian assistance, and we support the
request that the Secretary-General should intensify his
efforts to facilitate a humanitarian pause.
New Zealand will be actively engaged in following
up on progress towards those humanitarian outcomes
that we should all be seeking.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): As this
is the first time that I am taking the floor in an open
meeting under your presidency, Madam, allow me to
congratulate your country, Jordan, on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and to wish every
success to you and to your whole Mission team. Chad
wishes to assure you of our constructive cooperation
and support.
My country welcomes the adoption just now of
resolution 2216 (2015), on Yemen, where the situation
is deeply worrisome on the security and humanitarian
fronts. The resolution addresses the root causes of the
conflict. Chad voted in favour of the resolution, hoping
to see the international community its join efforts with
those of the countries members of the Gulf Cooperation
Council so as to prevent the total collapse of Yemen,
which could pose a real threat to international peace and
security. In that regard, Chad supports the efforts of the
member countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council to
restore peace in Yemen. Accordingly, we emphasize the
need for strong mobilization by the entire international
community to put an end to the dangerous escalation
of the conflict and to promote the ongoing negotiations
under the auspices of the United Nations in respect
of the legitimacy represented by President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour and the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council, including resolution 2201 (2015).
The Security Council must send a clear and strong
message to all Yemeni parties, especially the Houthis,
to call them to immediately stop the violence and
respect the democratic transition under the Peace and
National Partnership Agreement, as well as decisions
of the National Dialogue Conference and the agreement
on the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its
Implementation Mechanism. It is not acceptable that
an armed militia could use violence to undermine
the achievements of the National Dialogue or subvert
constitutional legitimacy.
In conclusion, Chad reminds all parties to the
conflict of their obligations to respect international
humanitarian law and to avoid targeting hospitals,

15-103447/10

S/PV.7426

The situation in the Middle East

schools, civilian infrastructure and camps for refugees
and displaced persons.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): Nigeria is deeply concerned by
the deteriorating political, security and humanitarian
situation in Yemen. We have repeatedly stated that
the crisis in Yemen cannot be resolved militarily. The
only path to sustainable peace and stability in Yemen
is through negotiation and dialogue. We call on all
parties in Yemen to return to the political process in
line with the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
Implementation Mechanism, as well as the outcomes of
the National Dialogue Conference, in which all parties
participated. Our wish is to see in the very near future a
peaceful, prosperous, united and stable Yemen in which
all communities live together in harmony. It is our hope
that resolution 2216 (2015), which the Security Council
has just adopted, will lead to an early and permanent
resolution of the crisis in Yemen.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): My delegation voted in
favour and fully supports resolution 2216 (2015),
whose necessity was dictated by the Houthis’ unilateral
actions that jeopardized what seemed to be a promising
transitional political process in Yemen. It is our hope
that the resolution contributes to a meaningful peace
process in the country and to solving the major
humanitarian crisis there.
We praise Jordan and the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC) for their efforts in bringing about the
Security Council’s adoption of this resolution for a
political solution based on the GCC’s Initiative, which
remains the only framework for the re-engagement of
the political process. We expect that the spoilers are
treated as the resolution disposes.
We are greatly concerned about the growing
number and scale of attacks by Al-Qaida terrorists,
a deadly danger for the future of peace and stability
in the country. We now appeal to all parties to the
conflict to resume negotiations and support United
Nations mediation efforts conducive to reinstating the
transitional political process for a future of stability
and peace in Yemen.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Jordan.
Jordan welcomes the adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 2216 (2015), which we put forward
today. It reflects Jordan’s ongoing desire for the return
of stability and security to the sisterly country of Yemen
8/10

14/04/2015

as soon as possible. The irresponsible practices of the
Houthis and their supporters, and the continuation of
their unilateral actions, along with their non-compliance
with Security Council resolutions, have led the Council
to adopt a resolution under Chapter VII, whereby States
are prohibited from arming a group of individuals
involved in acts that pose threats to peace, security or
stability in Yemen.
In a move that reflects the Council’s determination
to use the sanctions regime to deter anyone found
involved in acts that threaten peace, security or stability
in Yemen, the Council has imposed today a travel ban
and an assets freeze on Abdulmalik al-Houthi , the
leader of the Houthis, and Ahmed Ali Abdullah Saleh,
In addition to an arms supply embargo against them or
whoever acts on their behalf or at their direction.
Given that the Council stresses the importance of
dialogue and political solution to the Yemeni crisis, the
resolution requests the Secretary-General to intensify
his good offices role in order to enable a resumption
of the political transition process, as set out in the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and Implementation
Mechanism, and the outcomes of the comprehensive
National Dialogue Conference. It urges all Yemeni
parties to attend a conference to be held in Riyadh to
further support the political transition in Yemen, as
called for by the Yemeni President, whose legitimacy
is reiterated today by the Council, which has also
expressed its support for him.
In accordance with resolution 2216 (2015), the
Council is seeking to put an end to violence in Yemen
by creating the conditions to bring about such result, the
most important of which is the Houthis’ commitment to
implementing the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including today’s resolution, which demands, inter alia,
that they immediately and unconditionally end the use
of violence, withdraw their forces from all areas they
have seized, relinquish all additional weapons seized
from the military and security institutions, and refrain
from any provocations or threats to neighbouring states
of Yemen.
With respect to the humanitarian situation, the
resolution takes into account the guarantee to facilitate
the evacuation by concerned States and international
organizations of their citizens and personnel from
Yemen, ensures the smooth flow of humanitarian aid,
and facilitates evacuation procedures. It notes the
establishment of humanitarian pauses, as appropriate,
and in coordination with the Yemeni Government.
15-10344

14/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East

We emphasize that the humanitarian suffering in
Yemen began and reached record levels when the Houthis
failed to comply with Security Council resolutions and
rejected the appeals of the international community and
the League of Arab States. That derailed the political
transition process and exacerbated the humanitarian
and security situation in Yemen.
The adoption by the Council of this resolution
under Chapter VII sends a strong and firm message to
the Houthis, their supporters and any party that tries
to threaten the security and stability of Yemen. It is
a message that all parties should heed carefully and
seriously. The Council affirms its readiness to take
further measures in the event that any Yemeni party
fails to implement this resolution and resolution 2201
(2015).
Finally, the deteriorating political and security
situation in Yemen poses a serious and growing threat to
neighbouring States. The international community and
the Security Council should bear in mind the potential
security and political repercussions on the region as a
whole, and should continue to listen to the concerns of
the Gulf Cooperation Council.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Madam, for
the efforts made by the sisterly Mission of Jordan in
this international forum to address issues affecting
Arab countries and, in particular, my country Yemen.
Resolution 2216 (2015), adopted today, is a tangible
demonstration of the serious approach being taken by
the international community and the Security Council
to provide unified support to our people in pursuit of
their legitimate aspirations to instate the rule of law in
a dignified State where all citizens are all equal and
peaceful federal democracy reigns.
As the Council has today adopted a comprehensive
resolution to deal with all aspects of the Yemeni crisis,
may I recall the Security Council’s visit at the end of
January 2013 when it met with President Mansour Hadi
and other members of the Government. That historic
visit to my country by the Security Council, which
followed that of the Secretary-General, affirmed the
Council’s commitment to the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, as

S/PV.7426

well as to the outcomes of the National Dialogue and
relevant Security Council resolutions. It was an appeal
to all Yemeni parties to make headway in the political
transition.
The Yemeni people, with the support of international
community and of the countries of the region, stepped
up the pace to bring the transition to a close. Just as
we approached the historic steps of adopting the
federal Constitution of the State and holding legislative
elections, destabilizing militia forces stepped up efforts
to their own ends — a coup d’état.
The State under the constitutional legitimacy of the
Yemeni President was the aspiration of all Yemenis. To
the detractors, it was an obstacle to their designs. On
the one hand, there was a spirit of brotherliness and
dialogue in Yemen, in keeping with the hopes of the
Yemeni people, through national dialogue, to create
a unified State neither by coercion nor by hegemony;
on the other hand, the putsch sought, through a vision
manipulated by Iran — where Houthi militias and
forces loyal to the former president were trained — to
threaten the social fabric of Yemen and the cohesion
of its people. The coup d’état was sped up against
the legitimately elected President, whom these forces
sought to replace, just as they sought to topple the
Government in all areas, with militias from Sana’a and
Taiz to Aden.
The Yemeni people rose up against them. The
militias tried to attack the President in Aden so as to
topple his legitimate regime and perpetrate a coup
d’état. The President was forced, in the context of
his constitutional prerogative, to ask his brothers and
friends to protext the Yemeni people and the territorial
integrity of Yemen, in keeping with Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations. The response from the
brotherly countries of the GCC, led by Saudi Arabia,
was commensurate with the political responsibility
and reflects our intertwined destinies. It was a very
firm response aiming to defend the legitimacy of the
Constitution and to rebuff Iran’s efforts with regard to
my country.
The militias refuse to recognize the geopolitical
or historical realities of the country or the blood ties
between Yemen and the countries of the region. Let
me therefore reiterate that my country will never
forget and will remain forever grateful to our brothers
in Saudi Arabia and other GCC countries. We must
also pay heartfelt tribute to the heroic fighting of our

15-103449/10

S/PV.7426

The situation in the Middle East

brothers in Aden, Taiz, Shabwah, Al-Ghayda, Ibb and
elsewhere — every inch of Yemen has presented a
unified resistance against the army of death, revenge
and destruction.
From the very first hours of the Operation Decisive
Storm, we have taken humanitarian concerns into
account. Under the guidance of the President, we
have worked in cooperation with coalition forces and
humanitarian organizations to mobilize considerable
resources provided by the GCC for emergency measures
to mitigate the humanitarian suffering of the Yemeni
people in various regions of the country; to provide
humanitarian emergency assistance, medical supplies
and medicines; to transport the wounded to Gulf
States; and to help repatriate those stuck in airports
in neighbouring States. Humanitarian operations
continue under the auspices of the United Nations and
the International Committee of the Red Cross. The
Minister for Foreign Affairs is currently in Djibouti,
which has become a humanitarian support centre, to
organize emergency medical assistance.
At the same time, Government efforts continue
to seek an exit strategy from the crisis that has raged
since the coup d’état of 21 September. Consultations
and dialogue continue among the various Yemeni
forces in various Gulf capitals, including Riyadh. The
presidential decree of yesterday designating Khaled
Mahafoudh Bahah as Vice-President is of particular
importance. It was a necessary measure to restore

10/10

14/04/2015

peace and stability in Yemen and to urge parties to the
conflict to return to dialogue so as to implement the
outcomes of the national dialogue.
The only way out of the crisis in Yemen is through
dialogue. There can be no forceful solution or coup
d’état. The militias must implement the resolution just
adopted by the Security Council so as to allow for
the drafting of a reconstruction plan, build capacities
in cooperation with our GCC partners, and establish
a regional security system whereby Yemen will be a
source of stability, development and support to the
brotherly countries of the region.
In conclusion, I would like to express our heartfelt
gratitude to the Security Council members who
have always supported the Yemeni people and our
constitutionally legitimate President, Mansour Hadi. I
would like to thank in particular our brothers of shared
destiny in the framework of ongoing corporation under
the GCC, led by Saudi Arabia, and, in particular, the
King of Saudi Arabia. We would like to thank them for
their genuine support to our country.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General of
the United Nations for his efforts as well as the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan through you, Ambassador Kawar,
President of the Security Council and representative of
all Arabs in these dark times.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

15-10344
