S/2019/575

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 July 2019
Original: English

United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 46 of Security Council
resolution 2463 (2019), covers major developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo from 8 March to 28 June 2019. The report describes progress in the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) since my report of
7 March 2019 (S/2019/218); provides an overview of political developments; outlines
progress in adjustments to the Mission’s priorities, posture and presence, as well as
the pursuit of its comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians; and provides
information on the performance of MONUSCO uniformed personnel.

II. Political developments
2.
Following the peaceful transition of power in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on 24 January 2019, national and provincial legislative and executive
institutions were installed in accordance with the Constitution. The return of
opposition leaders to the Democratic Republic of the Congo contributed to evolving
dynamics in the emerging balance of power among the country’s political forces. The
President, Félix Tshisekedi, pursued his initiatives aimed at strengthening bilateral
and regional cooperation, implementing the national emergency programme, opening
the political space and improving the security situation in the country.
3.
On 20 May, Sylvestre Ilunga was appointed Prime Minister by the President.
The new Prime Minister served in various senior capacities under former President
Mobutu Sese Seko and was, until his appointment, the Director General of the Société
nationale des chemins de fer du Congo. He is a member of the Parti du peuple pour
la reconstruction et la démocratie, one of the main parties making up the Front
commun pour le changement of former President Joseph Kabila. The Prime Minister’s
appointment followed several rounds of consultations between President Tshisekedi
and Mr. Kabila. At the time of reporting, Mr. Ilunga had yet to assume his functions
as Prime Minister.
4.
The installation of national and provincial institutions continued. On 30 March,
the Constitutional Court validated the National Assembly’s rules of procedure, and

19-11002 (E)

180719

*1911002*

S/2019/575

by 21 May it had completed the adjudication of over half of the approximately 1,000
appeals related to the 30 December 2018 legislative polls. On 24 April, Jeanine
Mabunda, of the Parti du peuple pour la reconstruction et la démocratie, was elected
Speaker of the National Assembly and President of the Assembly’s seven-member
Bureau. Jean-Marc Kabund, the interim president of the Union pour la démocratie et
le progrès social, one of the parties that makes up the Cap pour le changement
coalition of President Tshisekedi, was elected Vice-President of the Bureau. Six
members of the Bureau belong to the Front commun pour le changement-Cap pour le
changement parliamentary coalition. The vote was boycotted by the opposition, which
argued that the 10 opposition deputies elected following the 31 March legislative polls
in Mai-Ndombe and North Kivu should have been considered when determining the
number of posts to be allocated to the opposition in the Bureau. Subsequently, the
opposition brought the matter before the Conseil d’État, which has not yet ruled on
the case. Discussions are ongoing in the National Assembly to find a compromise.
5.
By 18 May, indirect elections for the posts of senators were held in all
26 provincial assemblies. The polls were surrounded by allegations of corruption and
triggered demonstrations and sporadic violence, mainly by supporters of the Union
pour la démocratie et le progrès social. Some demonstrators were angry that the Front
commun pour le changement won the majority of senate seats, including in provincial
assemblies in Kasai Oriental and Kinshasa, where the Union pour la démocratie et le
progrès social holds the majority. The senators were installed on 2 April but have yet
to elect their President and Bureau.
6.
At the provincial level, the postponed legislative elections were held in
Mai-Ndombe and North Kivu on 31 March. Despite concerns over the activities of
armed groups, population displacements and the Ebola outbreak, the elections took
place in a relatively calm environment. As at 18 June, 25 of the 26 provincial
assembly bureaux were installed.
7.
At an inter-institutional meeting on 18 March, chaired by President Tshisekedi,
it was decided that the gubernatorial elections should be postponed in the light of the
corruption allegations relating to the senatorial elections. Initially scheduled for
26 March, the gubernatorial elections eventually took place on 10 and 15 April in
23 provinces. Mai-Ndombe and North Kivu provinces elected their governors on
30 May. In Sankuru Province, disputes over the final list of candidates led to a
postponement sine die of the elections.
8.
While the representation of women in the new institutions remains low, the
election of Ms. Mabunda as Speaker of the National Assembly is noteworthy, as she
is the second woman to hold that position and the first to be elected to it. In the
National Assembly and the provincial assemblies, women make up approximately
10 per cent of members, against 18 per cent in the Senate. No women were elected as
governors, although three women are serving as deputy governors.
9.
The Constitutional Court continued to rule on disputes regarding the outcome
of the 30 December 2018 legislative elections. On 11 June, the Court announced the
invalidation of the election of two senators, both from the Lamuka coalition, and
33 members of the National Assembly, 21 of whom are affiliated with Lamuka and
12 of whom belong to parties affiliated with the Front commun pour le changement.
Thirty-two members of the Front commun pour le changement and one member of
the Cap pour le changement were elected in their place. On 13 June, in protest at the
Constitutional Court’s announcement, members and supporters of the Lamuka
coalition held a demonstration in front of the Court building in Kinshasa. Lamuka
also decided to suspend its participation in the National Assembly.
10. The Front commun pour le changement has an overwhelming predominance in
the new institutions. It holds 361 seats in the 500-member National Assembly, while
2/18

19-11002

S/2019/575

Cap pour le changement holds 49. The opposition Lamuka coalition holds 90 seats.
Out of the 108 members of the Senate, at least 87 are affiliated with the Front commun
pour le changement, 3 with Cap pour le changement and 13 with Lamuka. When taken
together, the seats held by the Front commun pour le changement in the National
Assembly and the Senate represent a majority of over three fifths, giving the coalition
wide-ranging legislative powers. In the provinces, the Front commun pour le
changement has a majority in 25 of the 26 assemblies, with Lamuka having the most
seats in North Kivu. Furthermore, the Front commun pour le changement holds the
presidency in 24 assemblies, and 23 governors hail from its ranks. Lamuka holds the
presidency in two provincial assemblies, and Cap pour le changement presides over
one. The Lamuka and Cap pour le changement coalitions hold one governor post each.
Some factions of the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social expressed
dissatisfaction about the dominance of the Front commun pour le changement, while
disagreements within the Front commun pour le changement over the sharing of key
positions also arose. On 12 and 13 June, supporters of the Union pour la démocratie
et le progrès social held protests in Kinshasa, Lubumbashi (Haut-Katanga) and
Mbuji-Mayi (Kasai Oriental) and clashed with supporters of the Parti du peuple pour
la reconstruction et la démocratie over dissensions between Cap pour le changement
and the Front commun pour le changement. Supporters of the Union pour la
démocratie et le progrès social set fire to the local headquarters of the Parti du peuple
pour la reconstruction et la démocratie in Lubumbashi and Mbuji -Mayi. On 14 June,
at the initiative of the Governor of Kinshasa Province, representatives of Cap pour le
changement and the Front commun pour le changement met in Kinshasa to reaffirm
the commitment of both coalitions to surmounting misunderstandings and governing
in a spirit of collegiality.
11. On 30 May, the remains of opposition leader Étienne Tshisekedi, the founder of
the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social and a political opponent of former
presidents Mobutu Sese Seko, Laurent-Désiré Kabila and Joseph Kabila, were
repatriated from Belgium. National funeral ceremonies were held on 31 May and
1 June in Kinshasa. Étienne Tshisekedi was posthumously awarded the Héros
Nationaux Kabila-Lumumba Grand Cordon.
12. President Tshisekedi undertook visits to Kenya (13 March), Angola (22 March),
Uganda (23 March) and Rwanda (24–26 March) to discuss regional stability, security
and economic relations. He also visited Burundi, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon and the
United Republic of Tanzania between 11 and 14 June. During his engagements, the
President underlined the need for regional cooperation as a precondition for bringing
peace to eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, in line with his campaign
promises. Following a visit by a delegation from the Government of Rwanda to
Kinshasa on 20 March, RwandAir, the country’s national airline, began commercial
flights between the two countries on 17 April. On 10 May, President Tshisekedi met
the Chief of Defence Staff of the Rwanda Defence Force, General Patrick
Nyamvumba. Earlier that same day, General Nyamvumba held a working session with
his Congolese counterpart, Lieutenant-General Célestin Mbala, to discuss security
cooperation issues. From 3 to 7 April, President Tshisekedi visited the United States
of America and held discussions with senior United States officials on political,
economic and security cooperation issues. On 25 May, President Tshisekedi attended
the inauguration of the President of South Africa, Cyril Ramaphosa, in Pretoria. On
31 May, on the margins of the funeral ceremony for Étienne Tshisekedi, the President
of Angola, João Lourenço, and the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame, met with
President Tshisekedi to discuss cooperation, development and security in the Great
Lakes Region. They agreed, in the final communiqué of the meeting, to reinvigorate
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, strengthen economic and
trade relations and address the issue of Congolese and foreign armed groups.

19-11002

3/18

S/2019/575

President Tshisekedi also submitted the application of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for membership of the East African Community.
13. President Tshisekedi gave the National Oversight Mechanism of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Region a new impetus, with an increased focus on justice reform, the fight against
impunity and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. On 5 and 6 June, the
National Oversight Mechanism convened a meeting in Kinshasa attended by the
chiefs of the intelligence and security services of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania. Among other things,
participants recommended the adoption of a comprehensive approach to the
neutralization of armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and
agreed to promote the exchange of available information between intelligence and
security services in the region on issues of common interest.
14. As part of his so-called 100-day emergency programme, and in line with the
political agreement of 31 December 2016, President Tshisekedi pardoned some
700 political detainees, notably lawyer Firmin Yangambi and opposition leader
Franck Diongo. Moreover, in line with his commitment to combating corruption, the
President suspended the Minister of Land Affairs, Lumeya Dhu Maleghi, as well as
some heads of government agencies and parastatal organizations for their alleged
involvement in corruption cases.
15. On 12 April, President Tshisekedi embarked on a domestic tour to several
provinces, visiting Beni, Boma, Goma, Kasumbalesa, Kisangani and Lubumbashi.
During the visits, he held discussions with political and military officials on the
security situation, the surrender of members of armed groups, urban insecurity and
the Ebola outbreak. He indicated his readiness to address the disciplinary issues and
social conditions of national security forces. He also ordered that national security
forces be relieved of guarding mining companies and sites.
16. The dynamics within the opposition evolved during the reporting period.
Following a meeting of its founding members in Brussels in late March, the Lamuka
electoral platform was transformed into a political platform, with Moïse Katumbi
appointed as its first coordinator, a position that will rotate every three months. Amid
allegations of internal dissensions, Lamuka’s presidential candidate in the elections
of 30 December 2018, Martin Fayulu, continued to demand that the “truth of the
ballot” be upheld and held well-attended rallies in Kisangani and Kinshasa. On
20 May, Mr. Katumbi returned to the Democratic Republic of the Congo after two
years in exile. His return followed the annulment of a three-year prison sentence for
property fraud and the dropping of all pending legal proceedings against him.
Mr. Katumbi welcomed the progress achieved by President Tshisekedi, especially in
opening the political space, and pledged to take a pragmatic approach, promote
national cohesion and work constructively as a member of the “republican
opposition”. However, he warned against alleged attempts to change the Constitution.
On 31 May, opposition leader Antipas Mbusa Nyamwisi, a member of the Lamuka
coalition, returned to the Democratic Republic of the Congo after seven years in exile.
On 17 June, he pulled out of the coalition, citing the need to devote all his energy to
supporting the Government’s efforts to address the Ebola outbreak and insecurity in
Beni territory, North Kivu. On 23 June, Jean-Pierre Bemba, another member of
Lamuka and the president of the political party Mouvement de libération du Congo,
returned to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
17. Civil society and faith-based organizations continued to play a largely
constructive role. While offering to work with President Tshisekedi towards the
implementation of his agenda, members of the Conférence épiscopale nationale du
Congo urged him to reach out to opposition leaders. In anticipation of the local and
4/18

19-11002

S/2019/575

municipal elections, some organizations, including the Conseil national de suivi de
l’Accord et du processus electoral, called for the reform of the Commission électorale
nationale indépendante, whose mandate expires at the end of June. Although the
elections are scheduled for the last quarter of 2019, no significant preparations have
been observed.
18. Following a series of strike actions in the wake of the inauguration of President
Tshisekedi, the socioeconomic situation has since calmed down. The exchange rate
remained stable and a reduction of the Central Bank’s base lending rate from 14 to
9 per cent, announced on 30 April, is expected to lower interest rates by commercial
banks. Meanwhile, the price of cobalt, a major export commodity and source of
government revenue, stabilized after a significant drop in 2018. A meeting held on
5 April in Washington, D.C., between President Tshisekedi and the Managing
Director of the International Monetary Fund, Christine Lagarde, paved the way for
the resumption of cooperation between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Fund. The Fund conducted a mission to Kinshasa from 22 May to 4 June to assess
economic and financial developments and determine how it could support national
efforts to revitalize the economy.
19. As regards security governance, MONUSCO supported the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) in establishing troop rotation cycles,
in anticipation of new initiatives to improve security in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. MONUSCO also provided recommendations on security governance to
the ministries of the environment, defence and the interior.
20. In pursuit of her good offices mandate to support the consolidation of the post electoral transition process, my Special Representative for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Head of MONUSCO, Leila Zerrougui, met with President
Tshisekedi, the Chief of Staff of the President, Vital Kamerhe, and other political
actors and senior provincial authorities during the reporting period.

III. Security situation
21. Although the overall security situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
was relatively stable, some worrying dynamics emerged. Despite tensions in
Mai-Ndombe and Sankuru provinces, no significant violence took place and the
situation in the western provinces was generally stable. The trend of surrenders by
members of armed groups continued, notably in Tanganyika. In North Kivu, the
security situation deteriorated markedly in Masisi territory, and there was a spike in
attacks on Ebola response centres in Beni and Butembo. Shifting security dynamics
were observed in Maniema Province, and there were worrying trends in Fizi and
Kalehe territories (South Kivu Province) and in Djugu and Mahagi territories (Ituri
Province).
North Kivu
22. Compared with the period covered in my last report (4 January–8 March), there
were fewer attacks on civilians by the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) in Beni
territory, but there was a high level of violence in Masisi territory and increased
violence against Ebola response teams. Nduma défense du Congo-Rénové elements
were the largest perpetrators of attacks on civilians in North Kivu during the reporting
period.
23. Alleged ADF elements carried out 49 attacks on civilians, killing 89, including
29 women, and kidnapped 202 people, including 32 women. ADF also conducted
14 attacks on FARDC positions in Beni territory. MONUSCO supported FARDC after

19-11002

5/18

S/2019/575

ADF elements attacked a FARDC position in Ngite in the Mavivi area on 30 May.
FARDC killed 26 ADF elements in a counteroffensive. On 3 June, in an apparent act
of reprisal, ADF elements attacked the Rwangoma area of Beni town, killing
12 civilians (7 women and 5 men) and 2 FARDC soldiers. FARDC and the Congolese
National Police repelled the attack, killing one assailant. Since the beginning of 2019,
ADF has abducted at least 42 minors (24 boys and 18 girls). Mai-Mai groups also
continued to threaten civilians, especially in the Butembo and Lubero areas, with
63 attacks recorded during the reporting period, resulting in the killing of 31 people,
including 5 women, and the abduction of 80 civilians. No attacks against MONUSCO
were recorded during the reporting period.
24. There was a surge of violence in the Beni and Lubero territories that
significantly impaired the activities of the Ebola response teams. Between 8 March
and 30 May, at least five armed attacks were carried out against health facilities in
the Butembo area, including an incident on 19 April that resulted in the killing of a
World Health Organization (WHO) doctor.
25. In Masisi territory, a coalition of armed groups, led by Nduma défense du
Congo-Rénové, clashed on several occasions with another coalition led by the
Collectif des mouvements pour le changement-Force de défense du peuple, resulting
in a high number of civilian casualties and gross human rights violations. Between
1 March and 31 May, MONUSCO recorded 127 civilian deaths. Some 52 cases of
reported rape by elements of Nduma défense du Congo-Rénové were documented, of
which 50 were against women and 2 against children.
South Kivu and Maniema
26. South Kivu Province saw heightened foreign armed group activities, as the
Conseil national pour le renouveau et la démocratie (CNRD), a Rwandan armed
group, continued to strengthen its bases in Kitindiro and Rutare, in Kalehe territory.
The group’s movement from North to South Kivu increased markedly by early May.
Although the number of documented human rights violations committed by CNRD
remained low, the presence of the group posed a latent threat to civilians. Meanwhile,
in Fizi and Uvira territories, the incursion of militia groups from Burundi and FARDC
operations against those groups and their local allies led to clashes, resulting in
casualties, looting, sexual violence, the loss of people’s livelihoods and population
displacement.
27. Congolese and foreign armed groups remained active in Fizi and Uvira
territories, particularly in the Ruzizi plain, the Uvira mid-plateau and the Bijombo
groupement. In addition, tensions between the Bafuliro, Banyamulenge and Barundi
communities over the contested Ruzizi chieftaincy led to the loss of civili an lives. In
the Minembwe plateau of Fizi, intercommunity clashes between armed groups
affiliated with the Banyamulenge and other ethnic groups living in the area (Babembe,
Bafuliro and Banyindu) triggered large-scale population displacements across Fizi,
Mwenga and Uvira territories. The long-standing intercommunity tensions escalated
after a Bafuliro village chief was reportedly abducted and killed by an armed group
linked to the Banyamulenge. An estimated 125,000 civilians were displaced as a result
of clashes between, on the one hand, the Twigwaneho and Ngomino militias from the
Banyamulenge, and on the other, a coalition of Mai-Mai elements from the Babembe,
Bafuliro and Banyindu ethnic groups. These armed groups looted and burned villages,
causing severe damage to shelter and critical infrastructure, including schools and
health-care and sanitation facilities.
28. Between February and May, a series of clashes occurred between FARDC and
Mai-Mai groups fighting under the name “Revendiquants” around Lowa locality in
Tshopo Province, close to the border with Maniema. FARDC sent troop
6/18

19-11002

S/2019/575

reinforcements to the area. The situation caused the displacement of 20,000 civilians
from Tshopo Province to Punia territory in Maniema Province.
29. In the south of Maniema Province, FARDC continued to carry out operations
against the Mai-Mai Malaika (Mandevu faction) in the eastern part of Kasongo
territory and in the Lulindi and Wamaza sectors of Kabambare territory. In the Babuyu
sector of Kabambare territory, FARDC clashed intermittently with Twa militia
groups. In Salamabila locality, also in Kabambare territory, Mai-Mai Malaika leaders
continued to express their interest in surrendering.
Ituri, Bas-Uélé and Haut-Uélé provinces
30. In Ituri Province, the hiatus in the political process to demobilize the Force de
résistance patriotique de l’Ituri (FRPI) led to heightened FRPI activity in southern
Irumu. While looting was prevalent, a clear decrease of human rights violations by
the group was recorded. The uncertainty surrounding the political process reportedly
enhanced factionalism within FRPI and strengthened its links with other armed
groups, particularly in Djugu territory. Also in Irumu territory, on 1 May, ADF
elements reportedly abducted 18 civilians during an attack on Tchaby locality.
31. Violence by suspected Lendu assailants re-emerged in Djugu and Mahagi
territories, reaching worrying levels. Suspected Lendu youth militias carried out
several attacks on villages, resulting in the killing, wounding and displacem ent of
civilians, as well as the destruction and looting of properties. On 1 June, in Bunia,
members of the provincial assembly hailing from Mahagi territory issued a statement
claiming that the violence had resulted in the killing of at least 40 civilians in May.
Between 8 and 12 June, approximately 72 civilians were reportedly killed in a series
of attacks by suspected Lendu assailants in several villages around Lake Albert;
however, unconfirmed figures suggest that the number of victims may be substantially
higher. On 18 June, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees stated that
more than 300,000 had fled from the resurgent inter-ethnic violence in Djugu, Mahagi
and Irumu territories. FARDC conducted operations against Lendu militia camps in
the Wago forest along the shores of Lake Albert. MONUSCO deployed forward bases
in the affected areas.
32. In a positive development, in Haut-Uélé and Bas-Uélé provinces, the activities
of armed groups, including the Lord’s Resistance Army, decreased significantly
owing to constant military pressure by FARDC. Despite sporadic lootings, there was
a lull in the activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army in the Banda and Bondo areas
of Bas-Uélé, as well as in Niangara and Dungu territories in Haut-Uélé. In other
developments, FARDC and rangers clashed with South Sudanese armed elements in
Garamba National Park and in the Aba locality, Faradje territory, on 22 and 25 April
respectively.
Tanganyika Province
33. Although violence between Twa militias and other militia groups declined
significantly during the reporting period, several Mai-Mai groups continued to clash
with security forces, triggering displacement of the population and discouraging those
already displaced from returning. As at 31 March, more than 480,280 people remained
displaced in Tanganyika, according to estimates by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. In a positive development, up to 600 Mai-Mai Fimbo Na Fimbo
elements expressed their willingness to demobilize.
34. Following the alleged torture of six civilians by Twa militias in the village of
Munyatwa, in Nyunzu territory, FARDC troops deployed to the area with the support
of MONUSCO. The Mission also intensified patrols along the Kalemie-Kioko axis,
where there had been a high incidence of sexual violence and civilian deaths in March.
19-11002

7/18

S/2019/575

Kasai, Kasai Central, Kwilu, Mai-Ndombe and Sankuru provinces
35. Overall, despite localized tensions, the security situation was calm in most
western and central areas. A series of prison breaks took place from various detention
centres. In early May, five detainees who were being tried in relation to the 2017
murder of two members of the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán, escaped from Kananga prison, in Kasai
Central Province. Two of the fugitives have since been recaptured.
36. Tensions remained high in Sankuru Province, where violent demonstrations
followed the postponement of the gubernatorial elections on 15 April. Political
tensions were also noted near Kikwit, in Kwilu Province, which saw low-scale
community violence in Idiofa and Gungu territories. Tensions also remained high in
Yumbi territory, in Mai-Ndombe Province, despite reconciliation attempts between
the Nunu and Tende communities.
37. In Kasai Province, the Kamuina Nsapu group remained virtually inactive
following the spontaneous and large-scale surrenders at the start of 2019. In some
instances, those already demobilized have returned to their areas of origin.

IV. Humanitarian situation
38. During the reporting period, the humanitarian situation remained concerning,
albeit with some positive trends, such as the increased return of internally displaced
persons to their communities of origin in the Kasai region. The main concerns were
the continued propagation of Ebola, measles and cholera epidemics; violence-induced
internal displacements in Ituri, Maniema, North Kivu and South Kivu; and new
hotspots of acute malnutrition in several provinces, particularly Kasai Central, Kasai
Oriental and Kwango.
39. The humanitarian community maintained its projected figures of 12.8 million
people in need of protection and humanitarian assistance in 2019, representing more
than one in ten Congolese. In addition to an estimated 4.8 million internally displaced
persons, as at 31 March, the Democratic Republic of the Congo was also hosting some
540,000 refugees, mostly from Burundi, the Central African Republic, Rwanda and
South Sudan.
40. There are currently 13.1 million Congolese living in food insecurity, including
5.2 million children and 800,000 pregnant or nursing mothers who are acutely
malnourished. The United Nations continues to provide emergency food assistance to
more than 5 million people.
41. From 10 March to 2 June, 6,089 suspected cases of cholera, including
115 deaths, were reported. On 10 June, the Minister for Health declared a national
measles epidemic, stating that about 87,000 cases had been reported by mid -May. In
responding to the epidemics, humanitarian actors were confronted with a number of
challenges, including lack of funding, supplies and humanitarian access.
42. Despite the ongoing response effort, the number of Ebola cases in North Kivu
and Ituri provinces has increased sharply since early March, reaching over 2, 000
confirmed cases in June. There have been an increasing number of cases confirmed
in Kalanguta, Mandima, Mabalako and Musienene health zones across Beni and
Lubero territories. Ebola response efforts continued to be hampered by community
resistance and insecurity, with attacks on health-care personnel and facilities. On
30 April and 15 June respectively, the WHO Director-General, Dr. Tedros Adhanom
Ghebreyesus, and the WHO Regional Director for Africa, Dr. Matshidiso Moeti,
visited Butembo.
8/18

19-11002

S/2019/575

43. On 11 and 12 June, three Ebola cases were confirmed in Uganda, the first cases
to cross the border from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, a public
health emergency of international concern was not declared.
44. The United Nations Emergency Ebola Response Coordinator, David Gressly,
and the WHO Assistant Director-General, Dr. Ibrahima Socé Fall, initiated the
development of a United Nations strategy to put an end to the Ebola outbreak. The
strategy will focus on the public health response, enhanced security, political
engagement and support for communities affected by the Ebola outbreak. The United
Nations Emergency Ebola Response Coordinator met with President Tshisekedi, the
Minister for Health, local authorities, donors and international non-governmental
organizations.

V. Comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians
A.

Mission-wide strategies
45. MONUSCO continued to implement, in collaboration with the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, targeted strategies on armed groups. The
National Coordinator of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, Claude Ibalanky, visited Ituri,
which was a welcome boost to the FRPI peace process. The Mission’s comprehensive
approach to addressing the threat posed by FRPI, which integrates good offices, wideranging stabilization efforts, demobilization and reintegration, protection of civilians
and human rights, provided an enabling framework for the political engagement of
key stakeholders, such as the local community and authorities, the leadership of the
armed group and the Government. Meanwhile, the targeted strategy and joint
operational plan on ADF was reviewed on 19 June to assess progress and to consider
new developments in the Grand Nord. The targeted strategies to address armed groups
operating in Maniema, South Kivu and Tanganyika provinces are being finalized.
46. MONUSCO continued to implement the “protection through projection”
approach, with the establishment of 35 standing combat deployments and the conduct
of 9,645 long-range patrols during the reporting period. Early warning systems and
local protection committees in hard-to-reach communities were expanded, leading to
improvements in the Mission’s ability to reach civilian populations and support
dialogue initiatives. To build local ownership and ensure sustainability, MONUSCO
strengthened local protection mechanisms through community capacity-building and
conducted assessments of protection and early warning mechanisms.
47. The Community Alert Network received a monthly average of 449 early
warning alerts, originating mostly in North Kivu, South Kivu and Tanganyika. Of
those, 80 per cent gave rise to responses from the Government and/or MONUSCO.
Alerts that could not be responded to mostly emanated from remote areas or areas
with limited presence of national security forces.
48. During the reporting period, the Mine Action Service continued to mitigate the
threat posed to civilians by explosive hazards. The Service destroyed 52 unexploded
ordnances across the area of responsibility of MONUSCO and installed 124 gun safes
for 1,559 State-held weapons in police stations in Ituri, North Kivu and Tshopo
provinces. In addition, more than 5,000 State-held weapons were marked and
registered to support efforts to prevent diversion from national stockpiles.

19-11002

9/18

S/2019/575

B.

Field-level response
49. In North Kivu, MONUSCO used its good offices at the provincial and national
levels in response to the upsurge of violence in Masisi territory. The Mission also
deployed 10 standing combat deployments to monitor human rights abuses and secure
the separation of children associated with armed groups. On 15 May, MONUSCO
deployed to Ntoto (Masisi territory) and Walikale town (Walikale territory) to protect
civilians. Furthermore, MONUSCO supported the North Kivu Provincial Ministry of
the Interior in facilitating dialogue between Hunde, Hutu, Nande and Pygmy
communities in Binza groupement, in Rutshuru territory. As a result, the local conflict
resolution mechanism was revived and the number of violent incidents in the
community decreased significantly. In other developments, in March and April,
FARDC disarmed around 492 Congolese combatants, of whom 272 were from
Mai-Mai Nyatura (Kavumbi faction), who are now in the Mubambiro pre-cantonment
camp in Goma.
50. MONUSCO provided support to the Provincial Ministry of the Interior to
facilitate dialogue in the Bambuba-Kisiki and Banande-Kainama groupements in
Beni territory on land and other disputes. The dialogue led to the signing of a peace
agreement.
51. In response to increased insecurity in the Beni-Butembo area, MONUSCO
deployed additional Intervention Brigade troops, 14 individual police officers and two
platoons from the Egyptian and Senegalese Formed Police Units to address security
threats to Ebola response teams. Furthermore, the Mission redeployed the Kinshasa based Uruguayan company to Butembo.
52. In South Kivu, MONUSCO deployed integrated military and civilian teams to
two standing combat deployments in Kalehe territory, supported enhanced
information collection and early warning, and engaged with CNRD and the Congolese
authorities. MONUSCO held meetings with FARDC to encourage adherence to
international humanitarian law and reduce risks to civilians associated with CNRD.
In Fizi territory, MONUSCO deployed a standing combat deployment to the LemeraKidote-Mulenge axis in support of a FARDC military operation from 1 March to
15 April. Close collaboration of the MONUSCO force with the Mission’s civilian
sections facilitated the reopening of schools, churches, markets and hospitals in the
area. In Minembwe, MONUSCO conducted several joint missions and long -range
patrols and carried out conflict resolution initiatives, which resulted in the signing of
a document by the communities in conflict, in which they committed themselves to a
ceasefire and to working with FARDC. In Shabunda territory, in response to a spike
in conflict-related sexual violence, MONUSCO implemented a comprehensive action
plan, which led to the arrest by FARDC of the Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki leader, Koko
di Koko, and his deputy, who are facing charges of crimes against humanity for rape
and the killing of civilians. Despite the arrests and the surrender of some Mai -Mai
Raia Mutomboki members, low-level violence perpetrated by the group continued.
53. In Maniema, the establishment of a standing combat deployment in Salamabila
from 27 April to 8 May facilitated a joint mission by MONUSCO and provincial
authorities to address insecurity, evaluate conditions for the surrender of armed
groups and discuss stabilization initiatives. MONUSCO supported capacity -building
initiatives on security governance and the protection of civilians, and trained child
protection focal points and members of the Congolese National Police. MONUSCO
also conducted human rights investigations and an awareness-raising event for
FARDC on sexual violence. To encourage locally owned, peaceful solutions to
conflicts, MONUSCO supported dialogue between the authorities, representatives of
Mai-Mai Malaika, mining actors and civil society. Some 50 women and 100 men

10/18

19-11002

S/2019/575

participated. The dialogue identified measures to prevent a relapse into conflict, and
FARDC began withdrawing elements from Salamabila on 8 May.
54. In response to the conflict that began in February in the border areas of Maniema
and Tshopo provinces, MONUSCO conducted joint assessment missions to Ubundu
(Tshopo) in March and to Punia (Maniema) in April. The missions identified human
rights violations linked to FARDC in the Lowa locality, including confirmed cases of
executions.
55. In Ituri, MONUSCO maintained standing combat deployments in potential
hotspots to protect the population, and promoted reconciliation through dialogue
initiatives.
56. In Tanganyika, MONUSCO deployed five standing combat deployments in
areas most affected by Mai-Mai activities, allowing civilian personnel, humanitarian
actors, provincial authorities and local leaders to reach vulnerable communities and
engage directly with Mai-Mai leaders, which in turn led to some 600 militia elements
expressing their intention to demobilize.
57. In the Kasai region, MONUSCO focused its activities on the impact of the return
of Congolese expelled from Angola; the conduct of dialogue initiatives in Kam ako,
Kamonia and Tshikapa to reduce tensions between the Luba, Lulua, Pende and
Chokwe communities; and the promotion of peaceful cohabitation, particularly in the
context of the surrender of Kamuina Nsapu militias. In March, MONUSCO launched
a joint project with the United Nations Development Programme and other partners
in Kasai Central aimed at strengthening social cohesion between the communities
affected by conflict and at promoting peaceful coexistence.

VI. Extension of State authority
A.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
58. MONUSCO processed the cases of a total of 513 individuals from armed groups
and secured the release of 312 children. Of those 513 individuals, MONUSCO
repatriated 46 former combatants and their dependents to Rwanda, 8 to Burundi and
3 to Uganda, and referred 12 civilians to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. The Mission also continued to encourage foreign armed
groups to voluntarily disarm, demobilize and repatriate.
59. MONUSCO intensified its engagement with the Congolese authorities on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and discussed a strategic shift away
from static demobilization structures to more flexible, tailored approaches. Moreover,
MONUSCO and the United Nations country team continued to work jointly with
provincial and local authorities in areas to which former combatants have already
returned, in particular the Kasai region and Tanganyika, with a view to addressing
underlying conflict drivers and strengthening the ability of those communities to cope
with the return of both former combatants and displaced people. As a bridge to longerterm funding for Ituri, the Kasai region and Tanganyika, on 26 April MONUSCO
approved 9 new disarmament, demobilization and community violence reduction
projects, bringing the total number of projects for the period 2018/19 to 63.

B.

Stabilization
60. Within the framework of the International Security and Stabilization Support
Strategy, and in collaboration with the national stabilization and reconstruction
programme, MONUSCO continued to support efforts aimed at the signing of a peace

19-11002

11/18

S/2019/575

agreement between the Government and FRPI. Delays in the signing of the agreement
led to FRPI elements leaving the pre-cantonment area for the bush. The National
Coordinator of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, Mr. Ibalanky, met FRPI elements during a
field visit to Ituri from 10 to 17 May and reiterated the commitment of President
Tshisekedi to the peace process.

VII. Human rights situation, justice and corrections
61. While incidents of human rights violations and abuses generally remained high,
positive trends regarding freedom of expression and assembly were observed during
the reporting period. In the first quarter of 2019, MONUSCO documented 1,560
human rights violations and abuses throughout the country, a 10 per cent decrease
compared with the last quarter of 2018. Most of the violations and abuses took place
in conflict-affected provinces, mainly in Kasai, Maniema, North Kivu and South
Kivu. State agents, mainly FARDC soldiers and members of the Congolese National
Police, were responsible for 63 per cent of human rights violations and abuses. The
remaining 37 per cent of cases were committed by members of armed groups. State
actors were responsible for the majority of documented violations of fundamental
freedoms and restrictions on democratic space. Furthermore, a high number of
violations resulted from the presence and operations of national security forces in
conflict-affected areas.
62. In North Kivu, the province most affected by conflict, the human rights situation
deteriorated further, particularly in Masisi territory, where the number of human
rights violations and abuses increased by 40 per cent in the first quarter of 2019
compared with the last quarter of 2018. Armed groups were responsible for most of
those abuses, which included abductions and a high number of summary killings
(51 victims, including 11 women and 2 children).
63. Upon taking office, President Tshisekedi made strong commitments to improve
the human rights situation, including by releasing political prisoners and closing all
secret detention centres. That was followed by the publication, in March, of four
presidential and two ministerial orders on individual and collective measures of
pardon. Those measures concerned detainees who had served a quarter of their
sentence; those whose incarceration exceeded three months and who had shown good
conduct; beneficiaries of the amnesty law of 11 February 2014 who had nevertheless
been kept in custody; and those sentenced in connection with public protests or
political meetings held between 1 January 2015 and 31 December 2018. The effective
closure of prison cells at the Agence nationale de renseignements, announced by the
President of the Conseil national de suivi de l’Accord et du processus electoral on
26 March, could not be verified.
64. A positive trend was observed regarding freedom of expression and assembly,
with a 13 per cent decrease in related violations when comparing the first quarter of
2019 to the last quarter of 2018. However, freedom of the press and the intimidation
of civil society activists remained a cause for concern in the second quarter of 2019.
While several peaceful demonstrations were held without incident, others were
suppressed by the authorities and resulted in demonstrators being arbitrarily arrested
or injured. For instance, in demonstrations between 8 and 10 April in Tsh ikapa
(Kasai), Lubumbashi (Haut-Katanga) and Kinshasa, 38 demonstrators, including
1 boy, were arbitrarily arrested and at least 17 others, including 1 boy, were ill-treated
by members of the Congolese National Police during or following the dispersal of
peaceful protests related to the gubernatorial elections of 10 April.

12/18

19-11002

S/2019/575

65. On 23 May, in Kinshasa, the Minister of Human Rights, Marie-Ange
Mushobekwa, presented the report of the investigation commission on the incident
that occurred on 16 and 17 December 2018 in Yumbi. According to the report, 461
people were killed, 133 others injured and 1,793 properties destroyed. The incident
resulted in 7,472 internally displaced persons and 17,000 refugees. Twenty -five
alleged perpetrators have been arrested and are awaiting trial. Investigations are
ongoing.
66. Detention conditions continued to give rise to concern. In the first quarter of
2019, at least 74 people died in detention, mainly due to malnutrition, lack of medical
care and ill-treatment. Furthermore, during the reporting period, at least 899 people
escaped from detention centres across the country, with the provinces of Bas -Uélé,
Kwilu and Kasai Oriental being the most affected, compared with 801 escapes in
2018. Building on previous efforts, MONUSCO continued to provide support for
reinforcing security and improving living conditions in 14 high -priority prisons.
67. MONUSCO continued to support the efforts of the Congolese authorities to
combat impunity and address cases of war crimes, crimes against humanity and other
serious human rights violations. In Kasai and Kasai Central provinces, MONUSCO
and provincial authorities conducted five joint investigation missions on crimes
committed during the Kamuina Nsapu crisis.

VIII. Sexual violence
68. From 1 March to 31 May, the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office
documented 302 new cases of rape, gang rape, forced marriage and other forms of
sexual violence in conflict areas, of which 245 were against women and 57 against
children. Over half of the incidents were perpetrated by armed groups in North Kivu.
Most of the remaining cases occurred in Maniema, South Kivu and Tanganyika
provinces.
69. MONUSCO documented an increase in the number of cases perpetrated by State
actors compared with the last quarter of 2018. FARDC soldiers and other State actors
were responsible for approximately one third of documented cases, especially in the
territories of Beni (North Kivu), Kalemie (Tanganyika), Kabambare (Maniema) and
Uvira (South Kivu), as well as in Kasai and Kasai Central provinces.

IX. Child protection
70. Between 8 March and 8 May, MONUSCO verified 573 grave violations against
children, including the rape of 16 girls, the abduction of 6 children (5 girls and 1 boy)
and the maiming of 7 children (5 boys and 2 girls). In the same period, 538 children,
including 81 girls, were separated from armed groups.
71. During the reporting period, commanders of six Mai-Mai groups operating
chiefly in North Kivu and South Kivu signed unilateral declarations and road ma ps,
committing themselves to ending child recruitment and other grave violations of
children’s rights, including sexual violence and forced marriage. That brings the total
number of such agreements signed in 2019 to 10.

X. Gender considerations in mandate implementation
72. MONUSCO supported equal access to justice and equal participation in judicial
institutions for women in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In the first quarter

19-11002

13/18

S/2019/575

of 2019, more than 52 per cent of participants in the Mission’s training for judicial
authorities were women, compared with 11 per cent in the third quarter of 2018.
Further, 42.4 per cent of MONUSCO-supported mobile court sessions in prisons and
remote areas involved women as defendants or victims, enhancing their access t o
justice. That represents an increase of nearly 50 per cent in the first quarter of 2019
compared with the second half of 2018.
73. MONUSCO continued to promote gender-sensitive and non-discriminatory
communication in the media and provided training to 161 journalists.
74. Furthermore, MONUSCO supported efforts aimed at promoting women’s
involvement in political and conflict resolution processes. The Mission advocated the
inclusion of women in traditional government structures, leading to the nomination
of two female customary chiefs in the National Assembly. A total of 97 female
politicians, including candidates in the delayed Beni and Butembo legislative
elections, received capacity-building support from MONUSCO. In addition, the
Mission provided training to 314 female peacebuilders and mediators in 14 conflict
zones, who subsequently engaged with the parents and relatives of militia members.

XI. Deployment and assessment of the performance
of MONUSCO
A.

Progress in adjusting the Mission’s priorities, posture
and presence
75. In line with the strategic objectives outlined in Security Council resolution 2463
(2019), and following the successful holding of the national and provincial elections,
the operational focus of MONUSCO centred around the protection of civilians,
reducing the threat posed by armed groups and assessing the human rights situation,
while supporting efforts to combat impunity and stabilize and strengthen State
institutions.
76. With a view to focusing resources on areas where the presence of armed groups
poses a persistent threat to the civilian population, MONUSCO redeployed uniformed
personnel to field offices in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. One Indian
Formed Police Unit was successfully repatriated from the closing Kisangani office,
while an Egyptian Formed Police Unit, currently based in Lubumbashi, will redeploy
to Bukavu, given the effective closure of the Lubumbashi office. In addition, the
Egyptian Special Forces were repatriated on 2 June.
77. MONUSCO also readjusted the priorities of the Intervention Brigade, enhancing
its responsiveness by refocusing its area of operations and relieving Intervention
Brigade assets from static duties to increase the projection capability within their
assigned area. Similarly, the deployment of military observers was reassessed, and
teams were relocated to strengthen the presence in priority areas.
78. The MONUSCO police component continued to support, through the formed
police units, the capacity-building efforts of the Congolese National Police in areas
such as crowd control. In March, a United Nations specialized police team on
organized crime was established to strengthen the capacity of the Congolese National
Police to investigate serious and organized crimes. Moreover, the MONUSCO police
component continued to support the development of the 2019–2023 action plan for
the Congolese National Police.

14/18

19-11002

S/2019/575

B.

Assessment of performance of the Mission’s uniformed personnel
to protect civilians
79. Through field visits by the leadership of MONUSCO, 18 troop units were
inspected and evaluated against criteria that included support for mandate
implementation, command and control, training, discipline, sustainability of logistical
capacity and medical support. A total of 5 units were assessed as excellent, 10 as
satisfactory and 1 as requiring further improvement owing to the low rate of
availability of utility helicopters. Two assessments have not yet been approved. To
improve operational standards, various training sessions were organized, with a focus
on operations and logistics, planning and conduct of joint offensive operations, and
enhancing peacekeepers’ understanding of the Mission’s operations and complex
environment.
80. The leadership of MONUSCO also conducted a performance evaluation of
seven formed police units against several criteria, including command and control,
discipline, administration, understanding and support of the Mission’s mandate,
operational readiness, logistics, compliance with the relevant memorandums of
understanding, medical issues and training. The evaluation revealed that the
operational capability of formed police units is constrained by a lack of armoured
personnel carriers. To address the shortage, one police-contributing country was
requested to deploy six additional armoured personnel carriers and has already
deployed four; another has deployed an additional five carriers; and a third has been
requested to deploy two additional carriers. The Mission’s police component also
implemented a performance evaluation for individual police officers, including on
protection of civilians in urban areas through the integrated operational strategy for
the fight against insecurity.

C.

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
81. MONUSCO continued to implement the United Nations zero-tolerance policy
on sexual exploitation and abuse for all personnel, in close partnership with relevant
actors, including members of the local population. Activities to raise awareness of the
policy and the avenues for safe reporting were organized for communities located in
high-risk areas.
82. Between 9 March and 15 May, two allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse,
involving a military contingent member and an international staff member, were
reported and referred to the troop-contributing country and the Office of Internal
Oversight Services, respectively, for further action. Three projects sponsored by the
trust fund in support of victims of sexual exploitation and abuse were in the final
stages of implementation in Bujovu and Sake, North Kivu Province, and in Kavumu,
South Kivu Province. The projects provided vocational skills training to
250 vulnerable women, including 17 victims of sexual exploitation and abuse.

XII. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
83. From 9 March to 12 May, a total of 82 incidents related to the safety and security
of United Nations personnel were recorded throughout the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. They comprised 55 crime-related incidents, 21 cases of civil unrest and
6 hazard-related incidents.

19-11002

15/18

S/2019/575

XIII. Observations
84. I am encouraged by the positive steps taken by President Tshisekedi since his
inauguration to complete the installation of national and provincial institutions and to
launch his reform agenda. I also welcome the steps taken by the President to open the
political space, resulting in the release of political detainees, the return of political
actors and progress in the upholding of fundamental liberties, including freedom of
speech. I note the constructive approach adopted by many Congolese stakeholders in
support of the President’s agenda. That has helped to create a relatively peaceful
environment, which is essential for the implementation of reforms.
85. I am pleased at the initiatives taken by President Tshisekedi to promote regional
collaboration and strengthen the National Oversight Mechanism of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Region. I urge regional and subregional organizations, as well as international
partners, to build on that momentum in order to reinforce cooperation between
countries in the Great Lakes Region, including in the fight against armed groups and
in the pursuit of economic integration.
86. I welcome the commitment of President Tshisekedi to combating corruption and
impunity, and I encourage the Government to pursue governance reforms, which are
a precondition for creating an attractive investment climate, accelerating economic
growth and ultimately improving socioeconomic conditions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
87. I am encouraged by the improvement of the security situation in some parts of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I am, however, concerned at the deterioration
of the security situation in some areas of the eastern part of the country, particularly
in Ituri Province, where there has been a resurgence of intercommunal violence. Every
effort must be made to prevent a further escalation of the situation and to put an end
to the recurring cycle of conflict that has plagued that part of the country in recent
years. I take note of the decisions taken by President Tshisekedi to address threats to
the civilian population and the security of the State as a matter of priority. It would
be important, in that regard, to make progress on the further professionalization of
the national security forces, including by ensuring strengthened command and control
and democratic oversight. At the same time, there is no purely military solution to the
issue of armed groups. All concerned actors must therefore seize the opportunity of
armed groups surrendering, or expressing their intention to surrender, to make
tangible progress in disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating these combatants. I
call upon the Government and international partners to allocate the necessary
resources to efforts aimed at removing armed group elements from the battlefield
through non-military initiatives, including community violence reduction
programmes. I am also encouraged by the dialogue initiatives jointly carried out by
the authorities and MONUSCO to address the drivers of intercommunity violence and
conflict.
88. I commend the concerted efforts of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, WHO, MONUSCO and other partners to combat the Ebola outbreak. I
am, however, concerned at the worsening security situation in the affected areas and
the attacks on Ebola response teams. I call upon the Government to continue taking,
in collaboration with MONUSCO, measures aimed at improving the security situation
in the affected areas. I have taken specific steps to improve the coordination of the
United Nations system-wide response to the outbreak. The newly appointed United
Nations Emergency Ebola Response Coordinator, working closely with national
authorities and all concerned actors, will contribute to creating an enabling political

16/18

19-11002

S/2019/575

and security environment. The United Nations and its partners remain fully committed
to supporting the Government in its efforts to bring the Ebola outbreak to an end.
89. I am equally concerned about the overall humanitarian situation, which remains
dire. I renew my call for donors and partners to continue providing the necessary
support in order to close the humanitarian funding gap as quickly as possible.
90. Lastly, I wish to thank my Special Representative for her steadfast leadership
and dedication, and all MONUSCO personnel, the United Nations country team and
the troop- and police-contributing countries for their commitment to the stabilization
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also commend the efforts of the regional
organizations, bilateral and multilateral partners and non-governmental organizations
for their continued support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

19-11002

17/18

MONUSCO deployment map

S/2019/575

18/18

Annex

19-11002
