UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
T H I R T I E T H

1826 th

Y E A R

MEETING: 4 JUNE 1975

‘i:..,.
\I>’
:

..,

,

,

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l826) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ; . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1826

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolations and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1826th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 4 June 1975, at 3 p.m.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Banda
(President of the United Nations Council for Namibia)
and the members of the delegation took places at the
Security Council table.

President: Mr. Abdul Karim AL-SHAIKHLY (Iraq).
Present: The representatives of the following States;
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.

3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received letters
from the representatives of Bulgaria, Cuba, the
German Democratic Republic and Pakistan requesting
to be invited to participate in the discussion in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
Pursuant to the usual practice I propose, if I hear no
objection, to invite the representatives I have just
mentioned to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote. Owing to the limited number of places
at the Council table, I regret that I must invite the
aforementioned representatives also to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
I shall invite them to be seated at the Council table
whenever they wish to address the Council.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l826)
1.

Adoption of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia
The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Grozev (Bulgaria), Mr. Alar&n (Cuba), Mr. Neugebauer (German
Democratic Republic) and Mr. Matin (Pakistan) took
places at the side of the Council chamber.

The situation in Namibia
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions taken by the Security Council at its 1823rd
to 1825th meetings, I shall now invite the representatives of Burundi, Dahomey, Ghana, India, Liberia,
Nigeria, Romania, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
United Arab Emirates, Yugoslavia and Zambia to
take the places reserved for them at the sides of the
Council chamber in order that they may participate in
the current discussion without the right to vote. When
any one of them wishes to address the Council, he
will of course be invited to take a place at the Council
table.

4. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Sierra Leone, and I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
5 . Mr. BLYDEN (Sierra Leone): I should like first
of all, Mr. President, to associate myself with the
felicitations which have been extended to you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the current month. I feel that you are a
fortunate choice at a time when we are discussing
once again a question related to the mandate and
trusteeship systems, because of the distinguished role
which your predecessor, the representative of Iraq,
played at the first part of the first session of the
General Assembly of the United Nations, held in
London from 10 January to 14 February 1946, when
he took a strong position as to the nature of South
Africa’s Mandate in relation to South West Africa,
now called Namibia. We feel ourselves unduly fortunate at having you as our President for this very
interesting debate.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mikanagu
(Burundi), Mr. Aa’jibadP (Dahomey), Mr. Boaten
(Ghana), Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Dennis (Liberia),
Mr. Arikpo (Nigeria), Mr. Datcu (Romania), Mr. Djigo
(Senegal), Mr. Blyden (Sierra Leone), Mr. Hussein
(Somalia), Mr. Humaidan (United Arab Emirates),
Mr. Petri6 (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Mltvaanga (Zambia)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with a further
decision taken at the 18231-d meeting, I now invite the
President and the delegation of the United Nations
Council for Namibia to take places at the Council
table.

6 . Permit me further to pay a tribute to the outgoing
President of the Council, the representative of Guyana,
for the able and distinguished manner in which he
1

conducted the business of the Council during the month
of May. Our special thanks go also to Mr. Ramphal,
the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Guyana, who, from
his vast and intimate knowledge of the subject under
review, took the time and trouble to participate in this
series of meetings of the Council.

for by the General Assembly. Thus, when the other
eight trusteeship agreements were approved during the
first session of the Assembly, that for South West
Africa was not one of them. And when during the
second part of the first session nearly a year later,
in December 1946, South Africa, a Vice-President
and General Committee member, as we have already
noted, chose to make a submission on the South
African Mandate, it was clear that its primary, if not,
indeed, its sole interest in the then proposed Trusteeship System, appeared to be no more than the absorption or amalgamation of South West Africa, as it was
then known, as an integral part of its own territory,
the Union of South Africa.

7. Turning now to the subject of our debate, permit
me, Mr. President, to state, once again, the clear,
unequivocal and unyielding position of my Government, by inviting the attention of members of the
Council to certain pertinent observations which were
made by my Minister for Foreign Affairs in the course
of his statement at the twenty-ninth session of the
General Assembly. He said:

9 . It must come as no surprise to the representatives
assembled here today, some 30 years later, to learn
from the Fourth Committee’s reports covering that
early period that a number of delegations questioned
the validity of the referendum conducted by South
Africa in South West Africa, on the grounds that it
had not been possible to consult the people of the
Territory by democratic methods. It is a sad commentary on the credibility of our sister State, the
great Union of South Africa, that 30 years later similar
doubts continue to exist regarding its intentions in the
matter of holding and conducting fair and free elections in Namibia.

“The Namibian issue is a direct test of the efficacy
of the United Nations. No Member State, therefore,
can treat it with indifference without betraying the
principles that give this Organization its meaning.“*
Continuing in another context, my Minister observed
during the twenty-eighth session:
“In Namibia, history appears to have stood still
or to be moving backwards. It is deeply regretted
that in spite of the decision and the subsequent
actions of this body to assume the administration of
that Territory and free its inhabitants from the
clutches of the South African Government, we are
witnessing instead the dismemberment of Namibia
into homelands in preparation for the wholesale
importation of apartheid.“*

10. In retrospect, it would seem that a suggestion
put forward by one of the participating delegations,
Poland, in those early trusteeship discussions, did not
carry, and hence today we are still left with the legacy
of South Africa’s distasteful manners in its dealings
with the rest of the international community. The
Polish delegation had expressed the view, during that
first session of the General Assembly in 1946 on
trusteeship, that the only way to terminate a mandate
was to grant independence to a mandated Territory.

8. The Namibian question or situation, formerly
known as the “South West African Mandate question”, remains the oldest and still the longest surviving
issue on the agenda of the United Nations, having
been there ever since 1946. Indeed, alone among the
items which featured indirectly. and prominently on
the agenda of the first session of the United Nations
General Assembly at its unveiling in London in January
1946, the South African question and the South West
African question has remained a permanent fixture,
so to speak, on the agenda of the General Assembly
ever since. It is of some incidental interest that South
Africa, the party of the second part in the South West
Africa (Namibia) question, not only was a Charter
Member of the United Nations, but was one of the
first seven Vice-Presidents of the Organization and
automatically became a member of the original General
Committee, the nerve centre of any organization. Yet
it is this Charter Member, one of its first Vice
Presidents, that has chosen for 30 years to flout the
authority of its own creature. The significance of this
seemingly trivial, if not indeed irrelevant, foot-note to
history can only be properly assessed against the
background of South Africa’s recalcitrance as a
Member of the Organization during these first 30 years.
It is equally pertinent to note, en passant, that alone
among the Mandatory Powers of the day, South Africa
failed to submit a draft trusteeship agreement as called

11. Notwithstanding the expressions of goodwill
and sympathetic understanding manifested towards
South Africa even in the midst of its recalcitrance and
obstreperous behaviour throughout those early years,
the South African Government reserved its position
on the resolution (with regard to a Trusteeship
Agreement for South West Africa) as the Administering
Authority and also on behalf of the peoples of South
West Africa.
12. On the same issue-the proper method for
terminating a mandate-a group of five other States
that were busy working to have the question of
Palestine included on the agenda of the first special
session of the General Assembly in April 1947, called
to consider the Palestine question, also employed the
concept of the legal termination of a mandate being
synonymous with accession to sovereign independence on the part of the Mandate terminated.
1 3 . If I have gone back in time to the early days of
the South Africa/South West Africa Trusteeship
2

question in the United Nations, it is merely to point
up the nature and character of one of the parties
to the subject of our present debate, in the hope that
the Council, in 1975, may derive some flash of insight
into possible new approaches whereby it can best
hold this tiger of the international community at bay.

1 7 . The very sweet and touching hint dropped here
in this chamber by the representative of one of such
Powers during the current debate did not go unnoticed
by some of us. South Africa will do itself some
service by taking note of the gentle hint proffered to
it by the friendly State of the Republic of France.
1 8 . Having painted the preceding broad sweep of the
perspectives of my delegation at this juncture of the
South Africa-Namibia debate after 30 years, let me
quickly fill in some of the eyelets in the design of the
tapestry that constitutes the Namibian question or
situation, as we see it.

1 4 . In the light of the foregoing brief excursion into
the dim and ugly past of South Africa, our prestigious
but regrettably unresponsive and unscrupulous clientState, whose dealings with the United Nations have
been rooted in patterns of conduct which fall far
short of the expectations of reasonable men, it is
still the view of my delegation that this series of
meetings of the Security Council should address itself
directly and speedily to the task of re-establishing
direct communication and contact with the Namibian
peoples, as we have done in the past, through their
recognized and acknowledged leaders, namely the
South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO).
Precedent for this action is not lacking. The argument
advanced in certain quarters that recognition of
SWAP0 and direct dealings with it would provide a
facile excuse for South Africa to shout “wolf * and
claim that the international community was inflicting
a future one-party State system upon the Namibian
people, is rather far-fetched, as we see it.

1 9 . After an estimated 79 General Assembly resolutions on Namibia during the first 22 years of the history
of the United Nations-1946-196lLthe
Security
Council began its own rendez-vous with the issue of
Namibia, piling up its own equally impressive array
of resolutions, the fates of which were no less ignominious than those suffered by their antecedent
Assembly counterparts. Thus, by our count, no fewer
than 13 Council resolutions have, as it were, gone the
way of all the earth: resolution 246 (1968), followed
in rapid succession by resolutions 264 (1969), 269
(1%9), 276 (1970), 283 (1970), 284 (1970), 301 (1971),
309 (1972), 310 (1972), 319 (1972), 323 (1972), 342
(1973), 366 (1974), down into the limbo of forgotten
things. The last-cited resolution, 366 (1974), is the
immediate cause of the present series of meetings of
the Council.

1 5 . It cannot be denied that two of the most prominent
and powerful former colonial Powers of our times,
namely Great Britain and France, with great respect,
have both bequeathed to the science of politics, govemment and public administration a legacy which has
among its attributes that which dictates--or is it
“legislates”?-that a colonial or ruling Power must
never abdicate its alleged or assumed “moral” responsibility for the “governance” of so-called backward
or under-developed, now more graciously styled,
developing countries, and leave a vacuum behind. It is
to the credit of those two former colonial, former
Mandatory Powers that, unlike South Africa in present
circtimstances, both Powers were “leisurely quick”
to agree with their adversaries and negotiate with
erstwhile, supposedly revolutionary, one time
hostile political-nationalist organizations, and this as
the prelude to independence, as indeed it turned out.
In addition, both colonial Powers used this as a
guarantee of some measure of stability in the first
months of independence of any of their former
colonies.

20. The primary question that arises in the minds of
members of our delegation and myself out of the
preceding observations is, the following: What is the
precise purpose of our present meeting? We know it
is to discuss the situation in Namibia. Is it to engage
once again ad nauseam in what almost appears to
have become no more than a fruitless academic
exercise regarding who owns Namibia as distinct from
who rules Namibia? Why does not South Africa of
its own volition end its illegal occupation of a Territory
to which it no longer has any legal rights? Shall we or
shall we not make some further overtures to it, if not
indeed plead with South Africa to respect the verdict
of the international community, as represented by the
myriad resolutions we have adopted both in the Council
and in the Genera1 Assembly? How shall we bring an
illegal and irresponsible regime to its heels without
the application of those “effective measures” to which
we have repeatedly referred in nearly all the numerous
resolutions that have been adopted in recent years in
this body and in the General Assembly? Or, is the
purpose of our present meeting what is. implied in
resolution 366 (1974), as indeed it has been in other
earlier resolutions, namely, what necessary and
effective measures do we now propose to adopt to
dispose once and for all of this cancerous growth in
the body politic of the international community before
that community itself-if it is not careful-collapses
or fades into oblivion by our own self-imposed timidity,
our compromises and our weak-kneed irresoluteness?

16. The balance sheet in every such successful
exercise of negotiation with a nationalist organization
will undoubtedly reveal that at the end of the exercise
the former “trustee” or “guardian” and the former
“ward” continue to maintain a relationship of cordiality and non-compulsory
politeness where,
formerly, only attitudes of acrimony and resentment,
if not outright hostility and venom, would have
prevailed.
3

21. One representative after another during the past
three days has echoed the theme which underlies my
Government’s position in the present debate-a theme
which it is clear no member State or representative
here will eschew, namely, the formulation of concrete
steps that should lead to action, vigorous and positive
action against South Africa if it continues to show no
signs of a change of policies, if not-as we would
prefer-a change of heart, on a matter over which it
has stood condemned for more than half a century.

British administrator, Ormsby-Gore. The Namibian
people and the Namibian people alone-albeit with
the aid and encouragement of this body, the United
Nations, and ali its organs and other well-disposed
forces-are the only qualified persons to choose the
manner in which they shall continue to live and live
as free men.
27. The call of my delegation and my Government on
this occasion is not to South Africa; it is to the representatives in this august assembly, through you,
Mr. President. In the final analysis, it is you who must
have the last word about what the future of Namibia
shall be. The options open to us are limited; time is
running out. Shall it be “Who would be free themselves must strike the blow”? Or shall it be “Come
and let us reason together in an attitude of comradeship
between South Africa, Namibia and us of the
Council’*?

22. My Government’s long and untiring attachment
to the cause of total liberation in Africa-and, indeed,
wherever people and nations are held in political subjugation or subordination without their consent-is by
now too well known to bear any unwarranted or
pedestrian recital before this august body. For there
has hardly been a resolution before the Council or
before the General Assembly calling for adequate and
effective measures to be taken against South Africa to
which we have not been party-either as co-initiators,
co-drafters, or co-sponsors.

28. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Commissioner for External Affairs of Nigeria, Mr. Okoi
Arikpo, whom I invite to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

23. On every occasion on which we have thus
declared my Government’s stand on the Namibian
issue, we have asserted and pursued our commitment
to the cause of Namibia’s achievement of its right to
self-determination
and complete independence,
simultaneously and concurrently with South Africa’s
total and unconditional withdrawal from Namibian
territory.

29. Mr. ARIKPO (Nigeria): Mr. President, I am
grateful to you and your colleagues of the Security
Council for making it possible for the Nigerian delegation to participate in this crucial debate on Namibia.
But before I make my modest contribution to the
subject-matter of this series of meetings, may I congratulate you on your assumption of oflice as this
month’s President of the Security Council. It is entirely
appropriate that the representative of a country like
yours, Iraq, which has a long history of struggle against
colonialism and foreign exploitation, should be
presiding over a debate on one of the most brutal
forms of repression and exploitation ever known in
human history. My delegation is confident that your
experience in dealing with the kind of problems now
before the Security Council will greatly enrich the
present deliberations.

24. My delegation will now, as in the past, continue
to adhere to the spirit, the letter and the policies of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) on all
matters pertaining to Namibian freedom and independence. In this connexion, my delegation wishes to go
on record as being in full support of the OAU’s stand
on free and unfettered elections in Namibia under
United Nations auspices and supervision, with due
recognition of SWAP0 as the sole, legitimate and
popular national voice of the Namibian people.
25. South Africa will do well to heed the lessons of
history by which it has been surrounded for the past
two decades without appearing to have even been
fully aware of it, even in its own backyard. It is the
view of my delegation that SWAP0 should be seen
as the logical body now available, now ready, now
willing and now able to provide the first alternative
Government to the present illegal regime imposed
upon the Namibian nation without its consent during
the past 55 years. It is my delegation’s hope that
this vision of the future which we conjure will not
stand in the way of all men of goodwill everywhere
who believe in the right of all people to choose and
arrange their own way of life.

30. May I also thank the representative 0; the
brotherly Republic of Guyana and, more specially,
its Minister for Foreign Affairs, my friend
Mr. Ramphal, who set aside all other pressing commitments in order to preside over the first of this series
of meetings in recognition of the importance which his
country attaches to the issue of Namibian selfdetermination.
31. The 17 December 1974 the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 366 (1974), which
condemned South Africa for its continuing illegal
occupation of the Territory of Namibia and its arbitrary
application of racially discriminatory and repressive
laws and practices in Namibia, and demanded that
South Africa should make a solemn declaration that it
will comply with the resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations and the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice in regard to Namibia and

26. The slogan “Rather self-government than good
government*’ was not the brain child of an African
nationalist or politician; it was a legacy bequeathed
to the old League of Nations Council by that eminent
4

that it recognizes the territorial integrity and unity of
Namibia as a nation.
32. The South African authorities have refused to
make any declaration in the terms of the Council
resolution. They have contemptuously dismissed
any claim by the Council of the right to supervise the
transfer of power to the people of Namibia. This
blatant act of defiance should in normal circumstances
lead to the automatic invoking against South Africa
of Chapter VII of the Charter. But the Council has
already been served notice that the provisions of
Chapter VII will not be applied against South Africa.
The friends of South Africa in the Council would
rather sacrifice the authority and effectiveness of the
Council than jeopardize the security of their investments in that country. And even if the Council adopted
yet another strong resolution now, South Africa’s
friends amongst its members would frustrate those
provisions in such a resolution that would seek to
compel South Africa to act according to the wishes
of the overwhelming majority of the Members of the
United Nations.
33. Is it any wonder then that small and weak
countries are increasingly seeking protection under the
secure umbrellas of the super-Powers rather than
under the Security Council, which is supposed to be
responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security? Can we be surprised that every
major international issue in the last decade has had to
be settled outside the United Nations system? The
moral issue arising from the Namibian situation is that
in the second half of the twentieth century might
is’still right. Of course we are aware of the secret
defence links between South Africa and some Security
Council members which deter the latter from positive
action against South African intransigence.
34. But in spite of my pessimism, I find some hope
in the letter [see S/l 17011 of South Africa rejecting the
demands of the Council. I see that the Government of
South Africa recognizes the distinct international
status of South West Africa, the Territory which we
know by the name of Namibia. South Africa says that
it does not claim for itself one single inch of Namibian
soil. Mr. Vorster agrees that the human dignity and
rights of peoples, irrespective of colour or race, must
be maintained and promoted in Namibia. Mr. Vorster
says that South Africa cannot and shall not interfere
in the taking of decisions on the constitutional future
of the peoples of Namibia. The inhabitants of Namibia
themselves,
and nobody else, according to
Mr, Vorster, will decide upon their future.
35. The Nigerian delegation believes that those are
very weighty declarations of policy by the South
African authorities and that the Council should afford
South Africa the opportunity to translate that policy
into practice. South Africa should not be given the
opportunity to retract from any part of that declaration and the United Nations should assist South Africa,

in spite of itself, to implement that policy. Namibia
is a Trust Territory of the United Nations, whether
South Africa accepts this fact or not. South Africa
says that it accepts the international status of Namibia;
yet it continues to repudiate the right and duty of the
most universally recognized international organization
-the United Nations-to supervise the transfer of
power to the owners of the Territory. South Africa
says that it recognizes the right of the Namibians to
determine their future form of government; yet it
works assiduously to promote the political ascendancy
of a few ex-Nazi immigrants in that Territory. But in
spite of all that, it is prepared to negotiate with the
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
representatives of African leaders, the President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia and the Special
Committee of the OAU on the implementation of the
policy of handing overpower to the people of Namibia.
36. If the Security Council will not exercise its
authority under Chapter VII of the Charter-and I
believe it ought to exercise that authority-what
alternative is there but to talk with South Africa?
Mr. Vorster has already proposed the composition of
a possible United Nations committee and its terms
of reference as set out in the declaration of policy.
But I say that the Council ought to reject the more
arrogant proposals of Mr. Vorster and take its own
action. Nigeria would humbly urge the Council to
appoint a committee to facilitate the implementation
of the programme for the transfer of power to the
people of Namibia. This series of meetings of the
Council must give that committee a positive brief upon
which to work during the next three months to ensure
that the Council achieves positive results on Namibia
before the end of 1975.
37. The communication that has been received by
the Secretary-General from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of South Africa [ibici.] makes great play of
the earnest endeavours of the leaders of southern
Africa to seek a peaceful solution to the problems of
southern Africa, and asks for time and goodwill to find
solutions to the problems of that part of Africa. Those
are very soothing words, but I must say that 50 years
are long anough for the South African authorities
to prove their good intentions. Besides, it is said that
faith breeds faith. If the South African Government
believes that it can continue indefinitely to exploit the
honest desire of African leaders to find a peaceful
solution to the problems of African liberation, then that
Government is sadly mistaken. Missiles, atomic
bombs, napalm and defoliants have never succeeded
in burning out the spirit of independence and human
dignity anywhere in the word. They will not succeed
in Africa. South Africa has had all the time it needs
for constructive developments. That time is running
out. The leaders of Africa have offered South Africa
an olive branch. That offer is not indefinite. And let
there be no mistake: there is not a single leader in
Africa who does not want to see the black man master
of his own house. The choice whether there is peace

or war in Africa is one that South Africa must make
now. It cannot continue to dangle its carrots of friendship and good neighbourliness before African leaders
indefinitely.

visions of resolution 366 (1974) of the Council, and
particularly the requirements of paragraphs 3 and 4
of that resolution, which have been quoted by several
previous speakers. If we wish to be brief and precise,
we may well ask if the letter of the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of South Africa addressed to the SecretaryGeneral [ibid.] on 27 May last constitutes a positive
response to the requirements of resolution 366 (1974)
and, if not, what measures the Council might take in
order to discharge its responsibilities. This is the crux
of the matter.

38. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the United Arab Emirates. I .invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
39.

Mr. HUMAIDAN (United Arab Emirates) (interfrom French): Mr. President, permit me first
of all to say how happy I am to see you presiding
over this august Council. Your country, Iraq, and
mine have a common destiny, the destiny of an Arab
nation which has never ceased to struggle for its unity
and against colonialism and injustice in the world. I
should also like to thank you and the members of the
Council for having permitted me to participate in this
debate.

pretrrtion

45. We have studied with close attention the letter of
the Minister of Foreign Affairs of South Africa and the
annex containing extracts from the speech of his
Prime Minister [ibid.] We regret to say that neither
the letter nor its annex gives any positive response to
the requirements of resolution 366 (1974). The letter
and its annex constitute no more than an attempt to
divert attention from the principal objectives of the
resolution, namely: first, that South Africa make a
solemn declaration whereby it would undertake to
abide by the resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations and the Advisory Opinion of the International
Court of Justice on the subject of Namibia and undertake to recognize the territorial integrity and unity of
Namibia as a nation, and, secondly, that South Africa
take the necessary steps, in accordance with the
resolutions of the Security Council, for the withdrawal
of the illegal administration it maintains in Namibia
and for the transfer of power to the people of Namibia
with the assistance of the United Nations.

40. Furthermore, I have the honour to announce that
I am addressing the Council today, with a brief
statement, on behalf of the Group of Arab States in
the United Nations. The Arab people and Govemments wish to express their concern and distress at
seeing this illegal and inhuman situation persisting in
the African Territory of Namibia.
41. The importance of the outcome of this debate
is clear, not only for peoples who love justice and
peace but also for the credibility and prestige of the
United Nations, and particularly of the Security
Council _
42. In truth, this affair should be called “the problem
of the United Nations”, and not “the question of
Namibia”, because the responsibility of the United
Nations in this matter is direct and complete. General
Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) of 1966 clearly
proclaimed the inalienable right of the Namibian
people to freedom and independence. It unambiguously
put an end to the Mandate of South Africa over
Namibia and placed that Territory under the direct
responsibility of the United Nations. According to
paragraph 2 of that resolution, Namibia is a Territory
enjoying international status and will remain so until
its independence.

46. This is one more act of defiance towards the
Organization, and particularly to the Security Council,
on the part of the racist Government of South Africa.
The question now facing the Security Council is the
following: What are the appropriate measures to
take?
47. We have followed with great interest the proposals put forward by the President of the Council
for Namibia [1823rd meeting] and other distinguished
ministers and representatives. Taken over all, these
proposals are constructive and may be effective.
48. We for our part believe that in the decision
to be taken by the Council the following points should
not be overlooked: first, the legal responsibility of the
United Nations for Namibia should be reaffirmed, and
a request made that South Africa take appropriate
measures to permit the United Nations Council for
Namibia to establish its presence in the Territory in
order to facilitate the transfer of power to the Narnibian
.people; secondly, in order that the people of Namibia
may freely determine their future, the organization of
free elections, under the auspices and control of the
United Nations must imperatively be seen to as soon
as possible and at any rate within one year; thirdly,
the Council’s support for the struggle of the people of
Namibia under the leadership of SWAPO, its authentic
and legitimate representative, must be affirmed.

43. I do not want to mention here all the decisions
taken on the subject either by the General Assembly
or by the Security Council, nor do I wish to embark
upon a juridical analysis of the illegality of the
continued presence of the racist administration of
Pretoria in Namibian territory. In any case, the International Court of Justice made it quite clear that their
presence is illegal when it stated that “the continued
presence of South Africa in Namibia being illegal,
South Africa is under obligation to withdraw its
administration from Namibia immediately and thus put
an end to its occupation of the Territory.”
44. The purpose of this debate is to consider the
question of South Africa’s compliance with the pro6

49. We would also like to stress that the continuation
of the illegal presence of the racist administration of
South Africa in Namibia constitutes a serious threat
to the peace and security of Africa and, consequently,
a threat to international peace and security. That is
why we believe that the time has come to contemplate
the adoption of severe measures under Chapter VII
of the Charter.

today’s human and social standards and we think that
the solution of this problem is not, therefore, exclusively African: it is the concern of the entire membership of the Organization.
55. The position of Italy as regards Namibia is
clear: it is- reflected unequivocally-in the votes cast
by the Italian representatives in the Council and in
the General Assembly. We believe that our record
speaks for itself.

50. Like our African brothers, we would prefer to
see this tragedy brought to a peaceful end. For us,
there can be only one solution: the withdrawal of the
racist regime of South Africa and the independence
of Namibia. If this can be brought about peacefully,
so much the better. But in the absence of any peaceful
change, or of any real prospects for such a change,
we cannot but support the struggle of the African
people of Namibia under the leadership of its party,
SWAPO.

56. Italy voted in favour of resolution 2145 (XXI),
by which the General Assembly decided to put an end
to the Mandate as exercised by South Africa over
South West Africa. My country then became a member
of the Ad Hoc Committee in charge of finding
practical means of administering that Territory on
behalf of the United Nations.
57. In 1971, Italy, also at that time a member of the
Security Council, voted in favour of resolution 301
(1971), by which the Council reaftirmed the inalienable
right of the people of Namibia to liberty and independence, recalling as well pertinent resolutions prior to
that by which the Council pronounced itself for the
unity and integrity.of this Territory.

51. We accordingly undertake to support the struggle
of the Namibian people by all moral and material
means. We consider this struggle as a part of our
own struggle against foreign occupation and for the
safeguard of human rights .
52. The reasons for the failure of all measures taken
by the United Nations to compel the racist regime of
South Africa to comply with the decisions of the
Organization are familiar to everyone. That is why we
repeat our appeal to States which continue to have
dealings of all kinds with the racist regime of Pretoria
to cease their co-operation with it and to participate
actively in the efforts of the African States and the
United Nations to solve this problem.

58. Further, we would also like to recall our vote in
favour of resolution 311 (1972), by which the Security
Council called upon States to observe an arms embargo
against South Africa in view of its disregard of United
Nations resolutions concerning southern Africa. Italy
has strictly observed this decision, disregarding any
advantage it might have derived from an expansion of
its trade which the current economic difficulties might
have suggested.

53. Mr. CAVAGLIERI (Italy): Mr. President, allow
me first of all to convey to you my delegation’s warm
congratulations and good wishes on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month and to recall with pleasure on this occasion
the friendly relations that my country maintains with
your own. I should like also to associate myself with
the well-deserved thanks and congratulations that
have been addressed to your predecessor, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guyana, Mr. Ramphal.
My delegation has highly appreciated his presence
here as chairman of our meetings, just before his
assumption of the functions of Secretary-General of the
Commonwealth, a well-deserved recognition of his
qualities and statesmanship.

59. Italy has recently expressed its support for the
creation of the Institute for Namibia, which will make
possible the training of Namibians in view of the
establishment of their national State. Furthermore,
Italy has given its full support, since their creation,
to the various United Nations funds for southern
Africa: that is, United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa, United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa, United Nations Fund
for Namibia. As is well known, these Funds are meant
to provide assistance to, among others, refugees and
exiles from Namibia.
60. Italy has no commercial, industrial or financial
interest whatsoever in Namibia. Neither does it operate
any kind of transportation link by air or sea.

54. We are meeting at a time when the forthcoming
independence of Mozambique and the evolution of
events in Angola towards the same objective are
adding new positive dimensions to the struggle for
total decolonization in southern Africa. The remaining
traces of colonialism are well on the way towards
complete elimination under the increasing pressure of
an historical trend. In this framework, the occupation
of Namibia by South Africa represents an anachronism,
in sharp contrast with today’s world realities and

61. The Italian Government, as I have indicated,
has clearly stressed its position on Namibia to the
South African authorities, the most recent occasion of
this being a visit by the South African Minister for
Foreign Affairs to Rome. We have constantly urged
the Government of Pretoria to hasten the process of
ensuring self-determination in Namibia on the basis
of the principles and resolutions of the United Nations.
7

65. I should like to conclude my statement by
expressing our deep sympathy to the people of
Namibia, to whom we wish, in spite of today’s
difficulties, a prompt entry into the international
community after the speedy attainment of selfdetermination in accordance with the principles of the
Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.

In par&cular, we have stressed to the South African
authorities that this process should be carried out with
full respect for the national unity and territorial
integrity of Namibia, to the exclusion of any separate
racial lines. In so doing we have also emphasized that
the transfer of power to the Namibian people must be
accomplished in collaboration with the United Nations
and that such a transfer of power must be the result
of negotiations in which SWAP0 should be a participant. Most recently we have asked the Government of
South Africa to draw up a calendar indicating in the
clearest way the various stages for its progressive
withdrawal and the simultaneous transfer of power.

66. Mr. MALECELA (United Republic of Tanzania):
Sir, allow me to congratulate you on your assumption
of the high office of President of the Security Council
for this month, at a time when the Namibian problem
has assumed very crucial dimensions. You represent
a country whose commitment to the cause of decolonization is well known. Furthermore your own
personal qualities as an outstanding diplomat should
certainly ensure that the current discussion will be
conducted in a most serious and fruitful manner.

62. I should now like to refer to the two statements
issued towards the end of May by the Government of
South Africa in response to the mounting pressure
of world public opinion. These are the speech by the
South African Premier, Mr. Vorster, in Windhoek on
20 May and the letter addressed by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of South Africa to the SecretaryGeneral on 27 May [see S/11701]. Neither of those
statements, in the view of my Government, appears
to meet the main request embodied in resolution 366
(1974), which is a resolution whose contents had been
anticipated by the representative of Italy in the Council
on 1 August 1972, when he stated that:
‘6 . . . The people of Namibia should be allowed to
exercise its right to self-determination and independence. Namibia should achieve full independence
in conformity with the principles of the Charter. The
unity and territorial integrity of Namibia should be
preserved.” [1657zh meeting, puru. 1031

67. I also wish to express our appreciation to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guyana, Mr. Ramphal,
who honoured the Council by presiding over its
deliberations, and our gratitude to Mr. Jackson for
successfully undertaking the necessary consultations
on this question as well as on the other problems of
which the Council was seized last month.
68. The Namibian question has a long history which
is familiar to all of us. Therefore I will not repeat the
whole history of that country today. Rather, I shall
briefly refresh our memories with an account of the
recent political development in relation to that
Territory and throw some light on our expectations
with regard to this problem.

63. The South African statements are disappointing.
We fail to find in them clear-cut commitments which
would constitute a real step forward. Both statements
contain a certain degree of ambiguity, thus preventing
us from establishing their range and possible development. We regret this all the more as the South
African Government has given recent proof of being
able to look at other realities in southern Africa in a
new perspective; this encouraged the hope that
peaceful solutions aimed at meeting the aspirations
of African peoples might be promoted.

69. Since the Security Council met last December to
discuss the situation in Namibia [18/Ith and 1812th
meetings], the Ninth Extraordinary Session of the
Council of Ministers of the OAU met in Dar es
Salaam from 7 to 10 April 1975 to review the situation
in southern Africa, of which Namibia is an important
part. At that historic meeting, the OAU restated its
position on southern Africa in unambiguous terms.
With regard to Namibia, the Council of Ministers? in
their Dar es Salaam declaration, stated:

64. The present state of affairs in Namibia cannot
continue. We are faced with the illegal occupation
of a Territory by a State which has lost its right of
administration and has the duty of allowing the people
of that area to attain self-determination and independence. My delegation has listened with deep interest
to the statements of several previous speakers and
is looking forward to hearing the contributions of the
other delegations participating in this debate. We still
do not know what final judgement will emerge among
all the delegations on the contents of the two South
African statements. If, however, a general feeling
appears in the Council indicating that some elements
in those documents deserve more thorough study,
my delegation will be ready to join the others in that
work.

“Africa’s and the United Nations position on the
question of Namibia is unequivocal. South Africa’s
continued occupation of that land is illegal and all
Member States of the United Nations are under
obligation to refrain from doing anything which
implies the legality of its administration. Africa must
fulfil strictly this obligation to abstain from any
action which may be construed as recognition or
acceptance of South Africa’s right to be in Namibia.
“The OAU and the United Nations hold the unity .
and territorial integrity of Namibia sacrosanct.
Both organizations are working for the independence
of the Territory as a whole and are totally opposed
to its fragmentation. Both organizations recognize
8

of occupat&least
of all, that of the racist regime
of South Africa. They demand freedom and independence for their country. Led by their national liberation
movement, SWAPO, they have taken up arms to
secure this objective. By demonstrating that they are
prepared to pay the supreme sacrifice for their freedom, the Namibian people have long put to rest any
claims by the racists that the Namibians are subservient to foreign domination.

SWAP0 as the legitimate and authentic representative of the Namibian people. Despite the specific
and unanimous demand of the Security Council,
South Africa has not yet accepted withdrawing from
Namibia. In fact, the uparfheid regime has
consolidated its repressive rule in the Territory and
proceeded with its Bantustanization.”
70. Here I should like to add that when we speak of
recognition of SWAP0 as the legitimate representative
of the Namibian people, I hope it will be unde:stood
that we are not speaking in absolute terms of a
hundred per cent and nothing less, because, when it
comes to the representation of humanity, such
percentages do not exist.

74. However, let us for one moment suppose that we
are prepared to follow South Africa’s argument and
thus test the validity of its assumptions. Resolution 366 (1974) stipulated that the assistance of the
United Nations should be provided in the transfer of
power to the people of Namibia. To this demand,
Mr. Vorster and his regime have been categorically
negative. They will not accept the United Nations
supervision. One would have thought that, for
example, there should be no problem whatsoever in
accepting free elections in the Territory conducted
under the supervision and control of the United
Nations; for how is the United Nations supposed to
know that the people of Namibia want the South
African regime to stay if it is not going to be involved
in the process? What prevents the South Africans’
accepting United Nations involvement if they do not
have anything to hide? Is it not a fact that those
people who oppose South Africa’s presence in Namibia
are prosecuted, persecuted and denied all means of
expressing and propagating their views? Is it not a fact
that those who oppose the South Africans in Namibia
are hunted down with all the armed might of the
racist regime there? Do we really need to recapitulate
the variety of atrocities inflicted upon the opponents
of South Africa’s illegal rule? Public floggings, arbitrary
arrests and detentions and all sorts of intimidations
are a daily routine in that unhappy land. Yet Messrs.
Vorster and Muller have the audacity to tell the
Council that the Namibians exercise their right to
self-determination without interference from South
Africa. Perhaps they would like the Council to believe
that all these years the South Africans have been mere
tourists in Namibia. What cynicism! Certainly the
Council, as indeed the international community,
expected a more serious response.

71. Thus the main problem with regard to Namibia
is the continued illegal presence of the apartheid regime
in Namibia. Our objective, therefore, is to end that
regime’s illegal presence in that Territory. If today
South Africa were to declare its willingness to leave
Namibia, everything else would be a matter of details
to be worked out. Yet South Africa has continued to
remain there illegally and, with characteristic cynicism,
even attempts to rationalize its illegal presence in that
Territory.
72. At the same Dar es Salaam meeting, the OAU
endorsed the efforts of the Council and accepted the
goodwill shown by the Council in resolution 366 (1974)
of last year. It declared that the only peaceful solution
to the problem of Namibia was for the apartheid
regime to implement fully that resolution-for that
resolution sought to give South Africa an opportunity
to show its goodwill following the statement made by
its representative in the Council in 1974 [180&h
meeting], to the effect that, in the light of new developments in the Territory, the South African Government
believed that the stage when the people of Namibia
could exercise their right to self-determination might
be considerably sooner than the 10 years we had been
told of before. It was, therefore, at least, with a great
deal of curiosity that my delegation awaited the
response of the South African regime to Security
Council resolution 366 (1974).
73. We now have the response of the racist regime to
the decisions of the Council. It is not only negative
but also cynical, arrogant and contemptuous. Paragraph 4 of resolution 366 (1974) demands that South
Africa take the necessary steps to effect the withdrawal of its illegal administration, in accordance
with Council resolution 264 (1969), and to transfer
power to the people of Namibia with the assistance
of the United Nations. To this demand the South
Africans say that they cannot leave Namibia because
the people of Namibia want them to stay. Is this not
really the height of cynicism? To say that the people of
Namibia want the occupation forces to stay in Namibia
is to insult not only the Namibian people but also the
OAU and indeed the international community as a
whole. The people of Namibia do not want any kind

75. In any event the case for United Nations supervision in Namibia is not merely a question of ensuring
fair elections. We have maintained that Namibia is
a United Nations responsibility. Hence it is the height
of absurdity for South Africa to tell the United Nations
to keep out; it is for South Africa to comply with the
decisions of the Council and get out of Namibia and
not for South Africa to tell the United Nations to
keep out. The flat refusal of the apartheid regime to
comply with the demands of the United Nations on
this matter clearly displays South Africa’s unabashed
contempt for the Organization.
76. Paragraph 5 (a) of resolution 366 (1974) calls on
South Africa, pending the transfer of power, to comply
9

and obscurity. in such an atmosphere any talks or
so-called constitutional arrangements conducted by
the npurfheid regime in Namibia are a total farce; they
are illegal and should be denounced by the Council.
Furthermore, resolution 366 (1074) calls on South
Africa to accord unconditionaly to all Namibians
currently in exile for political reasons full facilities to
return to their country without risk of arrest, detention,
intimidation or imprisonment.

fully with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
in Namibia. Nobody here can claim that South Africa
has implemented that call. The resolution also calls on
the racist regime to release all political prisoners. That
call has fallen on deaf ears, and in fact that r&me has
indulged in political repression of the highest magnitude
through threats, imprisonment and torture of political
opponents. Document A/AC. 109/L. 1007 and Add. l4
indicates that numerous opponents of the r&me were
imprisoned after the call contained in resolution 366
(1974) was made. To give one example, Mr. Thomas
Kamati, who was found to have written in his prison
cell the words “One Namibia, one nation”, was taken
to court and found guilty because in South Africa for
someone to write what this young man wrote is a
crime.

80. The South Africans’ response is patently
unsatisfactory. They have neither taken the necessary
steps to give these guarantees effect nor created the
necessary political atmosphere for the free expression
of views. And as I indicated earlier, the leaders of
Namibia continue to be imprisoned for expressing
views which call for the unity and freedom of their
country.

77. The resoiution also calls on the Pretoria @me to
abolish the application in Namibia of all racially
discriminatory and politically repressive laws and
practices, particularly those pertaining to the
Bantustans and homelands. This call has not been
heeded at all. ‘Instead we are told vaguely by the
racist regime of certain unspecified proclamations
having been repealed. Yet apartheid remains intact
in Namibia. Has South Africa, for instance, discontinued the application of the so-called Terrorism and
Sabotage Acts? Has the regime discontinued its
Bantustan policies? The answer is obviousiy no, for
the statements of the r&gime indicate clearly that the
policy of Bantustans is to continue. The answer of the
racists of South Africa is that the so-called multiracial
talks have been instituted. Yet the motion to institute
those talks lays down conditions which indicate
clearly that the objective of those talks is to perpetuate
apartheid Bantustans and the so-cal1ed homelands.

81. Do I need to go further to show that the racist
regime has not complied with resolution 366 (1974)?
I repeat, the racist regime has not only defied resolution 366 (1974), but has even gone further to reject
categorically the supervision of the United Nations in
a Territory which is the responsibility of the
Organization.
82. We have been told in the Council that we should
explore the “positive” elements of South Africa’s
response in respect to contacts. Yet, what seems to
be lost is the gist of the problem. The issue is not
whether there can be or should be contacts between
the Organization or the OAU or both and South Africa.
The real issue is, what is the basis of such contacts?
After ah, we have had them in the past and they
have produced nothing, We have always recognized
that negotiations are an important aspect of the
struggle, but we have also recognized that there must
be a solid basis for such negotiations. I have already
said that the crucial point in the question of Namibia
is the United Nations responsibility there. If, therefore, South Africa rejects that, what is the basis of
such contacts? Furthermore, we must not confuse
form with substance. The substantive question is the
termination of South Africa’s illegal occupation. Once
South Africa unequivocally accepts this principle, the
modalities or instrumentalities of contacts can be
worked out. But where that commitment is lacking,
where South Africa continues to defy the Organization,
we find it difficult to comprehend the priority given by
some of our colleagues to the question of further
contacts.

78. These conditions speak for themselves and I need
only outline a few of them: first, they acknowledge
that there are various popufation groups in the Territory
and that the right of each group to its culture and
language should be recognized; secondly, they express
the opinion that non-whites are not interested in
political rights, but only in the recognition of human
rights; thirdly, they bar the participation of the nonwhite political parties in these talks on the alleged
ground that there were too many political groupings
among the non-whites and that no one knew who
was represented. In other words, the representation
of the non-whites is to be assumed by those who are
in the pay of the racist regime and who are now acting
as instruments of repression.

83. I must, however, add that my delegation will
remain open to any other constructive suggestions
that would lead the Council to action rather than
to the fruitless exercises which we have had in the
past. Fifty years is a long time for Africa to wait for
a positive response from South Africa.

79. These are talks designed to divide and weaken
the African people of Namibia and to create hatred
amongst the non-white population. They serve no
good purpose and should be condemned for what they
are. It is not surprising, therefore, that these talks have
been denounced even amongst the whites of South
Africa. Mr. Bryan O’Lynn, Vice-Chairman of the
United Party, has said that they represented nothing
more than a masterpiece in evasion, self-contradiction

84. One must seriously attempt to understand why
in spite of the overwhelming international opposition,
South Africa continues to pursue its obdurate and
10

recalcitrant policies. It would be an oversimplification
to attribute the behaviour of the apartheid r&me to
simple obstinacy. It is obvious that to a very great
extent South Africa’s defiance is encouraged by the
policies of some of the very powerful members of the
United Nations and the Security Council. South
Africa believes that it can continue to rely on their
support. The upurfheid tigime believes that it is
protected from the wrath of the international community because the three Western permanent members
of the Council will protect it from appropriate effective
measures, especially when such Powers in the Council
argue on flimsy legal grounds devoid of all moral
principle.

ment. All the potential for an expanded conflagration is there, unless the Security Council takes timely
action to promote a peaceful solution-of the problem.
89. South Africa’s reaction so far has been to block
all peaceful avenues. Those who support South
Africa’s manceuvres,
either directly or indirectly,
must realize that they are contributing to the intensification of tension and the escalation of a military
conflict. Do we really need a full-fledged Viet-Namese
type of war in Namibia for the Council to be convinced of the threat to international peace and security
in that area? Are we looking for a blood-bath to
convince ourselves of the urgent need for prompt
and decisive action in Namibia?

85. Those three members, who provided the triple
veto last year [see 1808th meeting] in defence of
South Africa’s membership, have, by their actions,
given comfort and support to the racist rkgime. And,
it is these actions which really matter, and not verbal
professions of abhorrence of South Africa’s actions
and policies. In this connexion, it would be pertinent
to recall some of those actions.

90. It is quite clear that a racial conflagration in
Namibia, with the inevitable repercussions beyond its
borders, will have the most dire consequences for the
peace and security not only of the African continent
but of the whole world community. Are we to understand that those who refuse to recognize this clear
danger would wish to see that conflagration before
the Council can take the necessary action?

86. Last year, the Council in effect gave an ultimatum
to the South African rigime regarding Namibia by
adopting resolution 366 (1974). The three Western
permanent members of the Security Council supported
that ultimatum. Yet, Britain conducted sea manoeuvres with South Africa. France did the same and
continues to sell arms to South Africa. The United
States received the Chief of South African Defence
Forces. I have ample evidence that since that time
there has been a group of South African military
experts who have visited almost all the Western
capitals looking for arms. These men, Mr. I. Rodger,
Mr. A. G. Engelter and Mr. L. L. Van Zyl, have been
to London, New York, Paris and Bonn. I need not
elaborate what they discussed, but should my statement be challenged I would be prepared to provide
further evidence on this question.

91. Clearly, the Council would be wiser to work for
the prevention of a conflagration than to attempt
desperately to stop one after it has started. We submit
therefore that in whatever way one conceives the
current situation in Namibia arising from South
Africa’s continued defiance of the will of the intemational community and its brutal repression of the people
of the international Territory of Namibia, the problem
is one which seriously threatens the peace, security
and tranquillity of the area. It is one which cries for
a prompt, decisive and definitive decision by this
Council. And the demand made in the Council by
African and other spokesmen of freedom and justice
that the Security Council take action commensurate
with the gravity of the situation is sound, timely and
logical. We are not exaggerating the fact; we do not
desire overdramatization; but we desperately seek the
freedom and independence of Namibia so that peace,
security and harmony can prevail in that area. And we
firmly believe that the Security Council has a duty to
act in a responsible manner.

87. Some of our colleagues have argued in the
Council that the situation in Namibia does not constitute a threat to international peace and security.
With all due respect to those representatives and the
great countries which they represent, it is difficult
for us and indeed difficult for the people of Africa to
understand the logic behind their assertions. Right
now, as has been repeatedly stated, there is a war
going on in Namibia itself between the freedomfighters and the illegal occupation forces. The South
Africans themselves admit this; the South Africans
themselves say they have military bases in Namibia
to pursue this war. South Africa has consolidated its
military arsenals in Namibia and is waging a war of
repression in that Territory and thus at the same
time posing a direct threat to the peace and security
of the whole region of southern Africa.

92. In its resolution 366 (1974), the Security Council
declared that in the event of South Africa’s noncompliance with this resolution, the Council would
take appropriate measures under the Charter. There
is no doubt that South Africa has failed to comply
with the provisions of that resolution, as I. have clearly
stated. All those who have taken part in the debate
of the Council have attested to this fact, and no one,
either in the Council or outside, can by any stretch
of imagination claim the contrary. Thus; the question
that now arises is: What should the Council do? What
are those measures which this body undertook to take
in order to enforce its decisions? For the Council
cannot remain immobile and retain its credibility as
an organ primarily responsible for the maintenance

88. Free Africa has made no secret of its unequivocal
support for and its solidarity with the liberation moveI1

of international peace and security. The Council must
therefore act, and do so firmly and decisively. It must,
as a minimum, take such measures as will clearly
demonstrate to South Africa its determination not to
abandon our responsibility with regard to the question
of Namibia.

(g) A call for the suspension by all Member States
of any investments in South Africa for the time being
as a clear demonstration to South Africa that this will
continue only until there is a clearer positive response
from South Africa;
(h) The rejection by the Council of any kind of sham
elections and any kind of so-called expressions of
will by the people of Namibia organized by the South
African regime.

93. The Council must insist on the full and scrupulous
implementation of its resolutions, and in particular
the relevant provisions of resolution 366 (1974), which
was adopted with unprecedented unanimity. The
Council cannot afford to equivocate on this. The
oppressed Namibians cry for action. The peace and
security of the continent, as well as international
peace and security, are being put in serious jeopardy.
The very credibility of the Security Council and indeed
of the United Nations is being called in question.

%. We make those proposals with the firm conviction that positive action by the Council will be a crucial
contribution to the solution of the problem of Namibia.
But whether the Council acts firmly, as we hope it will,
or remains immobilized because of the actions of a
few in our midst, the struggle in Namibia will continue.
The issue, therefore, is whether there should be freedom and independence in Namibia with the minimum
sacrifice or whether that freedom must be brought only
by armed confrontation, with all its consequences.
Either way the United Republic of Tanzania, like the
rest of Africa, will support our brothers in Namibia.
But can the Council really afford to be a passive
observer in such a situation? Action on its part will
save thousands of lives and contribute effectively to
the relaxation of international tension. Inaction will
certainly serve to enhance the prospects of further
suffering, bloodshed, and further escalation of tension.
Does the Council really have a choice? We hope that
the Western permanent members of the Security
Council will consider this as they decide their course
of action.

94. The Council therefore has a responsibility to
ensure that its decisions are respected; and it is in this
context that my Government firmly believes that
the time has now come for the Council to adopt enforcement measures against South Africa so as to compel
that rkgime to abide by international law and rules of
conduct. At least, the Council must impose a
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa. Such
action would surely demonstrate the Council’s determination to act, while at the same time reducing
South Africa’s capacity for continued mischief and
defiance of the Organization. Such action would also
give hope and confidence to the struggling people of
Namibia. Above ah, it would enhance the prospects
for a peaceful settlement while reducing the despondency and frustration that must certainly confront the
African people both in Namibia and elsewhere on the
continent should the Security Council fail to take
decisive action on this issue.

97. We must make it absolutely clear that Africa has
not come to the Council with its hands folded. As the
Chairman of the Liberation Committee for Southern
Africa of the OAU, I must emphasize Africa’s belief
in the armed struggle. I should like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to China, to
the Soviet Union and to the other socialist countries
for the material assistance they have rendered to the
liberation movement. We should like to express our
appreciation also to the Scandinavian countries, and
indeed to other peace-loving peoples of the world,
for the aid they have given the liberation struggle in
southern Africa.

95. We also hope that in any measures contemplated
by the Council in the form of a resolution the Council
will include the following:
(~1) The reaffirmation by the Council of the authority
of the United Nations over Namibia;
(h) A clause to the effect that the United Nations
should organize and supervise elections to enable the
people of Namibia freely to determine their own future;

98. In the past when we spoke in these chambers of
the armed struggle, some of the Members of the
Organization did not take us seriously. After the events
in Mozambique, Angola and Guinea-Bissau, we
believe that we can now be taken seriously by both
our friends and our enemies. If we in Africa say-and
we have said it already-that we wish the problem
of Namibia to be solved peacefully, through the United
Nations, we should like both the Council and South
Africa to take our words seriously and believe what
we say. But if, through the attitude of certain members
of the Council, the efforts of Africa are frustrated,
then the armed struggle-l repeat: the armed strugglemust continue.

(c) The complete rejection of Bantustans and a call
to South Africa to abandon that policy;
(d) The reaffirmation of the territorial integrity of
Namibia;
(e) A call for a halt to repression and for the release
of all political prisoners;
v) A call for the dismantling of all military bases in
Namibia set up by the South African rkgime in a United
Nations Territory contrary to the Charter;
12

99. The people of Namibia have already taken up
arms to wage the struggle. The Council has the
responsibility to shorten their suffering. I should like
to say that we in Africa, and indeed the people of
Namibia, do believe that the Council will in fact take
those actions that will shorten the suffering of the
people of Namibia. It is the sincere hope of my
delegation that the people of Namibia and the people
of Africa as a whole will get the support from the
Council that will help to strengthen their faith in the
Security Council and the United Nations.

not that I have pried into any documents, but I believe
that his statement will not be too far removed from the
statements made on the subject by the representatives
of France and the United States.
107. Then I must take into account the statement
made by the representative of the People’s Republic of
China [1825th meeting]. It was very straightforward
-perhaps it was not harsh enough, but it was in the
best Chinese tradition.
108. There remains the Soviet Union, and I am sure
it will take a stand in support of the people of Namibia.

100. The PRESIDENT: I thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania
for the kind remarks he made about my country and
about me personally.

109. Where do we go from there? The pattern is clear.
Shall we continue to. go in circles or shall we break
new ground? Perchance some seeds will germinate
and produce something practical.

101. I have just received from the representative of
Saudi Arabia a letter containing a request that he should
be invited to participate in the discussion in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Security Council’s provisional rules of
procedure. Pursuant to the usual practice I propose,
if I hear no objection, to invite the aforementioned
representative to participate in the discussion without
.the right to vote, in accordance with his request.

110. I submit that I have been actively seized of
thi3 situation since the special session of the General
Assembly of 1967. To recapitulate, I thought it might
be feasible to have two co-administrators from neutral
countries join with South Africa in accelerating the
process of self-determination. My African brothers
were very avid for this and supported the plan until,
unfortunately for them and for us all, the United
States then thought it would encourage the idea of a
Council for Namibia. I would recall to the memory
of my colleagues what Mr. Clemenceau said at the
League of Nations: if you want to kill any item, just
create a committee and refer that item to it. Of course,
it was a council, which one would call a glorified
committee.

It was so decided.

102. I now invite the representative of Saudi Arabia
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
103. Mr. BARROODY (Saudi Arabia): First,
Mr. President, I should like to say that if I were to
congratulate you it would be like congratulating
myself. After all, you hail from the Arab world. The
less said about the qualities you have for assuming the
duties of the presidency of the Council, the better. I am
afraid that if I were to try to enumerate those qualities,
I would not give the complete list, and in any case
praise might be embarrassing to a gentleman who is
as modest as you are. So I shall stop there.

111. I have seen the representatives of Namibia.
They are acting like most of us here, like diplomats
far from the scene of action-with all due respect to
their deep patriotism and their deep desire to see their
country liberated. But I must say that like many of us
they have been peddlars of words without any action.
That is unfortunate. It is a question of power. Those
who wield the power can call the action, and we
Asian and African Powers, I submit, even in our
collectivity, do not wield any power that enables us to
translate our desires into the action of liberation.

104. I have been hesitating about making a statement
on this question ever since it was broached again.
I felt that we might be going around in circles. No
new element has been introduced-I do not consider
Mr. Vorster’s statement [see S///701] to be something
new that opens up an avenue which will lead to
practical results.

112. Those who wield power are not prepared to use
that power. They may be right. I do not say they
should. But let us face the facts. Mr. Scali has told
us that the United States is not even prepared to
resort to sanctions, and he has also told us that the
United States is recommending that no arms be sold
to South Africa. But we know very well that, whether
or not they sell arms to South Africa, South Africa
can obtain arms from other sources. This is not
unusual. I would just recall to memory what happened
in the First World War. Luxembourg sold steel to both
France and Germany, who were at war. And nowadays
what we call embargoes and sanctions do not function
properly. The world is very corrupt, and you can
always find people who are middlemen and who try

105. But I must salute my colleagues, the representatives of France and the United States, for having
made clear and straightforward statements [182&h and
1825th meetings. respectively] and for not having tried
to play politics, so to speak. They said what their
respective countries were prepared to do and what
they were not prepared to do.
106. I have an inkling what my good friend the
representative of the United Kingdom will say. It is
13

to find ways and means of sending the things that are
needed to the embargoed or sanctioned country.

five, six or seven chapters, each divided into several
paragraphs. They injected apartheid and everything
into it that related to the question of Namibia.

113. Let us be practical and face the facts. How do
I know that some of our oil, Arab oil, went to certain
countries? But I do not open the oil question now,
because that might lead us into a digression. There are
ways and means of keeping South Africa strong,
arms-wise.

118. Now I must recall that I submitted two compamtively succinct, draft resolutions: one before the
Council and one before the General Assembly. I am
not talking of the draft resolution of 1967, during the
special session, but the one of last year. During the
month of May I set a target period of six months, or
nine months, during which time the co-administrators
from neutral countries would accelerate the process
of selfdetermination. I was prevailed upon by my good
African brothers to withdraw it because they had
something better. But 1 found it so voluminous; good
Lord, I got lost in it. There are too many cooks
amongst our African brothers. Everybody put in his
pinch of salt and pepper and we lost time.

114. Then we should take into account the genuine
fear of the white people of South Africa. But this,
I submit, should pertain to South Africa as such, not
to Namibia, which since the early 1920s has been
entrusted to South Africa in order to prepare the people
for ultimate self-determination. .
115. In the fertile crescent of the Arab world we
experienced what is implied in mandates. In countries
such as Palestine, Lebanon, Syria and Iraq we had
high commissioners, English or French. They had
puppet governments, too. It was colonialism by proxy.
But even then circumstances changed and events came
about. The Second World War accelerated the full
liberation of those countries and the relative insolvency
of the mandatory Powers. They could not keep their
colonies because the colonial peoples were becoming
aware and could not be kept under the thumb of the
colonial Powers.

119. On the other hand, our Western friends were
placid and content. That is the Anglo-Saxon way. This
is not a digression. 1 marvelled at the freedom of
speech at Hyde Park comer in 1929. They could say
everything. Then it dawned on me, after years and
years, that they were very sagacious, the AngloSaxons. They let everybody say what he wants and
then they know what people think. They note it all
down and note how they are affiliated. Then, when
they constitute a danger, somebody comes and takes
them to Bow Street and fines them-in those day
10 shillings or 21 shillings, before the inflation-for
having done something which might affect public
order. They were great psychologists, those in power,
who thought: let the people who have something
which is troubling them get it off their chests; they will
not be dangerous.

116. Now, do the Western Powers believe that the
people in Namibia are not aware of what is happening
outside and that they may rebel? Do we have to wait
for a rebellion inside a mandated Territory before
we give the people their freedom? I think this is
impractical in modem days, because it might ignite a
conflict which could not be easily contained-the
more so because it so happens that all the Africans
and Asians and, I submit, some of the European
Powers, not to mention China and the Soviet Union,
are behind the people of Namibia. But how? With
words? They are not prepared to have a confrontation,
the major Powers-China, the Soviet Union, the
socialist States and all the conglomeration of Asian
and African States. And that is why those who formulate the policies in Washington and in London and in
Paris take into account the weakness of the Asian
and African States and the desire of socialist States
such as the Soviet Union and the People’s Republic
of China not to have a confrontation with them.
Therefore the whole question is stymied. And why are
we here-just to have the conditions of war in order
to stir ourselves in the Council and do something?
Is that practical? Is that what the United Nations
was predicated on-not dealing with the patient until
he is in the terminal stage?

120. So you Africans and Asians here, you are
playing into the hands of this Anglo-Saxon system.
You come here and blow your tops; you get it off
your chests. My good friend the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania got it off
his chest. He came all the way from Tanzania; and then
there was the representative of Liberia. They are all
good friends and brothers of mine, and I respect
them. They got it off their chests. So our friends
.from the West know what they have in mind. Knowing
that we have no power to wield, they devise new
formulas which perhaps might work after 20 years or
after 30 years, if ever, because as long as Mr. Vorster
lives-I do not know how old he is; he might live to
be IOO-the policy will be the same. Many a serious
thing is said in jest, but this is not a joke. This is
what is happening. What is happening is that nothing
will happen. There will be new resolutions submitted
and the question will be protracted for another period
and there will be no result.

117. Then the United Nations would die, not necessarily actually die, but the essence of it would fade
out. What is the solution? No doubt there will be a
couple of resolutions. I admonished my African friends
for having produced a voluminous resolution, with

121. I am not going to go into all the subtleties of
what was said by our friends, who need time to
persuade Mr. Vorster. They are self evident. The
argument is self-evident. We cannot use sanctions,
14

they said. We belong to parliamentary systems, they
said, and if our Congress or Parliament does not agree
to sanctions, we are democratic regimes and we have
to go by what the people want. These are elected
representatives.

under a foreign yoke? Because there are so many
tribes and we should see whether we can make them
agree by referendum or by any other means on a
form of government? This can go on and on and on.
128. Why should South Africa do it by itself7 That
is why, ever since 1967 I have thought we should have
two co-administrators, from two neutral countries
-because we did not trust South Africa, and I told
Mr. Muller, in the lounge, that we did not trust themto accelerate the process of self-determination. In
fairness to Mr. Muller, he was toying with the idea.
He said: “I cannot promise you we will accept, but
we will think about it.” But instead we have had
the Council for Namibia, and the Council will remain
with us for many years-not that I have anything
against the members of the Council; do not get me
wrong: they are fine people. But they are getting
to be the traditional type of diplomat: some of them
wear French cuffs and they act like traditional
diplomats. Let us face facts: we want people who have
a sense of innovation, of something new, to attack the
problem from its roots, rather than to use pruning
shears.

122. I know this formula very well. And then where
are we? We are left by the wayside on this question,
we Africans and Asians. What shall we do? We should
do something that is against my own principles. After
all, we should all be dedicated to peace, but it seems
that without a struggle you cannot win peace. It is
contradictory.
123. Do the South Africans and the Western Powers
who support them expect that things will remain as
they are, notwithstanding the OAU and the support it
receives from Asia, and from Latin America-for I am
sure that many are sympathetic to the cause of
Namibian liberation.
124. Shall we try to activate the question by the use
of force, against the principles and purposes of the
United Nations? Is this the only answer? If we have
no other alternative, what can we do but try and arm
the people there, or have activists who will resort to
force, which would be deplorable.

129. Baroody will surprise you and not speak for a
full hour. It is going to be six o’clock, and you all
can go and have your cocktail, or what have you.
But, once and for all, please-and here, with all due
respect, I would paraphrase the words of Shakespeare-let us be true to ourselves as diplomats and
not just wear the straitjacket of instructions from our
Governments. Of course, they would dismiss us if we
did not, but perhaps some people would like to be
dismissed now that New York is bankrupt. But that is
not the point. Let us be true to ourselves and try
and advise our Governments that this is becoming
the laughing stock of the world, and see to it that they
do not tell us, “Tell those people that we have to ask
the Congress”, or the Parliament, with all due respect
to my good friend from France, “to have contacts,
a sort of liaison”. It is all very good, but with what
result? And where is the Secretary-General? He is
not here today: he has Cyprus; he has I do not know
what; everything is put on his shoulders.

125. But what is the alternative, can you tell me?
Is it just making speeches here in the Security Council
and from the podium of the General Assembly, just,
as we say in Arabic, trying to start a fire by blowing
into the ashes of an empty hearth? I have a few
suggestions to make and I am going to speak again
on this question. I am not going to leave it to float
around in such a miasma. We are all responsible
here, not only to our respective Governments but to
the peoples of the world, because the Charter starts
with the words “We the peoples of the United
Nations*‘; and I am speaking in terms of belonging to
the peoples of the world, not only as a representative
of a country, Saudi Arabia.
126. To begin with, I will await the emergence of any
draft resolution, which I will study carefully in my
humble capacity as a member of the Organization
and, in the light of my past experience, which goes
back to the days when some of my friends and
I elaborated the principle of self-determination into a
full-fledged right, between 1948 and 1956. I will have to
address myself to the practical ways and means by
which this imbroglio will be resolved-because it is
becoming an imbroglio.

130. Let us have two co-administrators, neither from
among the Western Powers nor from among the
Socialist countries but from countries like Sweden,
like Switzerland, which are neutral-Austria, perhaps,
but not the Secretary-General. Do not burden him too
much: he would not be able to handle it. And let them
be sent to Mr. Vorster to find out from him what he
intends to do. I have read the letter, with its vague
statements. It is like a slippery fish: once you think
you are getting it, it jumps out of your hand back
into the ocean. We are only fooling ourselves with
rationalizations. But that does not work any more:
the whole world-the people-are aware of this. Who
are we Governments here? We :.>me and go. You
cannot sell these ideas t3 the peoples of the worici
any more. Thank God they are rware, because Gove.rn-

127. And how do we expect the Western Powers
which are supporting Mr. Vorster to persuade him
when he can hide behind the Charter and say nobody
is allowed to interfere in the domestic affairs of
another State? He can dismiss it simply by such a
statement. But Namibia is not his State: it is a
Mandated Territory. All the colonial Territories have
been liberated, so why should the Namibians still be
15
.

.

ments are expendable; they change their policies
according to the circumstances. But people of every
country, especially the young, have minds of their
own; and, sooner or later-ifnot already, in Namibiathey are aroused. That is why we opt for the liberation
of Namibia within a certain period of time.

because if we use only the cliches of diplomacy we
get nowhere.
135. A last warning, before I wind up this statement.
This question of Namibia might activate many Africans
against Western interests-not the Governments, mind
you, but the people of Africa. They will say, “Those
Westerners are against us-why should we trade with
them, why should we do business with them? How
do I know? I know because in the Arab world I have
been accosted. One man asked me, “Why do you live
in America?‘* I said, “I am in the United Nations.”
He probably did not know the United Nations. He
was a simple man. He said, “Move it to some other
place-those Americans are our enemies.” I said,
“No, the American people are/nice people, like
everybody else.” The people, rightly or wrongly,
will arise and trample on us Governments, and rightly
so if we go against their wishes day in and day out.
Do not think it is a simple question. What are Govemments? Today they are here and tomorrow they are
gone, but not the people, unless the major Powers
want to use the atom bomb and bring the world to
an end. That is another question, and we are not
concerned with that now. We will speak about it in
the First Committee of the General Assembly. This is
a warning. The people cannot put up any longer with
all this dilly-dallying and shilly-shallying. It is high
time. As Shakespeare said, anyone who is true to
himself cannot be false to any other man. I am paraphrasing, not quoting textually.

131. If they had listened to me in 1967, when I
proposed a target date of six or seven years hence,
the Namibian people--or, as we called them then,
the people of South-West Africa-would already be
free. No. We have a Council here; we want everything
at one time; yet we have still got nothing. When I say
“we”, I mean the Africans and the Asians who were
supporting that idea of liberating the Mandated
Territory.
132. It does not matter whether we call them coadministrators or emissaries, if you prefer, as long as
they are from neutral countries. But they should be
sent to work out something practical and stay there
-unless Mr. Vorster tells them they are persona non
grotu-to get a proclamation, not a letter, that he will
abide by a plan whereby, by a certain target date--let
it be a year, two years, three years hence, as long as
we know where we stand-South Africa will hand over
all authority to the people of the Mandated Territory.
133. There is no other alternative. Otherwise, they
will be fooling themselves, not us. We cannot be
fooled any more. “There are certain modalities to be
observed”; “we should see what this tribe is.” It is
all economic and financial. Politics revolve around
financial and economic interests. All right. As I said
to the Western Powers, “We will see to it that your
financial and economic interests are protected.” After
all, it is better for the Namibians to deal with the
South Africans than to get somebody from elsewhere,
because they know each other. We have an Arabic
proverb. It is about the shepherd who says: “I do not
want my flock to perish, but I do not want the wolf
to get hungry either.” Well, satisfy the wolf--those
who have financial interests-but not at the expense
of the whole flock of sheep.

136. I thank you, Sir, and members of the Council
for having been patient with me. I have something
else which is more serious to say, but I think I will
leave it until the next meeting.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.
Notes
I

See Q#kial

Records

of

the

General

Session, Plenary Meetings, 2250th meeting.

Assembly.

Twenty-ninth

2 Q@cial Reckis
of the General Assembly, Twenty-Eighth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 2133rd meeting, para. 154.
’ L.egal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
South Aftica in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council resolution 276 (1970). Advisory Opinion, 1.C.J.
Reports 1971, p. 16.
4 Oficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session,
Supplement No. 23. vol. II. chapter X, annex.

134. What are we talking about, always in diplomatic
cliches? I have to be unorthodox in my approach,

16

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Natiom publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Cons& your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dam les librairies et les agtnces d+ositaires du
moxie entier. Informez-vous auprb de votre libraire ou adressez-vous g : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou GcnPve.

COMO CONSECUlR

PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas.
NUCM York o Ginebra.

Litbo in United Nations. New York

00400

82-6 1202-November

1983-2,200
