S/PV.9098

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9098th meeting

Monday, 25 July 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Almeida Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-43749 (E)
*2243749*

S/PV.9098

The situation in Libya

was also consensus on the establishment of provinces
according to Libya’s existing electoral districts and on a
revenue-distribution mechanism. Furthermore, the two
leaders charted a road map, with timelines and a series
of steps leading to the holding of national elections.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Martha Ama
Akyaa Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa in
the Departments of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
and Peace Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Pobee.
Ms. Pobee: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council on recent
developments in Libya.
The overall situation in Libya remains highly
volatile. Despite the progress achieved, the
constitutional and political stalemate persists,
prolonging the tense security environment, with an
increased number of clashes in and around Tripoli.
The economic situation remains dire, exacerbated by
the politicization of the National Oil Corporation. We
have witnessed demonstrations by frustrated Libyans
over the lack of progress on elections and poor State
services. In addition, the human rights situation in the
country still remains of serious concern.
Since the previous briefing to the Security Council
(S/PV.9078), on 27 June, progress has been made on
the constitutional track. Special Adviser Williams
convened a high-level meeting between the Speaker
of the House of Representatives and the President of
the High State Council. The meeting took place at the
United Nations in Geneva from 28 to 29 June.
The leadership of the two Chambers overcame
important contentious points and outstanding provisions
of the 2017 constitutional proposal, and concurred on
some of the transitional measures that would lead to the
holding of national elections. The two leaders agreed
on a bicameral legislature, as well as on defining the
responsibilities of the President, the Prime Minister,
the Cabinet of Ministers and local government. There
2/17

25/07/2022

Despite the promising progress achieved, one
outstanding issue prevented the finalization of the
agreement in Geneva. The parties did not reach
consensus on the question of eligibility requirements
for presidential candidates.
Special Adviser Williams has remained in contact
with the parties, and urges them to bridge that gap. On
21 July, she attended a meeting of international partners
in Istanbul. She reiterated that the only lasting solution
that places Libya firmly on the path towards peace
and stability, including resolving the current political
crisis and restoring legitimacy to Libyan institutions,
is through the holding of national elections as soon as
possible. We again call on the members of the Security
Council and all Libya’s international partners to
continue to exercise their influence on the two leaders
to reach a final agreement that would allow elections to
be held as soon as possible.
On 1 July, demonstrations were held across Libya,
including in Tripoli, Benghazi, Al-Bayda and Tobruk.
The Parliament building in Tobruk was stormed and
damaged. Protestors expressed their frustration with
the continuing political divisions and the deterioration
of their living conditions. They demanded the swift
holding of elections and solutions to the country’s
electricity crisis and fuel shortage. We urge Libya’s
political leaders to heed the calls of their people and
demonstrate responsible leadership by addressing
their grievances.
The continued political divisions, including the
crisis over the executive and sovereign institutions,
are prolonging the tense security environment in
and around Tripoli. As the armed groups continue to
position themselves in support of either Mr. Dbeibah
or Mr. Bashagha, the risk of escalation increases.
Military activity has also increased in the western
region, especially on the eastern flank of Tripoli, in
Misrata and on the outskirts of Sirte. We are deeply
concerned about the armed clashes in Tripoli that took
place on the night of 21 July and the skirmishes in
Misrata on 23 July among armed groups, resulting in an
unconfirmed number of civilian casualties. We reiterate
the importance of maintaining the ceasefire in Libya
22-43749

25/07/2022

The situation in Libya

and urge all the parties to exercise maximum restraint
and address disputes through peaceful dialogue. We
also remind all the parties of their obligations under
international humanitarian law to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
I welcomed the resumption of the activities of the
5+5 Joint Military Commission and the holding of
meetings in Cairo and Tripoli between the military
commanders of the Libyan Army. I commend their
calls for maintaining calm and stability in the country,
as well as their efforts to unify the military institutions.
I am also pleased to report that the Libyan monitors,
together with the international monitors of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
conducted two joint workshops in Tunis in June and
July to operationalize the Libyan-led and Libyanowned ceasefire monitoring mechanism. The UNSMIL
ceasefire monitoring component, the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission and the Libyan monitors plan to meet in
Sirte in early August to finalize a proposed plan for
the withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries.
On that occasion they also intend to activate a joint
operations room.
We are concerned about the ongoing disagreement
over the leadership of the National Oil Corporation.
On 12 July, Mr. Dbeibah appointed Farhat Bengdara,
the former Governor of the Central Bank of Libya, as
the new Chairperson of the National Oil Corporation.
He replaced Mustafa Sanalla, who had headed the
Corporation since 2015. Mr. Sanalla rejected the
decision to replace him and intends to take up the matter
with the Libyan judiciary. Meanwhile, Libya resumed
oil exports on 19 July. The shutdown that began on
16 April had reduced Libyan oil exports by two thirds
and cost the country $4 billion in lost revenue. It is too
soon to confirm whether oil production will be resumed
at full capacity and whether changes at the National Oil
Corporation will further affect oil production and export.
We underline the need for the National Oil Corporation
to remain neutral and free from the pressure of political
interests. We call on all the relevant actors to overcome
their differences with a view to ensuring the full
exploitation of the country’s oilfields. We also reiterate
that Libya’s natural resources belong to all Libyans.
Revenues from oil exports should be distributed evenly
and utilized fairly to enhance service delivery. The
United Nations reiterates its call to all actors to avoid
actions that would cause a regression in the levels of oil
production and export at this critical juncture.

S/PV.9098

The human rights situation in Libya remains of
serious concern. The dire economic situation has had a
negative impact on people’s fundamental right to basic
services and access to food, water, sanitation, health
care and education. In addition, UNSMIL has received
reports that medical facilities lack oxygen supplies
for surgeries and critical care and that clinics across
the country have faced severe challenges owing to the
extended power cuts and lack of fuel for generators. The
Mission also received reports that dozens of protesters
who participated in the 1 July demonstrations were
arbitrarily arrested by armed groups. The United
Nations emphasizes the fundamental right to peaceful
assembly, association and freedom of expression and
calls for the release of all who have been arbitrarily
detained. The increase in incidents of violence against
women during Eid al-Fitr, including the murder of at
least six women, including one girl, in Benghazi in
eastern Libya, and Ain Zara and the city of Gharyan in
western Libya, must be condemned.
Meanwhile, the civic space continues to be eroded,
with arbitrary restrictions still being imposed on civilsociety organizations. Politically active women and men
defending human rights are targeted with hate speech
and incitement to violence, compromising their safety
and security. We remain concerned about the continued
detention of nine civil-society and humanitarian
workers arrested between November 2021 and February
2022 for peacefully exercising their right to freedom of
expression. On 6 July, four of those arbitrarily detained
persons were once again not permitted to attend their
second scheduled court hearing.
UNSMIL has continued to receive reports of
serious allegations of torture being inflicted on Libyans,
migrants and asylum-seekers in detention facilities and
prisons. UNSMIL observed a wave of discrimination,
expulsions and arbitrary arrests of migrants while they
celebrated the holiday in the western Libyan cities of
Zuwarah, Zawiyah, Tripoli, Misrata and Sabratah. It was
particularly worrying that a radio station in Zawiyah
broadcast hate speech against migrants, asserting that
they were responsible for spreading diseases. The
Libyan authorities must investigate all allegations
of torture and other human rights violations. Those
responsible must be held accountable domestically
or, as applicable, by international justice mechanisms
such as the International Criminal Court. Against that
backdrop, I welcomed the recent nine-month extension
of the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya

22-437493/17

S/PV.9098

The situation in Libya

and the findings of its recent report (A/HRC/50/63),
which includes recommendations on the human rights
situation there.
While the main priority of the United Nations
in Libya continues to be facilitating a return to the
electoral process, we should continue supporting
and encouraging Libyan counterparts to focus on
effectively addressing the key drivers of the political
and economic stalemate, including those that triggered
the 1 July demonstrations. The message from the young
Libyans to their leadership was that more must be
done to improve their living conditions and that they
want elections to be held as soon as possible so that
they can choose their legitimate representatives. We
also emphasize the readiness of the United Nations
to support the African Union’s efforts to organize a
national reconciliation conference. In that regard, we
welcomed the recent technical-level meeting held in
Brazzaville at the initiative of President Denis Sassou
Nguesso, bringing together the African Union and other
partners in its support.
We count on the members of the Council and the
wider international community to continue supporting
the United Nations in its efforts to facilitate a mutually
agreeable solution that will put an end to the continuing
crisis in Libya.
The President: I thank Ms. Pobee for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Ms. Pobee for her briefing today. I would also
like to pay tribute to Stephanie Williams’ dedication to
her role and to welcome the Secretary-General’s efforts
to find a new Special Representative.
I would like to make four points.
First, the United Kingdom is concerned about the
recent violence in Tripoli and Misrata. The preservation
of peace has been one of the successes of the past two
years. There needs to be de-escalation to ensure that
relative peace continues. Combined with the protests that
took place earlier this month, those events demonstrate
the urgent need for the delivery of a Libyan-led and
Libyan-owned inclusive political process. Libyan
parties need to compromise and agree on a pathway to
achieve parliamentary and presidential elections.
4/17

25/07/2022

Secondly, we urge Libyan actors to refrain from
the politicization of State institutions, including the
National Oil Corporation. The Libyan people need
to see the full resumption of oil production and the
equitable distribution of the State’s oil wealth. However,
that should not come at the expense of the integrity
and independence of the National Oil Corporation,
or jeopardize Libya’s progress towards stability,
sovereignty and national unity.
Thirdly, as Ms. Pobee said, it is imperative that
authorities respect and protect human rights across
Libya. The United Kingdom remains very concerned
about the human rights abuses and violations identified
in the most recent interim report of the Independent
Fact-Finding Mission on Libya, as well as the recent
crackdowns on civil society. Libyan authorities must
build and deliver mechanisms that safeguard human
rights and enable civil society to flourish as a key
component of accountability.
Fourthly, the United Kingdom welcomes the
European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation
IRINI’s interdiction of a vessel carrying military
vehicles intended for Libya and underscores the
responsibility of all Member States to fully comply
with the United Nations arms embargo on Libya.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom reaffirms its
readiness to work with Libya and all international
partners on a constructive way forward, both on the
ground in Libya and in the Security Council.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Martha Pobee for
her briefing today. I also welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Libya in today’s meeting.
We are closely following the developments in
Libya. The recent protests and continuing political
disagreements are a matter of concern. We welcome
the progress made at the meeting between the President
of the House of Representatives and the Head of the
High State Council held in Geneva last month. It is
imperative that all outstanding political issues be
resolved peacefully by the parties concerned, while
keeping in mind the greater interests of the Libyan
people. We hope that all parties will work together to
maintain peace and stability in Libya. In that regard, we
also take note of the meetings held among the military
leaders in Tripoli last week.
22-43749

25/07/2022

The situation in Libya

The immediate priority for Libya is to hold
presidential and parliamentary elections at the earliest
opportunity in a free, fair, inclusive and credible
manner. We look forward to an early consensus among
the Libyan parties on the constitutional basis for
holding the elections. The reports of clashes and the
continued mobilization and activity of armed groups
are a worrisome sign. There are real risks of losing the
momentum generated on the ground by the signing of
the ceasefire agreement.
We remain concerned about the resurgence of
terrorist activity in Libya and reiterate that terrorist
groups and affiliated entities must not be allowed to
operate unchallenged in Libya. That menace is bound
to have cascading effects on the Sahel region. It is
therefore important for the international community
to focus on it now and nip it in the bud at this stage
so as to avoid the collateral consequences of terrorism
in Africa.
The critical necessity of the full and complete
withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries cannot
be overemphasized. We have yet to see signs of tangible
progress on that count. The continued presence of foreign
forces and mercenaries is detrimental to the peace and
stability of the country and the region. In that regard, we
express serious concern about the repeated violations
of the arms embargo in Libya. In its recent report, the
Panel of Experts of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) categorically pointed out that
“[t]he remainder of the training provided by Turkey
to the Government of National Unity Affiliated
Forces is military or naval in nature and thus a
violation of paragraph 9 of resolution 1970 (2011)”
(S/2022/427, para. 77).
Moreover, in the same report, the Panel of
Experts also
“noted the continuous presence of Turkish-backed
Syrian fighters in Government of National UnityAffiliated Forces military camps in Tripoli” (ibid.,
para. 30).
We reiterate that the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Libya needs to be safeguarded. The political
process must be fully Libyan-led and Libyan-owned,
with no imposition of external interference.
In conclusion, let me underscore that India has
traditionally enjoyed close and mutually beneficial
bilateral ties with the Libyan people and we remain

S/PV.9098

committed to supporting Libya and the Libyan
people in their endeavour to bring about lasting peace
and stability.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the three African members of
the Security Council — Gabon, Ghana and Kenya (A3).
We thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha
Pobee for her briefing and welcome the participation of
Ambassador Taher Elsonni, Permanent Representative
of Libya.
We acknowledge the continued useful efforts
of the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General for
Libya, Ms. Stephanie Williams, in furthering the
dialogue between the joint committee of the House of
Representatives and the High State Council.
We note the progress made during the consultations
on Libya’s constitutional track held on 28 and 29 June
in Geneva, under the auspices of the United Nations.
We reiterate that a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
dialogue is the only option for achieving a sustainable
solution to the crisis. To that end, the A3 commends the
representatives of the two chambers for their efforts to
reach consensus and urges them to build on what they
have achieved.
We also welcome the meeting between General
Mohamed Al-Haddad and General Abdel-Razek
Al-Nadori, which builds on the work of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission (JMC) and the commitments by
the parties to ensuring that the ceasefire holds. It is
crucial that the representatives of both sides continue
to work on the formation of a unified structure for
the army and agree on the appointment of a single
Commander-in-Chief.
We acknowledge the commitment of the Head of
the High State Council and the Deputy Head of the
Presidential Council to reviewing the road map initiative
for parliamentary and presidential elections, which will
help to identify ways to resolve their differences and
move forward with the constitutional track.
We are closely following the meetings held by
Libya’s High National Elections Commission to discuss
the development of the voter registration system and
ways to improve it for the upcoming electoral period. It
is important that an agreement be reached on election
laws as soon as possible in order to enable the eagerly
anticipated elections to take place.

22-437495/17

S/PV.9098

The situation in Libya

Those recent events have demonstrated that Libyans
can work together across the political divide to achieve
peace and security. We must strive to ensure that those
processes are inclusive, nationally owned and free from
any external interference.
However, we call upon the relevant Libyan
institutions
and
authorities
to
implement
confidence-building measures in order to create
an environment conducive for successful national
presidential and parliamentary elections, including
by ensuring the full, equal, effective and meaningful
participation of women and the inclusion of youth
and civil society representatives in all activities and
decision-making relating to democracy.
It is for that reason that the African Union’s
commitment to support an inclusive and comprehensive
national reconciliation process is so important. We
urge all Security Council members to embed that
initiative in the mandate of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), reflecting its anticipated
operationalization by resolution 2510 (2020).
We note with concern the recent clashes between
armed groups in Tripoli, which resulted in civilian
casualties. We urge the leadership and the people of
Libya to exercise restraint, shun violence and seek to
resolve their differences by peaceful means.
The continued presence of foreign fighters and
mercenaries in Libya can add to insecurity. All
responsible parties should therefore support the
initiative of the 5+5 JMC to develop arrangements
and a national action plan for their withdrawal.
That withdrawal requires close monitoring and
coordination to ensure corresponding disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in their countries of
origin. The utmost care should be taken to ensure that
the process does not create an environment conducive
for recruitment into terrorist groups. It is therefore
imperative that there be close coordination with the
neighbouring states, in liaison with relevant regional
and subregional mechanisms.
We reiterate our deep concern about the suffering
of thousands of migrants and refugees in Libya. The
persistent interception and return to Libyan ports of
migrants crossing the Mediterranean in search of a
better life in Europe is not a sustainable solution; neither
is the application of resources to the establishment of
inhumane holding areas for them in Libya.
6/17

25/07/2022

We condemn the inhumane treatment the migrants
are subjected to on land and sea and demand that those
involved desist from such abuses of human rights
and adhere to their commitments under international
humanitarian law. We equally condemn the provision of
resources and targeted information in support of such
treatment. Those involved must abide by the relevant
international laws and norms governing migration and
the treatment of refugees. They must also cooperate
with the international community in consideration of
viable ways of addressing the root causes of migration.
UNSMIL must be well structured and effectively
led in order to enable the Council to adequately
support Libya. We therefore reiterate Africa’s strong
recommendation for the filling of the position of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General with a
candidate from Africa at the earliest opportunity.
We also look forward to the substantial renewal of
the UNSMIL mandate in order to safeguard the gains so
far, signal the Security Council’s support and pave way
for the implementation of envisaged improvements under
the mandate. The people of Libya deserve a Mission
that can facilitate and support the necessary dialogue,
not one held hostage by geopolitical considerations.
Finally, we urge that any action on Libya’s frozen
assets be undertaken in consultation with the Libyan
authorities in order to ensure that the country’s frozen
assets are preserved for the eventual return to, and for
the benefit of, its citizens.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our commitment to a
truly Libyan-led and -owned peace process and our
respect for Libya’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha
Pobee for her briefing and welcome the Permanent
Representative of Libya.
Mexico expresses its concern about the deteriorating
security situation in Libya. The intensification of
fighting among militias in Tripoli represents a serious
risk for the civilian population and an obstacle to efforts
to stabilize the country.
Without clear prospects for the future of the
political process, the popular discontent that has been
expressed on the streets over the past month will
probably increase. We believe that the Libyan people
have clearly expressed their will to elect a Government
that meets the real needs of the population. It is now up
22-43749

25/07/2022

The situation in Libya

to those in positions of power to listen to that message
and to resume preparations for free, credible and
inclusive elections as soon as possible.
The Security Council, for its part, must take into
account the lessons learned from recent initiatives to
facilitate a dialogue between Libyan political actors.
Without the unanimous support of the Security Council,
the efforts led by the Secretary-General on the ground
will be more limited. Let us work together to move
forward on this complex dynamic afflicting Libya. We
know all too well that a resumption of hostilities would
have a very serious impact on the whole region.
In recent months it has become clear that some
Libyan political actors lack genuine commitment
to build a country that moves towards peace. At this
critical time for Libya’s future, the international
community must strictly enforce the decisions of the
Security Council. It is up to the Council to use the
tools at its disposal to ensure that those obstructing the
political process do not continue to act with impunity.
Recent reports of possible shipments of military
equipment to Libya, in clear contravention of Council
resolutions, are worrisome. We call on all States
to cooperate with the European Union Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI in order to prevent
weapons from continuing to fuel violence in Libya,
and we call for investigations of all vessels suspected
of transporting military equipment to Libya. We recall
that the authorization for this European operation can
be used by any State or regional organization to monitor
compliance with the arms embargo.
Mexico also welcomes the recent meeting between
Generals Al-Haddad and Al-Nadori in Tripoli. We call
on the parties to move towards the unification of the
security forces and the comprehensive implementation
of the ceasefire, within the framework of the work being
carried out by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. My
country reiterates the importance of a coordinated
withdrawal of foreign fighters and mercenaries as soon
as possible.
Finally, we urge the authorities to respect their
obligations under international human rights law.
Recent reports of arbitrary arrests and disappearances
of protesters must be investigated and, if proved, the
perpetrators must be punished. Justice and the rule of
law are the best tools to break the cycle of violence and
to lay the foundation for genuine national reconciliation
in Libya.

S/PV.9098

Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Pobee
for her briefing. We welcome reports of considerable
progress made in Cairo and Geneva by delegations from
the House of Representatives and High Council of State
towards an agreement on a constitutional framework
for elections, and we credit Special Adviser Stephanie
Williams for her role in facilitating that progress.
It is unfortunate that the Speaker of the House of
Representatives Speaker, Aqilah Salah and the President
of the High State Council, Khalid Al-Mishri, were unable
to come to agreement on the eligibility requirements for
candidates in the presidential elections. We urge them
to maintain dialogue and redouble their efforts to reach
agreement on outstanding matters. These issues are the
same as those that derailed elections in December.
It is past time for Libya’s leaders to set aside
personal interests and implement a plan that ends
with free and fair elections in line with the road map
established by the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum.
Delays do a disservice to the Libyan people, who are
demanding their rightful opportunity to choose leaders
who will deliver transparent governance.
Delays are also dangerous, creating opportunities
for political maneuvering and miscalculations that
can increase tension and lead to violence. The turmoil
surrounding Libya’s oil sector is an example. The use
of hydrocarbon revenue to buy support from militias
and foreign mercenaries increases the armed presence
in cities and is destabilizing. The politically motivated
shutdown of Libyan oil production has robbed the Libyan
people of revenues derived from their natural resources.
The prospect of resuming oil production will be
welcomed by Libyans and the international community.
But the international community must ensure
production does in fact resume, and when it does, we
must ensure that the integrity of the Libyan National Oil
Corporation as an apolitical institution is maintained
and that revenues are managed in a transparent and
accountable manner.
These developments take place concurrently with
a disappointing step back in the reunification of the
Central Bank of Libya. While we applauded the recent
initiative of the Central Bank to release more detailed
monthly statements, which should reduce suspicion
among leadership factions and build public trust in the
bank, we are concerned that steps toward reunification

22-437497/17

S/PV.9098

The situation in Libya

have stalled, amid reports that the eastern-based branch
is seeking to print currency abroad.
Also deeply disturbing are shows of force by
militias and the attendant sporadic violence, all in
service of political maneuvering. We urge all sides to
refrain from unilateral actions that will lead to violence.
We welcome the Human Rights Council’s extension of
the mandate of the Independent Fact-Finding Mission
on Libya, which is an important step in continuing to
document human rights violations and abuses in support
of transitional justice and a more durable resolution to
the conflict.
The most effective mechanism to reduce the risk of
widespread violence is the demobilization of militias
and the immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces,
fighters and mercenaries. This includes Russia’s
Wagner Group, which operates both in Libya and across
Africa, which it accesses from its bases in eastern and
southern Libya.
The United Nations role in supporting Libya
through its political, economic and security challenges
is critical. It is now time for this Council to provide
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
with a clear and comprehensive one-year mandate so
the Mission can work confidently to address the many
issues facing Libya. We call on all members to engage
constructively in negotiations towards a comprehensive
mandate and vote to adopt a resolution that reflects the
views of the vast majority of the Security Council.
Council members are engaged with the SecretaryGeneral as he works to nominate a candidate for
Special Representative. Refusing to allow a substantive
12-month mandate until the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General is in place will only result
in hobbling UNSMIL at a critical moment, when
effective leadership could be instrumental in sealing
an agreement to hold elections. If we allow this to
happen, we will be allowing Council members to hold
a mandate-renewal hostage as a means of achieving
political aims. That would be a dangerous precedent,
and one we have seen play out on other files in recent
weeks. We ask that all Council members adopt a more
constructive approach that empowers UNSMIL with
the resources and political guidance needed to succeed.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for her briefing.
8/17

25/07/2022

France would like to see a rapid resolution of the
executive-power crisis in Libya. The status quo is not
sustainable; it carries risks for the country’s stability.
The tensions between militias, which are increasing
in the Tripolitania region, are proof of that. This crisis
must be resolved, and a unified Government capable of
conducting the electoral process throughout the country
must be established.
It is also urgent to put Libya back on the path to
elections. France supports the efforts of the United
Nations to reach an agreement between the two
Chambers on a constitutional basis in order to allow
presidential and parliamentary elections to be held as
soon as possible. It calls on the Libyan actors to rapidly
finalize an agreement, particularly on the criteria
for eligibility.
The arms embargo must finally be respected.
The European Union military operation in the
Mediterranean (Operation IRINI) makes it possible to
ensure this in practice, as was recently demonstrated by
action against a ship that violated the embargo.
France calls for the full implementation of the
ceasefire agreement. This requires the withdrawal of
all foreign forces and mercenaries as soon as possible,
in accordance with the Libyan action plan, as well as
the implementation of a demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration process, in conjunction with the
countries of the region.
We welcome the meeting in Tripoli between
Generals Haddad and Nadhouri as part of the work of
the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. This is a further
step towards the reunification of Libya’s military and
security institutions, which demonstrates a strong
commitment to the stabilization of the country and
Libya’s sovereignty.
France welcomes the reopening of the oil
terminals. The resumption of production and exports
is an important step. France will continue to support
a fair and transparent redistribution of revenues for
the benefit of the population as a whole. We welcome
the renewal of the mandate of the Independent FactFinding Mission on Libya, which is essential to the
fight against impunity. This is first and foremost the
responsibility of the Libyan authorities, who must
establish independent and strong judicial institutions.
France calls on the Libyan parties to cooperate fully
with the International Criminal Court, in accordance
with resolution 1970 (2011).
22-43749

25/07/2022

The situation in Libya

Finally, as the mandate of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) approaches
its end, France calls for a substantial renewal of its
mandate in order to take into account developments
in the situation over the past year. It commends the
work of the Special Adviser and reiterates its call for
the appointment of a Special Representative without
further delay in order to avoid a vacancy at the helm of
the United Nations mediation.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): Let me thank the briefer
today, Assistant Secretary-General Pobee. I would
also like to recognize the Permanent Representative of
Libya, who is with us today.
Ireland is gravely concerned about the violence
in Tripoli and Misrata last week, resulting in civilian
casualties. We express our deepest condolences to the
victims and their loved ones. This incident demonstrates
how precarious the security situation in Libya has
become. We call on all actors to refrain fully from any
escalatory actions and preserve the fragile stability in
place since the October 2020 ceasefire agreement.
We commend the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
(JMC) for its ongoing exemplary efforts on a number
of key security issues and welcome the recent meeting
with military leaders.
The seizure last week of a vessel likely to be
in violation of the United Nations arms embargo
by the European Union military operation in the
Mediterranean (Operation IRINI) further demonstrates
the crucial role Operation IRINI plays in contributing
to the embargo’s implementation.
Ireland hopes to see a substantive renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) this week. Special Adviser Williams
has done a commendable job in brokering an agreement
between the parties on many sensitive issues. However,
last week’s events show the need for a fully mandated
UNSMIL, with its leadership agreed and in place.
We call on the Security Council to show flexibility
in facilitating the appointment of a new Special
Representative at the earliest opportunity.
Last month, the presidents of the House of
Representatives and the High Council of State met in
Geneva under United Nations auspices to review the
outstanding provisions of the 2017 Constitution. While
the two sides made progress, as we have heard, building
upon the JMC talks in Cairo, it is very disappointing

S/PV.9098

that they did not bridge the remaining gaps to settle on
a constitutional basis for elections. We strongly urge all
Libyan actors to intensify dialogue towards resolving
outstanding issues to deliver for the Libyan people.
The findings of the third report of the Independent
Fact-Finding Mission on Libya (FFM) make for
disturbing reading. We are particularly troubled
by incidents of sexual and gender-based violence,
including against migrants. We call upon the authorities
to address the failure of domestic legal frameworks
to protect survivors and to improve and increase
support structures.
Libyan women are facing extreme barriers to
meaningful participation in their country’s political
transition. Even the use of the term “feminist” has
become grounds for investigation and arrest. We sadly
recalled the third anniversary last week of the abduction
and enforced disappearance of Siham Sergewa. We call
for accountability for her disappearance and condemn
all acts that attempt to silence women’s voices.
The FFM’s work, along with the renewed
investigation of the International Criminal Court, is
an important step towards delivering accountability
and providing redress. This is crucial for the pursuit
of peace, justice and reconciliation. We welcomed the
consensus renewal of the FFM’s mandate at Human
Rights Council earlier this month.
A free and safe civic space is indispensable to
the growth and sustenance of democracy. Recent
demonstrations by Libyans, many of them youth-led,
should serve as a wake-up call for Libyan leaders to put
the needs and aspirations of their people first. It goes
without saying that protests should remain peaceful,
and security forces must exercise maximum restraint
and act in compliance with human rights obligations.
We also stress the importance of the fair and transparent
management — free from political interference — of
Libya’s resources and public wealth.
In conclusion, a Libyan-owned and Libyan-led
process facilitated by the United Nations establishing a
constitutional basis that paves the way for free, fair and
inclusive national elections is the only way to overcome
the current political deadlock. Libyans deserve a safe
and prosperous future. It is past time for this.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Pobee for her briefing. We also welcome the

22-437499/17

S/PV.9098

The situation in Libya

presence of the Permanent Representative of Libya at
today’s meeting.
We continue to give our full support to the
United Nations and Special Adviser Williams. The
Special Adviser’s efforts to facilitate negotiations on a
constitutional framework for elections are critical.
Recent developments in Libya are extremely
concerning. The fighting in Tripoli and Misrata over
the weekend clearly demonstrates how unstable the
security situation is.
We call on all parties to protect civilians, including
children, in accordance with international law. The
protection of civilians is critical to fostering sustainable
peace. It is clear that the lack of a unified executive
government and Libyan leaders’ power-brokering
behind the scenes contribute only to increased tensions
and lack of confidence in the authorities.
Corruption, power cuts, increased food prices
and the crackdown on civil society is further fuelling
discontent. The Libyan people are angry and frustrated.
The protests earlier this month demonstrate that their
patience is not limitless. This was a clear signal to
Libya’s political leadership — and it should not go
unheeded. The Libyan people have made it clear that
they want improved public services, participation and
to elect their own leaders. Free, fair, and inclusive
national elections must be held as soon as possible.
One positive development relates to the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission (JMC) resuming its work. We
welcome the talks between the commanders of the
Libyan army in Tripoli earlier this month and call for
strengthened efforts on the security track, including in
the JMC. Unifying the Libyan armed forces is essential.
The deterioration of the situation in Libya illustrates
the need for a strong, relevant and effective United
Nations presence. The United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) plays a vital role but needs more
resources and greater predictability. We are concerned
by reports that the Libyan people are increasingly losing
confidence in the United Nations. The Security Council
must therefore live up to its responsibility and provide
UNSMIL with a robust 12- month mandate renewal. We
must agree on a substantial resolution that reflects the
developments on the ground and sends a strong signal
to Libya’s political leaders.
Finally, Norway reiterates its support for the
European Union military operation in the Mediterranean
10/17

25/07/2022

(Operation IRINI). Last week’s interception by
Operation IRINI of a vessel violating the arms embargo
illustrates its valuable contribution to implementing the
arms embargo. We will continue to urge all States to
uphold the embargo.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee for her briefing and
welcome the Permanent Representative of Libya to
today’s meeting.
Since 24 December last year, the political
transition in Libya has continued to face challenges,
and its negative impact on the situation in the country
is gradually emerging. The Libyan people are eager
to move the political transition forward and see an
improvement in the economy and their livelihoods.
China welcomes the progress made by the Libyan
House of Representatives and the High Council of
State on the constitutional basis for the elections. We
encourage all parties in Libya to stay committed to
the general direction of political settlement, maintain
the momentum of positive dialogue, and negotiate
and resolve the key outstanding differences as soon
as possible so as to create favourable conditions for
holding elections at an early date.
Under the current circumstances, the maintenance
of security and stability in Libya should be the shared
objective for all parties. China is deeply concerned
about the recent clashes in Tripoli and elsewhere and
urges all parties to exercise maximum restraint, avoid
any unilateral action that may lead to an escalation of
tensions and maintain the hard-won peace and stability.
The 5+5 Joint Military Commission (JMC)
plays a key role in maintaining the ceasefire and
implementing the ceasefire agreement. China supports
strengthening cooperation between the JMC and the
ceasefire-monitoring component of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) to achieve the full
implementation of the mechanism as soon as possible.
China looks forward to progress in the withdrawal
of foreign forces and mercenaries from Libya on the
premise of ensuring military balance.
Oil is an important source of income for national
reconstruction and the improvement of livelihoods in
Libya. China welcomes the fact that the Libyan parties
are working to remove political interference, negotiate
and resolve differences in the management of the oil
sector and revenue distribution, and ensure the normal
22-43749

25/07/2022

The situation in Libya

order of oil production in Libya. Libya’s oil industry
should continue to be managed by the country, and all
oil revenues should be used for the benefit of its people.
Frozen assets are an important resource for national
reconstruction, and the countries concerned should
ensure the integrity of these assets, in strict accordance
with Security Council resolutions.
UNSMIL’s mandate will expire soon. Given that
the political process in Libya is at a critical stage,
China supports the extension of UNSMIL’s mandate.
The Security Council should continue to maintain the
frequency of its deliberations and devote its attention
to the issue of Libya. China supports the selection of a
Special Representative of the Secretary-General from
an African country and hopes that the selection and
appointment process will be expedited.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Ms. Martha Ama Akyaa Pobee
for her comprehensive briefing, and we welcome
the participation of Ambassador Taher Elsonni in
today’s meeting.
We have followed with concern recent events
unfolding across several Libyan cities, including the
escalation and recurrence of clashes between armed
groups in Tripoli. In that regard, we stress the need to
avoid acts of violence and sabotage and for all parties
to exercise the utmost restraint. We also offer our
sincere condolences to the families of the victims of
last week’s clashes.
As the Libyan parties were unable to reach
consensus on certain issues regarding Libya’s
draft constitution, which serves as the basis for the
presidential and parliamentary elections, we note that
the continued deadlock in the political process has
disrupted the daily life of the Libyan people and their
legitimate aspirations. It also has led to frustrations that
have been reflected on the current security situation.
It is imperative to maintain the momentum and
progress achieved in the recent meetings held in Cairo
and Geneva. We call on all parties to do their utmost
to overcome the remaining protracted contentious
issues on the draft constitution and fulfil the demands
of the Libyan people. Reaching consensus will end
the transitional period and lead to the holding of the
elections on the date agreed upon by Libyans.
It is also imperative for all actors to commit to
de-escalation and refrain from any provocative actions

S/PV.9098

that would exacerbate the security situation. They must
also cooperate to overcome the current divisions. In
that regard, we stress the importance of keeping the
coastal road open to ensure the free movement of people
and goods between cities while avoiding any negative
measures that may add to the suffering of the Libyan
people. Furthermore, efforts must continue to ensure
that all vital Libyan institutions and facilities not take
sides and are unified.
Achieving sustainable peace makes it imperative
for all Libyan parties to join the national reconciliation
initiative and work to unite and overcome past
differences in accordance with the values of tolerance
and justice. They must do so while using the
appropriate mechanisms to achieve transitional justice.
This initiative is essential to enhancing confidence
among all political parties and achieving the legitimate
demands of the Libyan people. The Security Council
and the entire international community must spare
no effort in supporting that initiative, which is a key
step in building a stable Libyan State. We emphasize
once again the pivotal role played by international
and regional organizations, such as the League of
Arab States and the African Union, in supporting the
achievement of those goals.
We commend the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
for its tireless efforts to protect the ceasefire agreement.
We also welcome the outcomes of the Commission’s
recent meetings concluded last week, and we urge
for continued efforts in that regard. Furthermore,
we welcome the second meeting of the local and
international ceasefire monitors facilitated by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
We stress the importance of the withdrawal of forces,
foreign fighters and mercenaries from Libya, in a
simultaneous, phased, gradual and balanced manner, in
accordance with the ceasefire agreement and Security
Council resolutions.
We look forward to the renewal of the UNSMIL
mandate in the upcoming days. We hope that the
Council will adopt a substantive and integrated draft
resolution that takes into consideration the current
critical situation in Libya. We also look forward to
the Secretary-General’s appointment of a Special
Representative to Libya who enjoys enough consensus
in order to bring all relevant parties together and
contributes to promoting the political process led
by Libyans.

22-4374911/17

S/PV.9098

The situation in Libya

25/07/2022

In conclusion, we affirm our full support for
achieving the legitimate aspirations of the brotherly
Libyan people. We hope that all efforts will be aimed
towards overcoming current challenges to build a
united, peaceful and prosperous State.

of work. It is therefore especially sad that a lasting
solution has not yet been achieved. Progress on the
constitutional track is key to ensuring control over
Libya’s institutional sovereignty and guaranteeing its
territorial integrity.

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Martha Pobee for her briefing.

The Libyan stakeholders realize that a relapse into
armed confrontation would be very dangerous and
are striving to prevent such a situation. We note the
symbolic importance of the meeting of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission in Tripoli, which is a milestone
development in terms of the unification of the country’s
armed forces. No less important are the respective
agreements on the simultaneous, well-balanced, gradual
and phased withdrawal of all non-Libyan armed groups
and military units from Libya.

We are closely following the developments in
Libya. The inability to reach an agreement on the draft
constitution and convene nation-wide elections within
the time frame set out in the road map of the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum led the country to a state of
political uncertainty. The security situation then started
to deteriorate, which triggered the recent protests and
armed clashes. The situation is further exacerbated by
the unresolved issue of the unification of economic
and financial institutions and the general decline in the
living standards of ordinary Libyans.
We call on all participants in the political process
to maintain peace and refrain from any acts that
infringe upon it. In the current conditions, incitement to
violence and exploiting protests in one’s own political
interests are unacceptable. The inviolability of the
civilian population, the State and private property must
be respected.
At this stage, the most important thing is to narrow
the differences among the Libyan political forces
and help them find some common ground, based
on which they can steadily move forward towards
unifying the country in the spirit of the October 2020
ceasefire agreement and resolution 2570 (2021). We
firmly believe that the national reconciliation process
in Libya should be inclusive and transparent. That
means the involvement of all leading political forces
of the country, including representatives of the former
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. In that regard, we welcome
the efforts of the African Union and the personal efforts
of the Chairperson of the African Union High-Level
Committee on Libya, President Denis Sassou Nguesso
of the Republic of Congo. We support the African
Union’s proposal to convene a Libya-wide conference
on national reconciliation. For its part, Russia will
provide all possible assistance in the implementation
of that initiative.
We welcome the ongoing efforts of Libya’s House
of Representatives and the High State Council to seek
consensus. The sides have accomplished a great deal
12/17

We realize the importance of stable oil production in
Libya. At the same time, we emphasize that the revenue
from the sale of hydrocarbons should primarily be used
to improve the living standards in the country, pay
salaries to civil servants and ensure an uninterrupted
energy supply. However, excessive hastiness rarely
yields positive results. That work must be carried out in
a thoughtful and balanced manner, taking into account
the possible long-term implications for the country.
There must be no impetuous steps.
In that connection, we cannot fail to notice the
eagerness with which our Western colleagues, first and
foremost our American colleagues, are calling for the
rapid resumption of work in the largest Libyan oilfields.
Given the overall tensions in global energy markets and
the volatility in oil prices, that could be interpreted as
them essentially approving attempts to put the urgent
task of a Libyan political settlement on the back burner
in favour of their own mercantile interests. That is how
they act in other regions of the world as well.
We are approaching a turning point for Libya. How
quickly the country’s parties manage to find common
ground will determine the future of the country.
The approaches taken by external players must be
consolidated in order to help the country emerge from
the crisis, keeping a check on political actors and
preventing further escalation.
Russia agrees with the international consensus that
the United Nations must play a central role in the Libyan
settlement process. We would like to underscore our
unwavering support for the efforts of the key element of
that configuration, the United Nations Support Mission
22-43749

25/07/2022

The situation in Libya

in Libya (UNSMIL), whose mandate expires at the end
of this week.
It is deeply regrettable that for more than six months
now, it has been acting without leadership, which has
had a serious impact on its ability to properly fulfil its
functions. We are convinced that the United Nations
envoy must have a mandate from the Security Council.
Only then will that person have all of the tools that
they need to fully support the national dialogue, and
only then will the Libyan people fully trust that person.
Incidentally, we cannot rule out the fact that the current
domestic political deadlock could be largely aggravated
by the absence of just such a person.
We can see that the Secretary-General is trying
to resolve the issue of the appointment of the Special
Representative. Nevertheless, once again we urge him
to redouble his efforts to find a special representative
through a realistic and balanced approach to the
problem. The candidate needs to be satisfactory to the
Libyan people and regional players and be approved
by all members of the Council. We believe that in this
situation, the best option would be a technical extension
of the UNSMIL mandate for three months. That would
give the Secretariat the time it so dearly needs, and,
once the Special Representative has been appointed, we
can then start talking about further steps, including the
adoption of a substantive resolution.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Pobee for the detailed briefing.
Albania continues to be deeply concerned by the
volatile situation in Libya and the escalation of violence.
The violent clashes between urban groups in Tripoli
last week, which caused civilian casualties, are deeply
troubling, as they reflect a situation of uninterrupted
rivalry when what the country needs is the opposite.
As a result, the fragile stability in the country remains
under serious threat.
There should be a rallying cry for the responsible
parties in Libya to de-escalate, denounce violence in
all its forms, exercise maximum restraint and choose
dialogue as the only viable method of resolving
disputes. We welcome in that regard the commitment
of Mr. Dbeibah and Mr. Bashagha to de-escalate the
situation, because time is not on the side of Libya and
its people, and too much precious time has already been
lost. Libya needs to invest immediately in legitimacy,
and the only way to move forward is to hold elections
as a matter of absolute priority to break the deadlock.

S/PV.9098

We regret the fact that the parties have made
no further progress on the remaining issues on the
constitutional track. That gridlock runs counter to the
aspirations and rights of the Libyan people, who are
demanding a democratic country based on the rule of
law. The recent protest is testimony to the resolve of the
Libyan people and their thirst for basic freedoms and
democracy. The right of people to exercise their rights
should be respected.
The armed clashes in Tripoli show the importance
of the full implementation of the arms embargo in
Libya, and we commend the efforts of the European
Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI in
that regard, as recently demonstrated.
Respect for basic rights must be at the heart of
all efforts to restore order in the country. We deplore
any and all violations of human rights and call for
accountability. Civilians, especially women and
children, continue to be disproportionately affected by
violence. We urge the relevant parties to investigate
those attacks and hold the perpetrators to account.
We believe that for it to be viable, the reconciliation
process in the country must be inclusive and based on
rights and on the principles of transitional justice.
A Libyan-led and Libyan-owned process, supported
by the United Nations, is the right path to move ahead.
The Libyan people want to choose their political leaders
through credible, fair and inclusive elections as soon
as possible. We commend the stewardship of Special
Adviser Williams in that respect.
Security remains key to establishing order in the
country, and we welcome the positive developments
on the security track. The meeting of the commanders
of the Libyan army in Tripoli on 18 and 19 July is a
positive step towards the unification of the military.
The full implementation of the October 2020 ceasefire
agreement remains a priority, and the work of the 5+5
Joint Military Commission is highly commendable.
In addition, the full and immediate withdrawal of all
foreign forces, fighters and mercenaries is a must for
stability in Libya.
We welcome the resumption of oil production in
the country. We believe that national wealth should be
managed responsibly, in transparency, free of political
interests, and serve the common good of the Libyan
people. The National Oil Corporation should preserve
its independence, function in an accountable manner

22-4374913/17

S/PV.9098

The situation in Libya

and contribute to Libya’s stability and the prosperity of
the Libyan people.
Let me end by reiterating Albania’s full support
for a substantive renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya. It would be a major
miss for the Council if for the fifth time in a row we
were not able to find a way to give a 12-month mandate
to the Mission in supporting the Libyan people in
their aspirations to the holding of elections and the
establishment of democracy.
We commend the relentless efforts of the SecretaryGeneral in appointing a new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in Libya, but there is no
justification for the inability of the Council to provide
UNSMIL with the resources necessary to help Libya
overcome the daunting challenge that it faces, where
the United Nations has a critical role to play.
When the Council is unable to do its part, any call
for Libyan actors to do theirs may sound shallow. The
contrary is needed.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.
Brazil thanks Assistant Secretary-General Martha
Pobee for her comprehensive and clear briefing. I also
welcome the representative of Libya to this meeting.
Libya is at a critical juncture. We are deeply
concerned about the clashes between armed groups in
Tripoli last week and the related civilian casualties. We
are also concerned about reports of arbitrary arrests and
detentions earlier this month, following demonstrations
protesting the deteriorating living conditions and
calling for elections.
Brazil acknowledges the critical role that the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) has to
play to preserve the country’s fragile stability. We are
thankful for the mediation efforts and good offices that
UNSMIL has provided to the Libyan political actors,
including during times when the Mission has had
shorter mandates.
We acknowledge that despite a less-than-optimal
provisional arrangement regarding the Mission’s
leadership since the departure of its last formal Head,
UNSMIL has still been able to foster dialogue between
the parties on a number of issues. Progress on the
security track through dialogue within the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission is but one example.
14/17

25/07/2022

But as the Council examines the renewal of
UNSMIL’s mandate, there is also a need for further
dialogue within the Council. A question we could
ask is: how can we reinvigorate political dialogue in
Libya, without foreign interference, and pave the way
for a truly Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political
settlement?
From our perspective, there are two important
dynamics in Libya that the Council has the authority
and responsibility to influence in a positive way.
One is UNSMIL’s capacity to engage with the
relevant actors. With the understanding that the
Mission’s mandate, one way or another, is going to be
renewed in the coming days, Brazil considers that the
appointment of an UNSMIL leader is key to its adequate
functioning. We therefore call upon the SecretaryGeneral and Council members to engage constructively
in that endeavour, taking into account the fact that
UNSMIL is a Mission created by the Council and
therefore accountable to it.
The second dynamic that the Council could impact
positively is the inclination of the Libyan political
forces to engage among themselves. In a politically and
institutionally fractured society, as Libya is today, fear
of what comes next, after the elections, may be adding
to the complex causes that have brought progress to
a standstill. We urge the Libyan actors to agree on
the outstanding issues regarding the organization
of elections, and we have taken note of the Libyan
constitutional track committee meetings held in Cairo
and Geneva over the past months.
But we also believe that the Council could remind
the parties that peacebuilding efforts will necessarily
have to follow. In that regard, Brazil acknowledges
the role that the Peacebuilding Commission can play
in assisting countries’ efforts to implement their
peacebuilding priorities, mobilize international
attention and promote the coordination and coherence
of international assistance.
A final word concerns resources and assets
management. The active management of Libyan assets
frozen abroad has continued. We recall the conclusion
reached by the Panel of Experts that such management
is not allowed under paragraph 19 of resolution 1970
(2011).
Brazil also recalls that the Libyan people have
sovereignty over the natural wealth and resources of
22-43749

25/07/2022

The situation in Libya

Libya and that that sovereign right must be exercised in
the interest of national development and the well-being
of all Libyans, without foreign interference.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I should like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
presiding over the Security Council this month. I also
thank Ms. Martha Pobee for her briefing on behalf of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
I will try to be brief in my statement. However, in
order for the interpreters’ team to properly convey my
message, I will speak at a reasonable speed in order to
allow for accurate interpretation.
Today’s briefing is being held nearly a month after
the most recent meeting of the Security Council on
Libya (see S/PV.9078). During that period, everyone
has witnessed a series of successive and accelerating
events, whether local or international. Those events are
unfortunate, and the tensions are part of the reality of
the current political impasse and divisions.
The current situation could get out of hand at any
moment unless radical solutions are found to the crisis,
solutions that are free of foreign intervention and
political manoeuvring. Those events recently included,
unfortunately, the armed clashes in the capital, Tripoli,
a few days ago, which terrorized the people and resulted
in people killed and injured, including civilians, of
whom many were children and women.
If it were not for the wise and effective intervention
of the national leadership and of political, military or
social leaders and their efforts to achieve calm, the
situation would have escalated and worsened not only
in Tripoli but also, evidently, in other cities and regions.
We therefore commend all national leaders who have
pledged not to be misled by any attempts at infighting
among Libyans and have thus far managed to defuse the
crisis, especially in the Western region.

S/PV.9098

Despite these meetings on Libya, which are held
monthly, the Council suffers from paralysis because
of its internal divisions. Even the briefings that we
hear are repeated and lack effectiveness, as if they
were news bulletins provided by various international
radio stations, filled only with expressions of concern,
condemnation and denunciation.
As my colleague, the Ambassador of Norway said,
the Libyan people are fed up with these meetings and
have lost hope in them. It is not just the Libyan people
but also the peoples of the world who are fed up with
such meetings, which do not lead to any effective results.
So far, since the beginning of the crisis in Libya
more than 172 meetings have been held in the Security
Council, and there have been 27 United Nations reports,
19 reports of the Panel of Experts and 23 reports of
the International Criminal Court. What is the result?
Nothing.
Apart from the series of sanctions that were issued
against Libya and certain figures in 2011, have we heard
of any sanctions against the countries or individuals that
obstructed or violated Security Council resolutions?
Have we heard of the results of the investigations of
the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya, the
Human Rights Council or the International Criminal
Court vis-à-vis violations or war crimes? No, we have
heard nothing. So obviously, the whole matter was and
continues to be politicized.
One of the most bizarre and contradictory things,
for example, is the fact that the Libyans are asked to
work on solutions that are Libyan-led and Libyanowned, yet they must be under the auspices of the
United Nations and the international community, since
Libya is under Chapter VII because it represents a
threat to international peace and security. So how can
solutions be purely Libyan?
Given the events that have taken place since 2011,
we honestly do not know if it is Libya that threatens
international peace and security or if it is the countries
intervening and fighting on its territory that are the
source of that threat. The Libyan people were not afforded
the opportunity to achieve national solutions without
the stamp and approval of the international community.
The Security Council was not able to agree on any
international solutions sponsored by the United Nations
Mission. How can we see a solution under the Mission’s
leadership when for more than 10 months neither the

22-4374915/17

S/PV.9098

The situation in Libya

extension of the Mission nor the appointment of the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
have been subject of consensus? The new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General would be the
ninth Envoy in 11 years.
So what is the solution? I think it would be better
after all these years to change the name and mandate
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya to the
international consensus mission on Libya.
As we have repeatedly pointed out, Libyan citizens
are tired of the international fragmentation and endless
internal conflicts that have directly affected their
daily lives and the economic and security situation
in the country. Earlier this month, we all witnessed
diverse groups of young people and citizens taking to
the streets in many Libyan cities, after having reached
a state of despair and lost trust in everyone. They
protested because they were fed up with all initiatives
and manipulations. They protested because they were
exhausted due to the deterioration of services and the
spread of weapons and armed groups. They took to the
streets against forced disappearances and silencing.
They took to the streets calling for an end to the current
stalemate and an end to all political bodies. They
protested because they wanted to uphold the popular
legitimacy through holding general elections resulting
in certain stability, improving living conditions and
essential services.
Hence today we need to communicate the voice of
the people. The Council must listen to them seriously
because it also bears moral responsibility for the current
situation. Is it not true that the Council is supposed to
sponsor a solution in Libya? The Council must listen to
this voice, which speaks for the majority of the Libyan
people and their overwhelming desire to end that
nightmare and emerge from the cycle of conflict and
never-ending crises.
Despite the positive efforts made and the hopes for
consensus between the House of Representatives and
the High Council of State on the constitutional path or
the constitutional basis, after holding several meetings,
the most recent of which was the meeting of the heads of
the two Chambers in Geneva, they have not been able to
reach a full and final consensus, although they agreed
on most points. In that context, the Presidency Council
has begun to communicate with the concerned parties
to try to bring their views closer and reach the desired
consensus. We call on all stakeholders to support those
16/17

25/07/2022

efforts and to work to resolve points of contention so
that the presidential and parliamentary elections can be
held as soon as possible on a sound basis that expresses
the hopes of all Libyans.
The consequences of international intervention
and division include the tremendous challenges
currently facing the Libyan economy as a result of the
continued division of State institutions and the lack of
comprehensive political solutions. The frequent closure
of ports and oilfields is but one of the challenges
that directly threaten the national economy and food
security, especially given the current international
crisis and the ensuing inflation and rise in the prices of
basic goods and services.
Notwithstanding the recent and positive resumption
of oil production and exports, it is necessary to look
at the root of the problem and not to circumvent it by
providing fabricated and unrealistic solutions, because
Libyan citizens everywhere have the right to enjoy their
wealth and to see its equitable distribution, free of the
monopoly of certain people, of foreign interference
and of attempts by some countries to control their
livelihoods or impose their guardianship directly
or indirectly upon them. The solution lies simply in
supporting the will of the Libyans to establish a stable
State and a constitution that defines the country’s
political and economic system along with a resource
management and distribution mechanism that preserves
the authority and sovereignty of the State.
The Libyan people remain optimistic about any
meetings between the various Libyan parties, especially
the role played by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
and the military leadership, which resumed meetings in
a number of Libyan cities, the most recent of which was
held in the capital, Tripoli. Those leaders confirmed
that they are attempting to stay away from political
disagreements and wish those meetings to be a starting
point for establishing a unified military institution,
a unified Libyan army under civilian leadership, the
State’s monopoly over arms and an end to all forms
of foreign presence in Libya in all its forms and under
any name.
It is therefore necessary to support those efforts
to ensure success and to enhance confidence. It is also
necessary to end the current political impasse and work
to stabilize the economic situation so that all solutions
on the political, security and economic tracks will
22-43749

25/07/2022

The situation in Libya

complement one another and come together to build the
basis of a sovereign civil State.
In conclusion, we know that certain international
forces fear the idea of elections in Libya because the
results are not guaranteed, which would not serve their
narrow interests. Clearly the international community
is interested in three dossiers: first, ensuring continued
oil production; secondly, preventing immigration to
Europe; and, thirdly, combating terrorism.
Apart from that, what happens in Libya is of no
concern to them. That is unfortunate, because the
solution must start from within and not simply be
imposed from outside. Hence we affirm once again
that the solution to all the problems and challenges that
are facing international peace and security, as is being
claimed, including the presence of mercenaries and
foreign forces; the proliferation of arms and militias;
the problem of terrorism and its hotbeds and criminal
networks, and the threat that poses to neighbouring
countries and the countries of the region; the problem
of migration and its humanitarian challenges; the
problem of energy and its impact on the international
arena — all those problems and others can, as we have
mentioned repeatedly, be resolved by giving effective
leadership and ownership to the Libyan people. A
starting point would be to listen and respond to the
voices of the citizens and the voices of laymen.

S/PV.9098

Nearly 3 million voters have made their position
and demands clear. The people want legitimacy to be
renewed, and they want to select their own leaders
and representatives through elections. Libyan leaders
should be chosen from within the Libyan people, who
know that elections are a means and not an end. They
are a beginning and an important step to bring about a
unified, strong and stable State that would have control
over all the Libyan territory. That can come about only
by stopping blatant interference from many countries
in our affairs and exporting crises to us. Leave the
Libyans alone and let them agree on a constitutional
path and unify their institutions in order to hold free and
fair elections as soon as possible with broad political
participation, without any exclusion, that would ensure
the minimal national consensus.
Despite all those challenges, we have confidence in
our people and youth. Libya will be come back strong
and healthy, no matter how long it takes, because
nothing stays forever.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

22-4374917/17
