S/2018/919

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 October 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on his mission of good
offices in Cyprus
I. Introduction
1.
The Security Council, in its resolution 2430 (2018), requested me to submit a
report by 15 October 2018 on my good offices and the outcome of the consultations
being conducted by a senior United Nations official, Jane Holl Lute, on my behalf. In
the resolution, the Council noted the lack of progress towards a settlement since the
conclusion of the Conference on Cyprus in July 2017 and urged the sides and all
involved participants to seize the important opp ortunity presented by the
consultations with regard to a possible way forward. The Council also called upon the
sides, the leaders of the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities, and all
involved parties to actively engage with openness and creativity and to fully commit
to a settlement process under United Nations auspices. The Council also expressed its
full support for my good offices to remain available to assist the sides, should they
jointly decide to re-engage in negotiations with the necessary political will.
2.
The present report is focused on developments from 21 May 2018 to 5 October
2018, providing an update on the activities carried out by the good offices mission
under the leadership of my Deputy Special Adviser on Cyprus, Elizabeth Spehar. As
requested, it further informs the Council on the outcome of the consultations
conducted on my behalf by Ms. Lute.

II. Background
3.
I noted in my previous report on progress towards a settlement ( S/2018/610)
that, 10 months after the closing of the Conference on Cyprus, no further prog ress
had been made towards a settlement. I observed that the political stalemate had further
lowered expectations on the island, despite important advances registered during the
most recent round of talks, and contributed to diminished trust between the le aders
and their respective communities and among the parties overall. I further noted with
concern the continued absence of dialogue and the uncertain prospects for the future,
while also acknowledging that there was still scope for the sides to act decisi vely to
chart a common way forward. In the report, I conveyed my intention to send a senior
United Nations official to conduct in-depth consultations with the parties.
4.
In the current reporting period, several controversies related to intercommunal
relations arose, serving as a stark reminder of the ongoing divide. These included the
reaction by some political actors in the Greek Cypriot community to musicians

18-16847 (E)

191018

*1816847*

S/2018/919

employed by the Cyprus Symphony Orchestra intending to play at a festival in the
north (the musicians ultimately refrained from participating) as well as the protests
by civil society activists on both sides of the divide against the decision of local
Turkish Cypriot authorities to open a beach in the Famagusta area only to Turkish
Cypriots and Turkish nationals. Furthermore, a group of 238 Greek Cypriot
journalists signed a letter of protest against a bicommunal glossary of sensitive words
and phrases for voluntary consideration by journalists from both communities that
had been launched on 10 July by the Representative on Freedom of the Media of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the aim of which was “to
encourage sensitive communications, to promote the sharing of stories and
experiences, and, eventually, to help ease tensions”.
5.
One widely observed phenomenon, however, which indicated growing contacts
between the two communities, at least those of a transactional nature, was an increase
in the number of crossings between the two sides of the island. There was reportedly
a significant increase in the number of Greek Cypriots crossing to the north from
January to August, as compared with the same period last year. In August alone, the
number of Greek Cypriots crossing to the north almost doubled compared with the
number of people crossing during the month of January 2018, likely due to economic
reasons. Greek Cypriot purchases in the north were up 32 per cent while those of
Turkish Cypriots in the south were down 22 per cent. These have also been a concrete
reminder of the possible economic benefits that would stem from a comprehensive
settlement.
6.
The period under review has seen fewer tensions surrounding the exploitation
of hydrocarbon reserves off the coast of Cyprus. New rounds of exploratory drilling
scheduled for the last quarter of 2018 could however result in renewed tensions and
significantly complicate prospects for dialogue between the parties.

III. Status of the process
7.
Following the closing of the Conference on Cyprus in Crans-Montana,
Switzerland, on 7 July 2017, I had called upon the parties to reflect on the way
forward. In early July 2018, I asked Ms. Lute, as a senior United Nations official, to
consult with the parties to the Conference to seek the outcomes of their reflection
since the Conference and to help determine whether the necessary conditions were in
place for a meaningful process. I stressed that she should underline that the United
Nations remained available to support the sides and that the interests of all Cypriots
would remain at the core of the efforts of the United Nations on the island. Through
these consultations, I asked that she try to understand whether the parties are ready to
undertake the effort necessary to achieve a concrete resolution of the Cyprus issue.
8.
Prior to the launch of the consultations, my Deputy Special Adviser met with
both leaders, who expressed satisfaction with the upcoming consultations and
reiterated their readiness to engage with Ms. Lute in discussions on a possible way
forward. In his public statements, the Greek Cypriot leader, Nicos Anastasiades,
welcomed the consultations. He stated his readiness to resume talks from where they
had left off in Crans-Montana in July 2017 and expressed the hope that the
consultations would serve as a catalyst towards a resumption of negotiations.
Likewise, in his public remarks, the Turkish Cypriot leader, Mustafa Akıncı, also
welcomed the consultations and underscored that they should not be considered as a
resumption of the talks. He reconfirmed his readiness to work towards a settlement,
while underscoring that the Turkish Cypriot side would not be part of an endless
negotiation process.

2/6

18-16847

S/2018/919

9.
At the same time, public expectations regarding the consultations appeared
contained in both communities, as popular opinion in Cyprus since the Conference
generally reflected either apathy or discouragement with respect to a return to talks.
Appeals to the leaders or calls for the United Nations to take the initiative towards
the resumption of talks were, however, sporadically heard, voiced primarily by
bicommunal civil society groups. On 1 September, for example, the Turkish Cypriot
and Greek Cypriot trade unions issued a joint statement calling on the leaders to
engage in a determined manner in renewed negotiations to achieve a s ettlement that
would serve the interests of all Cypriots. Similarly, on 26 September, those Greek
Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot political parties which regularly meet under the auspices
of the Embassy of Slovakia in Cyprus issued a joint communiqué welcoming the
attempt by the Secretary-General to explore options through consultations, while
strongly urging the leaders to “work hard for the resumption of the talks on the basis
of the framework and procedures proposed by the Secretary-General, towards
attaining a federal solution and reunification of the island ”.
10. During the reporting period, my Deputy Special Adviser on Cyprus and the good
offices team continued their outreach to a range of stakeholders, seeking the views of
political parties, civil society groups, business people and analysts on both sides on
the current situation on the island and encouraging their involvement in building a
constituency for peace.
11. On 23 July, Ms. Lute travelled to Cyprus to meet separatel y with
Mr. Anastasiades and Mr. Akıncı. Ms. Lute later visited the capitals of the three
guarantor powers, Turkey, Greece and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, for similar consultations. She met with the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Turkey on 30 July 2018, with the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Greece on
11 September 2018 and with the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs and the Minister of State for Europe and the Americas of the United Kingdom
on 12 September 2018. Ms. Lute also met with the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy/Vice President of the
European Commission on 13 September 2018. It is to be recalled that the European
Union had attended the Conference on Cyprus as an observer.
12. I met with Mr. Anastasiades and Mr. Akıncı bilaterally in New York on
28 September 2018 to hear their views on how they saw the way forward, following
Ms. Lute’s consultations. I reiterated the commitment of the United Nations to Cyprus
and the continued availability of my good offices.
13. These efforts, in line with the calls of the Security Council, underscore the firm
commitment of the United Nations to supporting the leaders in efforts to reach a
comprehensive settlement should they jointly decide to re -engage in results-oriented
negotiations.

IV. Status of the process: other features
14. In its most recent resolution on Cyprus (resolution 2430 (2018)), the Security
Council called for renewed efforts to implement all remaining confidence -building
measures and for agreement on and implementation of further joint and unilateral
steps to build trust between the communities. The Security Council furthermor e called
upon the two leaders to intensify the work with the technical committees established
in 2008, with the aim of improving the daily lives of Cypriots.
15. During the reporting period, there was little movement on new trust -building or
confidence-building measures, while the implementation of outstanding agreed
confidence-building measures previously agreed by the two leaders made scant

18-16847

3/6

S/2018/919

progress. As noted in my previous report (S/2018/610), the leaders had renewed their
focus on the work at two additional crossing points, as announced in 2015 and taken
up by the Technical Committee on Crossings, with the intention of opening them
promptly. Some, but not all, of the necessary public works at both crossing s were
completed during this period. However, despite these efforts, and notwithstanding the
work by the United Nations Development Programme to support technical
preparations, as well as the continued efforts by the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) to find solutions to issues and concerns raised by both
sides, regrettably the two crossing points have yet to be opened.
16. To date, there continues to be no significant change in the operation of the
technical committees. Some of these bicommunal bodies, such as the Technical
Committee on Cultural Heritage, the Joint Communications Room, which is linked to
the Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters, and the Technical
Committee on Education, continue to meet regularly and work o n important
bicommunal initiatives. Others meet only sporadically. Out of 12 technical
committees, 7 have not met in over a year, and one of those has not met since autumn
2016.
17. During the reporting period, the Imagine project, which is aimed at incre asing
connections between schoolchildren from both communities through peace education
and contact, continued its activities. The project was developed by the bicommunal
Association for Historical Dialogue and Research under the auspices of the Technical
Committee on Education and enjoys support from the Embassy of Germany. The
Technical Committee on Education met twice to lend its support to the
implementation of the project, which received additional funding from the Embassy
of Germany to expand the scope of its work and promote activities across the divide
and not only in the buffer zone as has been the case to date. In a recent development
the Turkish Cypriot authorities reportedly announced that more Greek language
teachers would be brought into the school system.
18. On 4 July, the Cyprus Women’s Lobby organized a meeting with a group of
women peacebuilders from across the island, with the support of the Mediterranean
Women Mediators Network, the Women Mediators Network across the
Commonwealth, the Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom and
UNFICYP. The event brought women from across the island together, in order to
reflect and build on efforts by women activists to strengthen the involvement of
women in the peace process. Follow-up activities are planned for autumn 2018, with
an emphasis on securing a broader base of women island-wide for involvement in this
forum.
19. From 22 to 26 September, co-founders of the Northern Ireland Women’s
Coalition participated in a series of events on the island to share experiences and
discuss the role of women’s engagement in the Good Friday Agreement and within
peace processes more broadly, and to share lessons that could strengthen the inclusion
of women’s perspectives in the peace process in Cyprus. The programme was hosted
and facilitated by the PRIO Cyprus Centre and the Embassy of Ireland in Cyprus, in
partnership with UNFICYP and my good offices mission, and involved public events
in different locations across the island, as well as more focused meet ings with women
activists, politicians, academics, university students and gender practitioners. During
the meetings, there was discussion on issues ranging from outreach and community
mobilization, as well as how to support the inclusion of civil society more broadly in
the peace process. Importantly, following several months of inactivity, several
members of the Technical Committee on Gender Equality met on 23 September
during a meeting held in the context of the visit of the co -founders of the Northern
Ireland Women’s Coalition. Among other issues, methods to draw a gender
perspective most effectively into any future resumption of talks were discussed.
4/6

18-16847

S/2018/919

20. Further to the call by the Security Council, my good offices mission and
UNFICYP have held several discussions with civil society representatives, as well as
economic and gender experts who have expressed interest in formulating a plan of
action to conduct a gender-sensitive socioeconomic impact assessment.
21. During the summer period, intercommunal activities remained limited;
however, both my good offices mission and UNFICYP pursued efforts to facilitate
intercommunal contacts and cooperation and encouraged civil society to contribute
to building a constituency for peace on the island. For example, o n 6 July 2018, the
missions co-hosted an informal meeting, which included representatives of civil
society, the international community and the United Nations, to network and
exchange views on how to further encourage and support intercommunal contacts.
Such efforts have assisted in identifying additional assistance for future civil society
initiatives to promote peace and reconciliation.

V. Observations and conclusions
22. Ten years after their initial establishment, the bicommunal technical co mmittees
continue to operate, albeit with little momentum. Overall, the stated commitment of
the leaders to revitalizing these bicommunal institutions has not yet led to increased
or more effective activities on the ground, and the work of the technical co mmittees
remains inconsistent. In this context, the conduct of a United Nations -facilitated
stock-taking exercise on the activities and modi operandi of the technical committees
over the past 10 years could be useful in identifying potential areas of impro vement
and ways to strengthen and streamline their work.
23. I reiterate once again that the natural resources found in and around Cyprus
should benefit both communities and should provide a strong incentive for all parties
concerned to work in earnest towards a mutually acceptable and durable solution.
Bearing in mind that all parties have recently reiterated their continued commitment
to this objective, all efforts should be made to avoid unnecessary escalation in the
coming months and to pursue dialogue on this issue.
24. Ms. Lute conducted careful consultations, and I am grateful for the thoughtful
engagement and trust of the leaders of the two communities, the guarantor powers
and others who have offered informed and constructive views on the prospects for a
peaceful resolution of this issue, which has vexed the best efforts of the international
community for over five decades.
25. Informed by these consultations, as well as my own discussions with the leaders
of the two communities, I believe that prospects for a comprehensive settlement
between the communities on the island remain alive, notwithstanding the well -known
history of the efforts of the United Nations to broker peace between the communities
and the remaining work that the parties must undertake to overcome the challenges
that have, to date, impeded resolution. I observe clearly that continued support for a
horizon of endless process without result lies behind us, not before us. I note the
widespread consensus that an unchanging status quo — i.e., the lack of a resolution
to the Cyprus issue — is not sustainable. I believe that all Cypriots deserve a common
future that one thing alone can bring: a lasting agreement achieved within a clear
horizon.
26. Throughout these years, the international community has demonstrated its
willingness to assist the parties in their efforts to resolve long -standing antagonisms
in ways that offer prospects for a better future. The message of this Organization has
been consistent: while the United Nations can assist the parties, an enduring solution
to the Cyprus issue is for the Cypriots to decide. The view among many informed

18-16847

5/6

S/2018/919

observers is that a solution will measurably improve the future circumstances of every
Cypriot. While a settlement will demand that each side accept less than the fullest
measure of satisfaction, it will also open up opportunities for growth, prosperity and
confidence going forward.
27. I note that the parties recall the framework of six points that I offered last June.
I also acknowledge that new ideas may additionally be needed in order for a fresh
effort to bear fruit. In addition, I hold the strong conviction that the way ahead must
be well prepared, with a sense of urgency and focus to seize the willingness of the
two sides to negotiate. In view of what I understand to be the sides ’ interest to engage
in such an effort, and before formal negotiations should be launched, I will instruc t
Ms. Lute to continue discussions to gauge the true extent of convergence on key issues
and the willingness of the sides to incorporate novel proposals as part of an overall
solution towards a common future that they themselves can envisage. Prior to
resuming full-fledged negotiations, the sides should agree on terms of reference that
would constitute the consensus starting point for a possible negotiated conclusion to
the Cyprus issue.
28. I urge the parties to mobilize their creativity and commitment to help their
communities understand and support the aim of a durable solution. In this regard, I
believe deeply in the vitality, energy and strength of the island ’s population,
including, especially, its women and youth, and I urge their greater engagement t o
help build the necessary confidence to take the steps that such a solution will require.
It is my hope that these discussions can lead, once again, to the deployment of the
full weight of my good offices in what may prove a lasting resolution of the Cypr us
issue.
29. In conclusion, I wish to thank my Deputy Special Adviser and the personnel
serving in my good offices mission in Cyprus for the dedication and commitment with
which they have discharged the responsibilities entrusted to them by the Security
Council. I also wish to express my appreciation for the timely and efficient way in
which Ms. Lute carried out the consultations entrusted to her.

6/6

18-16847
