176

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

4. Requests the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, to continue
to take all necessary measures, in consultation with
the freely elected authorities and representatives of the
people of the United States Virgin Islands, to enable
the people of the Territory to exercise fully their right
to self-determination in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Declaration;
5. Requests the administering Power to encourage
further and meaningful discussion regarding the political and constitutional status of the Territory and
to take such additional measures as would ensure
preservation of the identity and cultural heritage of the
people of the United States Virgin Islands;
6. Urges the administering Power, in consultation
with the freely elected authorities and representatives
of the people of the United States Virgin Islands, to
safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the
Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources
by taking effective measures which guarantee the right
of the people to own and dispose of those natural
resources and to establish and maintain control of
their future development;
7. Expresses the view that measures to promote the
economic development of the United States Virgin
Islands are an important element in the process of
self-determination and, to this end, calls upon the
administering Power, together with the freely elected
authorities and representatives of the people of the
United States Virgin Islands, to take all measures
necessary to achieve a viable and stable economy in
the Territory;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in the development and strengthening of the economy
of the United States Virgin Islands;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including the possible dispatch of a further visiting
mission to the United States Virgin Islands at an
appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
81 st plenary meeting
13 December 1978
33/35.

Question of Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat and
Turks and Caicos Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda, British
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat and Turks
and Caicos Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 29
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
29 Ibid.,

vol. I, chaps. III-V, and vol. Ill, chaps. XXI-XXV.

of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to the Territories listed above, in
particular General Assembly resolutions 32/29 and
32/30 of 28 November 1977,
Taking into account the statement of the administering Power relating to the Territories listed above,R0
Noting the continued readiness of the administering
Power to grant independence to the peoples of the
Territories under its administration on the basis of
their express wishes and aspirations in that regard, and
its declared policy of fostering the growth of free and
democratic political institutions in those Territories,
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the Territories concerned,
Bearing in mind the constructive results that can be
achieved as a consequence of United Nations visiting
missions to colonial Territories, which provide an
effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
Territories visited, and reiterating its conviction that
the dispatch of such missions is essential for securing
adequate and first-hand information in regard to the
political, economic and social conditions in those Territories and to the views, wishes and aspirations of the
peoples therein,
Mindful that those Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and in
the Declaration,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of the Territories concerned, and stressing the necessity of diversifying and strengthening further their economies as a
matter of priority in order to promote economic
stability and reduce their dependence on fluctuating
economic activities,
I. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman
Islands, Montserrat and Turks and Caicos Islands; 81

2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples
of those Territories to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as
the administering Power, in consultation with the freely
elected representatives of the peoples, to continue to
take all the necessary steps to ensure the full and
speedy attainment of the goals set forth in the Declaration with respect to the Territories;
30 Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Fourth Committee, 24th meeting, paras. 23-30.
3 1 Jbid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/
Rev.I), vol. III, chaps. XXI-XXV.

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

5. Calls upon the administering Power to expand
its programme of budgetary aid and to take all possible steps, in consultation with the local authorities,
as appropriate, to diversify and strengthen further the
economies of the Territories listed above and to work
out concrete programmes of assistance and economic
development for those Territories;
6. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the freely elected authorities and representatives of the peoples of the Territories concerned,
to safeguard the inalienable right of the peoples of
those Territories to the enjoyment of their natural
resources by taking effective measures which guarantee
the rights of the peoples to own and dispose of those
natural resources and to establish and maintain control
of their future development;
7. Requests the administering Power, in consultation with the freely elected authorities and representatives of the peoples of the Territories concerned, to
pay particular attention to the training of qualified
local personnel;
8. Welcomes the positive attitude of the administering Power with respect to the receiving of United
Nations visiting missions in the Territories under its
administration and requests the Chairman of the Special Committee to continue his consultations with a
view to the dispatch of such missions, as appropriate;
9. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of those Territories;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to Bermuda, British
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat and Turks
and Caicos Islands, including the possible dispatch of
visiting missions in consultation with the administering
Power, and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
81 st plenary meeting
13 December 1978

33/36.

Question of Belize

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Belize,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 32
Recalling its resolutions 3432 (XXX) of 8 December 1975, 31/50 of 1 December 1976 and 32/32 of
28 November 1977,
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of Guatemala33 and of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, 34
32 Ibid.,

vol. I, chap. V, and vol. IV, chap. XXIX.
Thirty-third Session, Fourth Committee, 26th meeting, paras. 45-48, and 30th meeting, paras. 25-28.
84 Ibid., 27th meeting, paras. 13-22, and 30th meeting, paras.
50-54; and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.

177

Having heard the statement of the representative of
Belize, 35
Having also heard the statements of the petitioners, 86
Reaffirming the principles established in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, set out in its resolution 1514
(XV) of 14 December 1960, in particular that all
peoples have the right to self-determination, by virtue
of which right they freely determine their political
status and freely pursue their economic, social and
cultural development,
Recalling that, in the Bogota Declaration of 6 August 1977, it was agreed that "a solution of the Belize
question should be found by the peaceful methods
consecrated in the charters of the Organization of
American States and the United Nations, and in accordance with respect for its territorial integrity and
with the principle of the free self-determination of
peoples",
Bearing in mind the relevant parts of the Declaration of the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 25 to
30 July 1978,37
Reiterating its conviction that the people of Belize
should be assisted in a practical manner to exercise
freely and without fear their inalienable right to selfdetermination, independence and territorial integrity,
Deeply regretting the continued failure of the parties
concerned to conclude an agreement in conformity
with the principles established in General Assembly
resolutions 3432 (XXX), 31/50 and 32/32, and the
resultant delay in the speedy achievement of the secure
independence of Belize,
I. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Belize to self-determination and independence;
2. Reaffirms that the inviolability and territorial
integrity of Belize must be preserved;
3. Urges the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, acting in close
consultation with the Government of Belize, and the
Government of Guatemala to pursue vigorously their
negotiations with a view to settling their differences
over Belize, without prejudice to the right of the people
of Belize to self-determination, independence and territorial integrity, and furthering the peace and stability
of the region, and in this connexion to consult as appropriate with other especially interested States in the
area;
4. Requests the Governments concerned to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session on
the outcome of the negotiations referred to above;
5. Calls upon the parties involved to refrain from
any threats or use of force against the people of Belize
or their territory;
6. Recognizes that it is the responsibility of the
United Kingdom, as the administering Power, to take
all necessary steps to enable the people of Belize to
exercise freely and without fear their right to selfdetermination and to a firm and early independence;

33 Ibid.,

85 Ibid.,

29th meeting, paras. 42-57.
23rd meeting, paras. 46-52, 56-60 and 62-68. For
the full text, see A/C.4/33/L.26, L.27 and L.28.
37 A/33/206, annex I, paras. 120 to 123.
36 Ibid.,
