UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/39
23 July 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3803rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 July 1997 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Angola", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its deep concern at recent
destabilizing actions in Angola, in particular the failure of the União
Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA) to comply with
resolution 1118 (1997) of 30 June 1997 and its continued efforts to restore
its military capabilities. The Council considers the information submitted
by UNITA to the Joint Commission on 21 July 1997 with regard to the
strength of its armed forces, the extension of state administration and the
activities of Vorgan radio station to be neither complete nor credible.
"The Security Council condemns the mistreatment of the personnel of
the United Nations and international humanitarian organizations in areas
under UNITA control, as well as the harassment of United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA) personnel in the exercise of their functions.
Those actions by UNITA are unacceptable and contrary to its commitments
under the Lusaka Protocol and to Security Council resolutions. In this
regard, the Council fully supports the joint statement by MONUA and the
representatives of the three Observer States issued on 14 July 1997.
"The Security Council notes with concern that the increasing tension
in the northern part of the country is rapidly spreading to the central and
southern provinces, with very dangerous implications for the implementation
of the remaining tasks of the peace process, including those referred to in
Security Council resolution 1118 (1997). The Council calls upon both
parties to refrain from any use of force, in accordance with their
commitments under the Lusaka Protocol.
"The Security Council also calls upon both parties to continue to work
closely with the Joint Commission, and in particular UNITA, to cooperate
fully with MONUA and to ensure the freedom of movement and the safety of
its personnel, as well as of international humanitarian organizations.

97-20150 (E)

230797

/...

S/PRST/1997/39
English
Page 2

"The Security Council reiterates its belief that the long-awaited
meeting within the territory of Angola between the President of Angola and
the leader of UNITA could greatly contribute to the reduction of tension
and to the process of national reconciliation.
"The Security Council notes with concern reports from MONUA that
unauthorized aircraft have landed in territory under UNITA control. In
this context, the Council calls upon all States to comply fully with
paragraph 19 of resolution 864 (1993) of 15 September 1993.
"The Security Council reaffirms its readiness to consider the
imposition of measures, inter alia, those specifically mentioned in
paragraph 26 of resolution 864 (1993), unless UNITA takes irreversible and
concrete steps immediately to fulfil its obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol. These steps should include demilitarization of all its forces,
transformation of its radio station Vorgan into a non-partisan broadcasting
facility and full cooperation in the process of the normalization of state
administration throughout Angola. The Council requests the SecretaryGeneral to keep it fully informed on the implementation of those tasks and
to assess their fulfilment by UNITA in his report which is to be submitted
by 15 August 1997 in accordance with resolution 1118 (1997).
"Security Council will continue to monitor closely the situation in
Angola and will remain seized of the matter."

-----
