VIII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

programme support costs and administrative costs of the Fund
and for transfers to and from reserves.
3. The Board shall approve the programme of the Fund
and shall exercise effective control over its constituent activities,
apportioning the resources available, taking into account the
estimates of the Executive Director, for such activities. The
Board shall authorize the necessary allocation of funds to
cover the following main categories:
(a) Expenditure on programme activities;
( b) Contingency margin for expenditure on projects to
meet emergency needs;
(c) Allocations, if any, to other units of the United
Nations, the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency.
4. The Board shall approve projects within the resources as
apportioned for programme activities of the Fund and shall
allocate funds for such projects accordingly. The Board may
delegate this authority to the Executive Director, within limits
and in such categories as it may establish.
IV.

FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS

The Fund shall be finctnced by voluntary contributions,
which may be accepted from Governments, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations and other non-governmental sources, in currencies chosen by contributors, for
purposes consistent with those of the Fund. The available
resources placed under the authority of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization from voluntary contributions will be integrated and become part of the Fund. Voluntary
contributions by Governments may be made, at their option:
(a) By pledges on an annual basis or for a number of
years;
1.

(b) In accordance with regulations 7.2 and 7.3 of the
Financial Regulations of the United Nations;
( c) By both of these methods.
Other contributions may be accepted in accordance with regulations 7.2 and 7.3 of the Financial Regulations of the United
Nations.
2. The voluntary contributions shall be governed by the
Financial Regulations of the United Nations except for such
modification as may be approved by the General Assembly on
the recommendation of the Board.
3. The Fund shall be administered in accordance with the
Financial Rules of the United Nations Industrial Development
Fund.

31/203.

General procedures governing the oper•
ations of the United Nations Industrial
Development Fund

The General Assembly
Adopts the general procedures governing the operations of the United Nations Industrial Development
Fund set forth in the annex to the present resolution.
107th plenary meeting
22 December 1976
ANNEX
General procedures governing the operations of the
United Nations Industrial Development Fund

I.

INTRODUCTION

The United Nations Industrial Development Fund was
established by the General Assembly under resolution 31/202
of 22 December 1976. The present general procedures are
formulated in pursuance of section III, paragraph 1, of the
annex to that resolution, which provides that the Industrial
Development Board shall formulate such general policy guidance as is necessary to govern the operations of the Fund.

171

Article 1
DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of these general procedures, the following
definitions shall apply:
(a) "Fund" means the United Nations Industrial Development Fund;
(b)
"Board" means the Industrial Development Board of
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization;
( c) "Government" means the Government of a State which
is a Member State of the United Nations or member of a
specialized agency of the United Nations or of the International
Atomic Energy Agency which participates in the Fund as a
donor or a recipient or both;
(d) "The Secretary-General" means the Secretary-General
of the United Nations or a member of the staff to whom he
has delegated his authority or responsibility;
( e)
"The Executive Director" means the Executive Director
of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization or
a member of the staff to whom he has delegated his authority
or responsibility;

(f) "The Controller" means the Controller of the United
Nations or his authorized delegate;
(g) "Contribution" means any voluntary contribution to
the Fund irrespective of source;
(h) "Donor" means any Government or other organization or individual who makes a contribution to the Fund;

(i) "Project document" means the formal document describing the purpose and plan of activities and the financial
provisions of a Fund project on the basis of which that project
is approved;
(j) "Financial resources" means funds available to the
Fund from all sources, including but not limited to contributions, except counterpart contributions from recipient Governments;

(k) "Counterpart contributions" means the amounts contributed to projects by recipient Governments for the cost of
specific services and facilities as set out in project documents;
(l) "Financial Rules" means the Financial Rules of the
United Nations Industrial Development Fund;
(m) "Allocation" means the authority from the Executive
Director to incur commitments and make expenditures under
those Rules for purposes specified in the allocation;
(n) "Commitment" means the legal obligation to make a
future expenditure from the resources of the Fund;

(o) "Expenditure" means the disbursement of funds of
the Fund by the Executive Director directly in full or partial
liquidation of a commitment.
II.

RESOURCES OF THE FUND
Article 2
FINANCIAL RESOURCES

The financial resources of the Fund shall be derived from
voluntary contributions and other sources as defined in the
Financial Rules.
Article 3
PLEDGES

1. Governments may pledge contributions to the Fund at
any time.

2. Contributions may be pledged either on an annual basis
or for a number of years. Whenever possible, Governments
are urged to pledge their contributions for a number of years.
While Governments may pledge contributions to the Fund at
any time, they are urged to do so on the occasion of the
pledging conference.

General Aasembly-Thirty-:firat Seseion

172

3. At the request of the Board, the Secretary-General shall
convene a pledging conference at which Governments may
announce their contributions to the Fund.

quired, the objectives it hopes to achieve and the services and
facilities it expects to be able to contribute. Such Government
shall provide a time-table and shall identify the governmental
entities responsible for the project.

Article 4

I 0. In respect of each project, the secretariat of the United
Nat ions Industrial Development Organization shall prepare a
project document for approval in accordance with section III,
paragraph 4, of the annex to resolution 31/202. The objectives
which a project is designed to achieve shall be identified
therein, as shall be the follow-up action expected to be taken
consequent on the completion of the project. The establishment
of a basis for such follow-up action may in appropriate cases
be a suitable objective for a project.

MANAGEMENT OF RESOURCES

The resources of the Fund shall be acquired, authorized,
administered, used and disposed of in conformity with the
Financial Rules.
Article 5
SUBACCOUNTS

Within the framework of the Fund, subaccounts may be
established by the Executive Director for specified purposes
consistent with the policies, aims and activities of the Fund,
in accordance with regulation 7 .3 of the Financial Regulations
of the United Nations. The purpose and limits of each subaccount shall be clearly defined. The Financial Rules shall
apply to any subaccount established under the present article.
III. APPROVAL AND IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE PROGRAMME OF THE FUND
Article 6
RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE BOARD AND OF
THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

I. The Board shall provide general policy guidance with
a view to ensuring that the resources of the Fund are employed with maximum efficiency and effectiveness in pursuance
of the purposes of the Fund.
2. The Executive Director shall submit to the Board each
year the programme of the Fund for the following year. This
programme shall be developed subject to such guidance as may
have been provided by the Board. The programme activities
shall be submitted in sufficient detail and shall include estimates
of expenditure according to types of activity.
3. In submitting his programme proposals, the Executive
Director shall:
(a) Provide estimates of the anticipated resources of the
Fund;
( b) Propose the sums to be transferred to or from reserves;
( c) Specify the amounts to be set aside for programme

support and administrative costs;
(d) State the resources consequently estimated to be
available to finance projects.
4. The formulation of the programme shall be so undertaken as to provide a margin of flexibility in the final choice
of projects to be implemented in a given financial year.
5. The programme submission shall be accompanied by
a plan containing estimates of future resources and their proposed apportionment. This plan shall cover two years, that of
the programme and the following year.
6. The Board shall approve the programme and authorize
the allocation of funds in the manner prescribed in section Ill,
paragraph 3, of the annex to General Assembly resolution 31 /202.
7. The Board shall exercise effective control over the constituent activities of the Fund. To this end, it shall ensure that
systematic evaluations are undertaken of individual projects
and of the programme of the Fund.

8. The secretariat of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization shall formulate on a continuous basis
such projects as are necessary to accomplish the programme
activities of the Fund approved by the Board within the limits
of the resources available to the Fund.

9. Any Government seeking assistance from the Fund
shall submit a request in writing to the Executive Director
providing detailed information on the kind of assistance re-

11.

The project document shall:

Describe all financial, technical, managerial and other
resources required for the successful implementation of the
project;
(a)

( b) Include a work plan and any special arrangements applicable to the execution of the project;
( c) Contain a budget estimate showing the financial implications of the project in its entirety and including a statement, where applicable, of the counterpart contribution to be
made by a recipient Government, as well as its amount, timing
and form.

If the project is expected to be implemented during more than
one financial year, separate estimates shall be prepared for
each such period.
12. Following approval, project documents shall be signed
by representatives of the recipient Government, where required, and of the Executive Director. The approved documents, including the budget estimates and work plans, shall
be the basis of allocating funds for the activities concerned.
13. Programme support and administrative services for
the implementation of projects of the programme of the Fund
shall be provided by the various units of the secretariat of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization as appropriate. Reimbursement for such services from resources of
the Fund shall be at the rate of reimbursement to executing
agencies currently applied by the United Nations Development
Programme.
14. The Executive Director shall submit annual and, where
appropriate, special reports to the Board on the implementation of the programme of the Fund, in all its aspects and with
emphasis on the concept of performance reporting.

31/204.

Emoluments of the members of the
International Court of Justice

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision in resolution 3537 B (XXX)
of 17 December 1975 to fix the annual salary of the
members of the International Court of Justice at
$US 50,000 with effect from 1 January 1976,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General100 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 101
1. Decides that the annual salaries of members of
the International Court of Justice shall next be reviewed
at its thirty-fifth session and thereafter normally every
five years;
2. Decides further, with effect from 1 January 1977,
that in between such periodic reviews the members of
the International Court of Justice may also receive, in
addition to their annual salary as defined in Article 32,
100 A/C.5/31/13.
1 0 1 Official Records

of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/31/8 and Add.1-26), document A/31/8/Add.3.
