-------···- ···- -·····-·- ···--···-·-- ··-

General Assembly-Twelfth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A COMMITTEE

CONTENTS

Page

1134 (XII). Admission of the Federation of Malaya to membership in the
United Nations (17 September 1957) (item 25) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1136 (XII). Report of the Committee on arrangements for a conference for the
purpose of reviewing the Charter ( 14 October 1957) (item 22) . . . . . . . . .
1145 (XII). Agreement governing the relationship between the United Nations
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (14 November 1957) (item 18)
1146 (XII). Authorization to the International Atomic Energy Agency to request
advisory opinions of the International Court of Justice (14 November 1957)
(item 18) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1151 (XII). United Nations Emergency Force (22 November 1957) (item 65)
1193 (XII). Report of the Security Council (12 December 1957) (item 11)..
1212 (XII). Clearance of the Suez Canal (14 December 1957) (item 64) . . . .
1229 (XII). Terms of appointment of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations (14 December 1957) (item 17) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1134 (XII). Admission of the Federation of

SS
SS
SS
58
58
59
59
59

2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the
work envisaged in paragraph 4 of General Assembly
resolution 992 (X).
705th plenary meeting,
14 October 1957.

Malaya to membership in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Havimg received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 5 September 19571 that the Federation of
Malaya should be admitted to membership in the United
Nations,

1145 (XII). Agreement governing the relationship between the United Nations and the
International Atomic Energy Agency

Having considered the application for membership
of the Federation of Malaya,

The General Assembly,

Decides to admit the Federation of Malaya to membership in the United Nations.

Noting the report of the Advisory Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy8 concerning its negotiations with the Preparatory Commission of the International Atomic Energy Agency, including the exchange
of letters4 relating to the interpretation of article I,
paragraph 1, of the Agreement governing the relationship between the United Nations and the International
Atomic Energy Agency,

678th plenary meeting,
17 September 1957.

1136 (XII). Report of the Committee on arrangements for a conference for the purpose
of reviewing the Charter

Noting that the General Conference and the Board of
Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency
have approved the above-mentioned Agreement,11

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of its resolution 992 (X)
of 21 November 1955,
Having considered the report of the Committee established by the above resolution,2
1. Decides to keep in being the Committee on arrangements for a conference for the purpose of reviewing the Charter, established by General Assembly resolution 992 (X) and composed of all Members of the
United Nations, and to request the Committee to report
with recommendations, to the General Assembly not
later than at its fourteenth session;

Approves the Agreement governing the relationship
between the United Nations and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, as set forth in the annex to the
present resolution.
715th plenary meeting,
14 November 1957.
• Ibid., agenda item 18, document A/3620.
• Ibid., document A/3620/ Add.l.
• The Agreement was approved by the General Conference
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, on the recommendation of the Board of Governors, on 23 October 1957. See
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 18, document A/3713.

1
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 25, document A/3654.
• Ibid., agenda item 22, document A/3593.

55

General Assembly-Twelfth Session

56
ANNEX

AGREEMENT GOVERNING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE UNITED
NATIONS AND THE INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY

The United Nations and the International Atomic Energy
Agency,
Desiring to make provision for an effective system of relationship whereby the discharge of their respective responsibilities may be facilitated,
Taking into account for this purpose the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the statute of the Agency,
Have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE I

Principles
1. The United Nations recognizes the International Atomic
Energy Agency (hereinafter referred to as the Agency) as
the agency, under the aegis of the United Nations as specified
in the present Agreement. responsible for internati,onal activities
CO!llcerned with the peaceful uses of atomic energy in accordance
with its statute, without prejudice to the rights and responsibilities of the United Nations in this field under the Charter
of the United Nations.
2. The United Nations recognizes that the Agency, by
virtue of its intergovernmental character and international
responsibilities, will function under its statute as an autonomous
international organization in the working relationship with the
United Nations established by this Agreement.
3. The Agency recognizes the responsibilities of the United
Nations, in accordance with the Charter, in the fields of international peace and security and economic and social development.
4. The Agency undertakes to conduct its activities in accordance with the Purposes and Principles of the Charter to
promote peace and international co-operation, and in conformity with policies of the United Nations furthering the
establishment of safegua!'ded world-wide disarmament and in
conformity with any international agreements entered into
pursuant to such policies.
ARTICLE II
Confidential information
The United Nations or the Agency may find it necessary
to apply certain limitations for the safeguarding of confidential
material furnished to them by their members or others, and,
subject to the provisions of article IX below, nothing in the
present Agreement shall be construed to require either of them
to furnish any informatiO!ll the furnishing of which would, in
its judgement, constitute a violation of the confidence of any
of its members or anyone from whom it shall have received
such information.
ARTICLE III
Reports of the Agency to the United Nations
1. The Agency shall keep the United Nations informed of
its activities. Accordingly it shall:
(a) Submit reports covering its activities to the General
Assembly at each regular session;
( b) Submit reports, when appropriate, to the Security
Council and to notify the Council whenever, in connexion with
the activities of the Agency, questions within the competence of
the Council arise ;
( c) Submit reports to the Economic and Social Council and
to other organs of the United Nations on matters within their
respective competences.
2. The Agency shall report to the Security Council and
the General Assembly any case of non-compliance within the
meaning of article XII. paragraph C, of its statute.
ARTICLE IV
Report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
1. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall report
to the United Nations, as appropriate, on the common activities
of the United Nations and the Agency and on the development
of relations between them.

2. Any written report circulated under paragraph 1 of the
present article shall be transmitted to the Agency by the
Secretary-General.
ARTICLE V
Resolutions of the United Nations
The Agency shall · consider any resolution relating to the
Agency adopted by the General Assembly or by a Council of
the United Nations. Any such resolution shall be referred to
the Agency together with the appropriate records. Upon request
the Agency shall submit a report on any action taken, in accordance with the statute of the Agency, by it or by its members
as a result of its consideration of any resolution referred to
it under the present article.
ARTICLE VI
Exchange of information and documents
1. There shall be the fullest and promptest exchange between the United Nations and the Agency of appropriate
information and documents.
2. The Agency, in conformity with its statute and to the
extent practicable, shall furnish special studies or information
requested by the United Nations.
3. The United Nations shall likewise furnish the Agency,
upon request, with special studies or information relating to
matters within the competence of the Agency.
ARTICLE VII
Reciprocal representation
1. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be
entitled to attend and participate without vote on matters of
common interest in sessions of the General Conference and
of the Board of Governors of the Agency, The SecretaryGeneral shall also be invited as appropiate to attend and
participate without vote in such other meetings as the Agency
may convene at which matters of interest to the United Nations are under consideration. The Secretary-General may,
for the purposes of the present paragraph, designate any
person as his representative.
2. The Director General of the Agency shall be entitled to
attend plenary meetings of the General Assembly of the United
Nations for purposes of consultation. He shall be entitled to
attend and participate without vote in meetings of the committees of the General Assembly, and meetings of the Economic
and Social Council, the Trusteeship Council and, as appropriate,
their subsidiary bodies. At the invitation of the Security
Council, the Director General may attend its meetings to supply
it with information or give it other assistance with regard to
matters within the competence of the Agency. The Director
General may, for the purposes of this present paragraph, designate any person as his representative.
3. Written statements presented by the United Nations to
the Agency for distribution shall be distributed by the Agency
to all members of the appropriate organ or organs of the
Agency. Written statements presented by the Agency to the
United NatiO!lls for distribution shall be distributed by the
Secretariat of the United Nations to all members of the appropriate organ or organs of the United Nations.
ARTICLE VIII

Agenda items
1. The United Nations may propose items for consideration
by the Agency. In such cases, the United Nations shall notify

the Director General of the Agency of the item or items concerned, and the Director General ,shall include any such item
or items in the provisional agenda of the General Conference
or Board of Governors or such other organ of the Agency as
may be appropriate.
2. The Agency may propose items for consideration by the
United Nations. In such cases, the Agency shall notify the
Secretary-General of the United Nations of the item or items
concerned and the Secretary-General, in accordance with his
authority, shall bring ,such item or items to the attention of
the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council or the Trusteeship Council, as appropriate.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Committee
ARTICLE IX
Co-operation with the Security Council
The Agency shall co-operate with the Security Council by
furnishing it at its request with such information and assistance
as may be required in the exercise of its responsibilty for the
maintenance or restoration of international peace and security.
ARTICLE X
International Court of Justice
1. The United Nations will take the necessary action to
enable the General Conference or the Board of Governors of
the Agency to seek an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on any legal question arising within the scope
of the activities of the Agency, other than a question concerning
the mutual relationships of the Agency and the United Nations
or the specialized agencies.
2. The Agency agrees, subject to such arrangements as it
may make for the safeguarding of confidential information,
to furnish any information which may be requested by the
International Court of Justice in accordance with the Statute
of the Court.
ARTICLE XI
Co-ordination
The United Nations and the Agency recognize the desirability
of achieving effective co-ordination of the activities of the
Agency with those of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies, and of avoiding the overlapping and duplication of
activities. Accordingly, the Agency agrees to co--0perate, in
accordance with its statute, in measures recommended by the
United Nations for this purpose. Furthermore, the Agency
agrees to participate in the work of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination and, as appropriate, of any other
bodies which have been or may be established by the United
Nations to facilitate such co-operation and co-ordination. The
Agency may also consult with appropriate bodies established
by the United Nations• on matters within their competence
and on which the Agency requires expert advice. The United
Nations, on its part, agrees to take such action as may be
necessary to facilitate such participation and consultation.
ARTICLE XII
Co-oPeration between secretariats
1. The Secretariat of the United Nations and the staff of the
Agency shall maintain a close working relationship in accordance with such arrangements as may be agreed upon from
time to time between the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Director General of the Agency.
2. It is recognized that similar close working relationships
between the secretariats of the specialized agencies and the staff
of the Agency are desirable and should be established and
maintained in accordance with such arrangements as may be
made between the Agency and the specialized agency or
agencies concerned.
ARTICLE XIII
Administrative co-operation
1. The United Nations and the Agency recognize the desirability of co-operation in administrative matters of mutual
interest.
2. Accordingly, the United Nations and the Agency undertake to consult from time to time concerning these matters,
particularly the most efficient use of facilities, staff and services and appropriate methods of avoiding the establishment
and operation of competitive or overlapping facilities and services among the United Nations, the specialized agencies and
the Agency, and with a view to securing, within the limits of
the Charter of the United Nations and the statute of the
Agency, as much uniformity in these matters as shall be
found practicable.
3. The consultations referred to in the present article shall
be utilized to establish the most equitable manner in which any

• Bodies such as the Scientific Committee on the Effects of
Atomic Radiation and the Advisory Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Atomic Energy, which the Agency would consult
through the Secretary-General and with his approval.

57

special services or assistance furnished by the Agency to the
United Nations or by the United Nations to the Agency shall
be financed.
ARTICLE XIV
Statistical services
The United Nations and the Agency, recognizing the desirability of maximum co-operation in the statistical field and of
minimizing the burdens placed on national Governments and
on organizations from which information may be collected,
undertake to avoid undesirable duplication with respect to the
collection, compilation and publication of statistics, and agree
to consult with each other on the most efficient use of resources
and of technical personnel in the field of statistics.
ARTICLE XV
Technical assistance
The United Nations and the Agency recognize the desirability
of co-operation concerning the provision of technical assistance
in the field of atomic energy. They undertake to avoid undesirable duplication of activities and services relating to technical assistance and agree to take such acti-on as may be necessary
to achieve effective co-ordination of their technical assistance
activities within the framework of existing co-ordination machinery in the field of technical assistance, and the Agency agrees
to give consideration to the common use of available services
as far as practicable. The United Nations will make available
to the Agency its administrative services in this field for use
as requested.
ARTICLE XVI
Budgetary and financial arrangements
1. The Agency recognizes the desirability of establishing
close budgetary and financial relationships with the United
Nations in order that the administrative operations of the
United Nations, the Agency and the specialized agencies shall
be carried out in the most efficient and economical manner
possible, and that the maximum measure of co-ordination and
uniformity with respect to these operations shall be secured.
2. The Agency agrees to conform, as far as may be practicable and appropriate, to standard practices and forms
recommended by the United Nations.
3. The Agency agrees to transmit its annual budget to the
United Nations for such recommendations as the General
Assembly may wish to make on the administrative aspects
thereof.
4. The United Nations may arrange for studies to be undertaken concerning financial and fiscal questions of interest to
the Agency and to the specialized agencies with a view to
providing common services and securing uniformity in such
matters.
ARTICLE XVII
Public information
The United Nations and the Agency shall co-operate in the
field of public information with a view to avoiding overlapping
or uneconomical services and, where necessary or appropriate,
to establishing common or joint services in this field.
ARTICLE XVIII
Personnel arrangements
1. The United Nations and the Agency agree to develop, in
the interests of uniform standards of international employment
and to the extent feasible, common per!>onnel standards,
methods and arrangements designed to avoid unjustified differences in terms and conditions of employment, to avoid competition in recruitment of personnel, and to facilitate the interchange of personnel in order to obtain the maximum benefit
from their services.
2. The United Nations and the Agency agree:
(a) To consult from time to time concerning matters of
common interest relating to the terms and conditions of
employment of the officers and staff, with a view to securing
as much uniformity in these matters as may be feasible;
( b) To co-operate in the interchange of personnel, when
desirable, on a temporary or a permanent basis, making due
provision for the retention of seniority and pension rights;

58

General Assembly-Twelfth Session

(c) To co-operate, on •such terms and conditions as may be
agreed, in the operation of a common pension fund ;
(d) To co-operate in the establishment and operation of
suitable machinery for the settlement of disputes arising in
connexion with the employment of personnel and related
matters.
3. The terms and c•onditions on which any facilities or
services of the Agency or the United Nations in connexion with
the matters referred to in the present article are to be
extended to the other shall, where necessary, be the subject of
subsidiary agreements concluded for this purpose after the
entry into force of the present Agreement.
ARTICLE XIX
Administrative rights and facilities
1. Members of the staff of the Agency shall be entitled, in
accordance with ·such administrative arrangements as may be
concluded between the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the Director General of the Agency, to use the United
Nations laissez-passer as a valid travel document where such
use is recognized by States parties to the Convention on the
Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations.
2. Subject to the provisions of article XVIII above, the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Director
General of the Agency shall consult, as soon as may be
practicable after entry into force of the present Agreement,
regarding the extension to the Agency of such other administrative rights and facilities as may be enjoyed by organizations
within the United Nations system.
3. The United Nations shall invite, and provide the necessary facilities to, any representative of a member of the Agency,
representative of the Agency, or member of the staff of the
Agency desiring to proceed to the United Nations Headquarters
district on official business connected with the Agency, whether
at the initiative of any organ of the United Nations, of the
Agency or of the member thereof.
ARTICLE XX
Inter-agency and other agreements
The Agency shall inform the United Nations before the
conclusion of any formal agreement between the Agency and
any specialized agency or inter-governmental organization or
any non-governmental organization enjoying consultative status
with the United Nations, of the nature and scope of any such
agreement, and shall inform the United Nations of the conclusion of any such agreement.
ARTICLE XXI
Registration of agreements
The United Nations and the Agency shall consult together
as may be necessary with regard to the registration with the
United Nations of agreements within the meaning of article
XXII, paragraph B, of the statute of the Agency,
ARTICLE XXII
Implementation of the present Agreement
The Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Director General of the Agency may enter into such arrangements for the implementation of the present Agreement as may
be found desirable in the light of the operating experience of
the two organizations.
ARTICLE XXIII

Amendments
The present Agreement may be amended by agreement between the United Nations and the Agency. Any amendment
so agreed upon shall enter into force on its appr,oval by the
General Conference of the Agency and the General Assembly
of the United Nations.
ARTICLE XXIV
Entry into force
The present Agreement shall enter into force on its approval
by the General Assembly of the United Nations and the
General Conference of the Agency:

• See footnote 5, p. 55.

1146 (XII). Authorization to the International
Atomic Energy Agency to request advisory
opinions of the International Court of
Justice

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of Article 96 of the Charter
of the United Nations,
Noting the provisions of article XVII of the statute
of the International Atomic Energy Agency and of
article X of the Agreement governing the relationship
between the United Nations and the Agency, 8
Authorizes the International Atomic Energy Agency
to request advisory opinions of the International Court
of Justice on legal questions arising within the scope
of its activities other than questions concerning the
relationship between the Agency and the United Nations
or any specialized agency.
715th plenary meeting,
14 November 1957.
1151. (XII). United Nations Emergency Force

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1000 (ES-I) of 5 November
1956, 1001 (ES-I) of 7 November 1956, 1089 (XI)
of 21 December 1956, 1125 (XI) of 2 February 1957
and 1090 (XI) of 27 February 1957 concerning the
establishment, organization, functioning and financing
of the United Nations Emergency Force,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the Force, dated 9 October 1957,9 and the
effective assistance rendered by the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Emergency Force,
Mindful of the contribution of the Force to the
maintenance of quiet in the area,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the assistance rendered to the United Nations Emergency Force by Members of the United Nations which have contributed
troops and other support and facilities, and expresses
the hope that such assistance will be continued as
necessary;
2. Approves the principles and proposals for the
allocation of costs between the organization and
Members contributing troops as set forth in paragraphs
86, 88 and 91 of the report of the Secretary-General,
and authorizes the Secretary-General in connexion
therewith to enter into such agreements as may be
necessary for the reimbursement of appropriate extra
and extraordinary costs to Members contributing
troops;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to expend an
additional amount for the Force, for the period ending
31 December 1957, up to a maximum of $13.5 million
and, as necessary, an amount for the continuing operation of the Force beyond that date up to a maximum of
$25 million, subject to any decisions taken on the basis
of the review provided for in paragraph 5 below;
4. Decides that the expenses authorized in paragraph
3 above shall be borne by the Members of the United
Nations in accordance with the scales of assessments
adopted by the General Assembly for the financial
• Resolution 1145 (XII), annex.
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 65, document A/3694.
