United Nations

S/PV.5789

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5789

th meeting
Wednesday, 5 December 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Spatafora . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Okio
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Christian
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Arias
Mr. Voto-Bernales
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Burian
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-62677 (E)

*076267*

S/PV.5789

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of December, I should
like to take the opportunity to pay sincere tribute, on
behalf of all members of the Council, to His
Excellency Mr. Marty Natalegawa, Permanent
Representative of Indonesia, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
November 2007. I am sure I speak for all members of
the Council in expressing deep and sincere
appreciation to Ambassador Natalegawa for the great
diplomatic skill and leadership with which he
conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Luis MorenoOcampo, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo to take a seat
at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court. I welcome
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo and give him the floor.
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: Mr. President, thank you
for the opportunity to brief the Council on the activities
of my Office.
On 31 March 2005, the Council determined that
the situation in the Sudan continued to constitute a
threat to international peace and security and decided
to refer the situation in Darfur to the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.

2

On 5 April 2005, I met with the SecretaryGeneral in New York to receive a sealed envelope with
the conclusions of the International Commission of
Inquiry on Darfur and a list of 51 names. I read the
document; I sealed it again. As the Prosecutor of an
independent court, I could not and did not use this list
in my subsequent work.
Before opening an investigation, and in
accordance with the principle of complementarity, my
Office reviewed whether there were national
proceedings related to allegations of serious crimes in
Darfur. Having found no such proceedings, I opened a
first investigation in June 2005.
We examined allegations of crimes committed by
all parties. We focused our efforts on the most serious
crimes, which occurred in 2003 and 2004. We
investigated brutal attacks on the villages of Mukjar,
Bindisi, Arawala and Kodoom. We looked impartially
at incriminating and exonerating facts. We identified
direct victims of crimes living in 17 countries and
eyewitnesses who gave strong evidence.
In addition, we collected evidence from a wide
range of sources, including the Government of the
Sudan. We interviewed Sudanese officials in Khartoum
and were provided with the report of the National
Commission of Inquiry as well as a report from the
Ministry of Defence.
After this, my Office continued to assess whether
or not the Sudan investigated the case selected by the
Prosecution. My Office met with all Judges and the
Prosecutors of the Darfur Special Courts and we also
met with the Minister of Justice.
In December 2006, I informed this Council that I
was ready to submit evidence to the Judges by
February 2007. I indicated, however, that my Office
would go to the Sudan to check again information on
national proceedings. The mission to Khartoum took
place from 27 January to 7 February 2007 and found
that no investigations in the Sudan addressed our case.
On 27 February, I presented my evidence to the
Judges. On 27 April, the Pre-Trial Chamber of the
International Criminal Court issued arrest warrants
against Ahmad Harun, former Minister of State for the
Interior of the Sudan, and Ali Kushayb, a
militia/Janjaweed leader integrated with the popular
forces who committed crimes against humanity and
war crimes.

07-6267

S/PV.5789

The Pre-Trial Chamber found that the case fell
within the jurisdiction of the Court and was admissible,
without prejudice to future challenges under the
Statute. Since then, the Court has received no
communication from the Sudan concerning national
proceedings. There has been no challenge to
admissibility from either the Government or from
Ahmad Harun or Ali Kushayb.
The Court transmitted the request to execute the
warrants to the Government of the Sudan on 16 June
2007. Interpol Red Notices were subsequently
disseminated.
On 17 October, the Registry submitted a request
to the Sudan for an update as to activities undertaken in
the execution of the warrants and as to any difficulty
which may have arisen, with a time limit of
15 November. The Court has received no response
from the Sudan.
Under the terms of Security Council resolution
1593 (2005), “the Government of Sudan and all other
parties to the conflict in Darfur, shall cooperate fully
with and provide any necessary assistance to the Court
and the Prosecutor pursuant to this resolution”. The
Sudan, a Member State of the United Nations, has the
legal obligation to cooperate to arrest and surrender
Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb and has the ability to
do so.
I report today to the Security Council that the
Government of the Sudan has not complied with its
legal obligation. The Government of the Sudan has not
complied with resolution 1593 (2005). The
Government of the Sudan is not cooperating with my
Office, or with the Court.
Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb have not been
arrested and surrendered. While the Sudan continues to
publicly insist that it is willing and able to prosecute
those responsible for serious crimes, they have done
nothing. While the Sudan has known the nature of the
case against Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb for ten
months, they have done nothing. They have taken no
steps to prosecute them domestically or to arrest and
transfer them to The Hague.
Ali Kushayb, against whom the Government had
previously indicated that there was an investigation,
was reported on 30 September by the media to have
been released for lack of evidence.

07-6267

Regarding Ahmad Harun, all public information
indicates that he would neither be surrendered to the
International Criminal Court nor subject to national
proceedings. The media reported in August a statement
by the Sudanese Minister of Interior Bashir Taha that
Harun had been interrogated but the evidence against
him did not stand scrutiny. And, he added, whether it
did or not, it was a matter for Sudan to decide and act
upon and that the Prosecutor had no jurisdiction there;
he was an intruder.
Even more serious, there are expressions of
support in Khartoum in Harun’s favour. Since the
issuance of the warrants, Ahmad Harun has been
maintained in his current position as Minister of State
for Humanitarian Affairs. He is even acting Minister
since the withdrawal of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army from the Government. He accompanied
President Bashir to Darfur on 18 June 2007. He, along
with the Minister of Interior and Director General of the
Police, attended the 5 September meeting when
President Bashir appointed Nafie Ali Nafie to the
Darfur portfolio in charge of the talks in Sirte. On this
occasion Ahmad Harun reported on the “improvement”
of the humanitarian situation in Darfur. In September,
he was also appointed to a committee on human rights
violations and breaches of the constitution in the south
and north.
There is more. There is more with potential risks
for the peacekeeping operations. As of 18 November,
the Government’s official website announced that
Ahmad Harun has now been appointed to the African
Union/United Nations Hybrid operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) national monitoring mechanism group,
overseeing the deployment of UNAMID.
The Sudan, a United Nations Member State, has
not complied with its obligation under resolution 1593
(2005) to arrest and surrender the indictees. The
Government of the Sudan is repeatedly challenging the
Council’s authority to give jurisdiction to the
International Criminal Court. On 1 November in the
General Assembly, the representative of the Sudan,
Ambassador Abdalhaleem Mohamad, stated that, since
the Sudan was not a member of the Rome Statute, the
Court held no jurisdiction there. I will ask the Council
to ensure respect for resolution 1593 (2005).
In June, I informed the Council that my Office
would monitor current crimes. Today, I will provide as

3

S/PV.5789

much clarity as possible on the next steps. I hope that
such information will be useful to the Council’s work.

women when they leave the camps are systematic. That
is not an inter-tribal clash.

In our first case, we demonstrated how, in 2003
and 2004, Ahmad Harun, as Minister of State for the
Interior, coordinated a criminal system. He recruited
and used militia/Janjaweed to supplement the Sudanese
Armed Forces and incite them to attack civilians. In
Darfur today, massive crimes continue to be
committed. I am therefore preparing to open two new
investigations.

In the camps, 2.5 million victims are deliberately
kept in a state of destitution. Obstacles to the delivery
of aid are part of the pattern of attacks. In the camps,
2.5 million persons are deliberately kept in a state of
insecurity, surrounded by hostile forces and threatened
with forced relocation to hostile territory.

First, we have consistent indicia showing a
pattern of attacks by Sudanese officials against
civilians, in particular against those 2.5 million people
who have been forcibly displaced into camps.
Secondly, we have reports of an increasing number of
attacks
against
humanitarian
personnel
and
peacekeepers, as happened in Haskanita, with rebel
involvement. Let me give the Council further details on
those forthcoming investigations.
First, we will investigate present acts of violence
against civilians, in particular the victims of
displacement. We are witnessing a calculated,
organized campaign by Sudanese officials to attack
individuals and further destroy the entire community.
All information points not to chaotic and isolated acts,
but to a pattern of attacks. We cannot and should not
deny reality. Calling those crimes “chaos” or “sporadic
violence” or “inter-tribal clashes” is a cover-up.
The campaign of terror of 2003-2004 has
achieved the forced displacement of 2.5 million people.
Most of the villages have been burned down, but in
Darfur today, in the few remaining villages, civilians
are still being attacked and forced to flee. Examples
include the joint attack on Muhajiriya by allied forces
of the Government of the Sudan and militia/Janjaweed
on 8 October 2007, just two months ago. Forty-eight
civilians were killed; people praying in a mosque were
rounded up and slaughtered. That was not an intertribal clash. The Sudanese Air Force bombing of Adilla
in August 2007, producing 20,000 new displaced
persons, was not an inter-tribal clash.
In the camps, 2.5 million victims already
displaced are subjected to persecution and abuses —
sexual violence, illegal detentions and unlawful
killings. Far from disarming the militia/Janjaweed, as it
committed to do, the Government of the Sudan has for
the most part integrated them into its security apparatus
and stationed them in the vicinity of camps. Rapes of

4

Instead of upholding their promises to facilitate
returns, Sudanese officials are said to facilitate the
settlement of militia/Janjaweed supporters on land
inhabited previously by Fur and Masalit. In addition,
approximately 35,000 Chadians have also been
encouraged to settle in destroyed villages or
surrounding land. Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa are thus
deprived of a safe place to return. Resettlements are
consolidating the displacements. Victims are faced
with two options — remaining under attack in the
camps or going back to hostile territory. Let me repeat
that: Victims are faced with two options — remaining
under attack in the camps or going back to hostile
territory. They are left with no hope for the present and
no prospect for the future. That is how the slow
destruction of entire communities is pursued — in full
sight of the international community.
The Sudan is not fulfilling its duty to protect its
citizens and is allowing members of the Government to
attack them. As Minister of State for Humanitarian
Affairs, Ahmad Harun — a man indicted by the
International Criminal Court — is responsible for
providing relief, for working with international aid
organizations and for coordinating with relevant
security organs the security in the internally displaced
persons camps. Formally, he shares responsibility for
the safety and well-being of the displaced population.
In reality, he joins in constant abuses against them.
The Humanitarian Aid Commission, a component
of the Ministry for Humanitarian Affairs, comprising
mostly security personnel, is allowed to enter and
gather intelligence within the camps. They promote
organized disturbances with the assistance of factions
close to the Government. Then, as international actors
and sheikhs try to find solutions, the camps are raided
by security forces. These are not inter-tribal clashes.
Ahmad Harun himself was present during
specific operations against internally displaced persons
camps in past months. He was in Nyala on 20 August,

07-6267

S/PV.5789

as arrest operations started in Kalma. That was not an
inter-tribal clash.

acquiescence or active participation by other high
officials.

All indications show that the so-called eruptions
of violence and in-fighting in the camps reflect a welldesigned strategy. Local civilian leaders are killed or
arrested to undermine any structure within the camps.
Attempts are made by Sudanese officials to dismantle
the big camps, including by trying to forcibly relocate
the displaced. We have witnessed the same modus
operandi in Kalma and Hamadiya in past months. The
objective is to disperse the inhabitants of the bigger
camps into smaller groups, which are easier to control.

My Office will proceed to investigate who bears
the greatest responsibility for ongoing attacks against
civilians, who is maintaining Harun in a position to
commit crimes and who gives him instructions. That is
my second case.

The Humanitarian Aid Commission also plays a
pivotal role in hindering humanitarian assistance. Aid
workers must have Commission permission to enter the
Sudan and then Darfur. The Commission manages the
complex system of permits needed to access camps.
When international staff expose the reality, they are
expelled. There is no connection here with inter-tribal
clashes.
Allow me to remind the Council that the
Commission is nothing new in the Sudan. In fact, it is
similar to the Peace and Resettlement Administration
created in South Kordofan in the 1990s. That
Administration had close links to national security, was
dominated by former security staff, oversaw internally
displaced persons camps and collected information to
prepare attacks on villages. Ahmad Harun was
Executive Director of the Administration from 1997
until 2000.
In Darfur in 2003 and 2004, we witnessed the
first phase of the criminal plan coordinated by Ahmad
Harun. Millions of people were forced out of their
villages and into camps. Now, in the second phase —
happening right now in front of our eyes — the victims
are being attacked in the camps.
Ahmad Harun is a key actor, but he is not alone.
Failure to take any steps to investigate or arrest him
and failure to remove him from office are clear
indications of the support he receives from other high
officials.
The failure to protect persons displaced from
constant attacks by militia/Janjaweed and Government
of the Sudan agents and the failure to facilitate the
deployment of peacekeepers who could protect the
victims are clear indications of endorsement,

07-6267

Allow me now to address our other new
investigation. On 29 October, 10 soldiers of the African
Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) were killed, eight
were injured and one was unaccounted for after the
attack on the Haskanita base. The incident appears to
have been committed by rebel forces. It represents an
increasing trend in attacks against African Union,
United Nations and other international workers by
various forces, a trend which my Office is monitoring
with concern. Attacks on humanitarian convoys have a
devastating effect.
Such attacks or threats of attack on peacekeepers
and aid personnel will be investigated by my Office.
They can constitute a war crime under the Rome
Statute. They also further undermine efforts to protect
the civilian population.
We note with concern that the Sudan is taking no
measures to protect international forces. There are
allegations that some Sudanese aircraft have been
painted with United Nations or African Union colours
and are used in Darfur. Such acts — among others —
undermine the United Nations and African Union,
create the impression of collusion and can encourage
attacks against them.
I wish to take this opportunity to ask all members
of the Security Council, all States Members of the
United Nations and all relevant organizations to
volunteer specific information and thus assist in
conducting our two new investigations.
Allow me to address further the issue of
cooperation. First, I want to thank all those who have
responded to our requests for information on the
possible movements of our indictees. I am pleased to
report that no State has been reluctant to share
information.
Regarding cooperation with the African Union,
Deputy Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda and I met with
members of the African Group in New York. I thank
South Africa for having hosted such meetings. On
20 June 2007, I updated the President of the African

5

S/PV.5789

Union, Ghanaian President Kufuor, on our work in
Darfur. We also met with the representative of Congo
in August in his then-capacity as President of the
Security Council.
Since June, the Deputy Prosecutor and I have
met, respectively, with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose Migiro. I am
very grateful for the Secretary-General’s efforts to
remind President Al-Bashir of his obligation to execute
the arrest warrants.
Since June, I have also briefed the European
Union and ministers of European Union member
States. I have continued constructive exchanges with
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States and
with its member States on international criminal
justice. I have been invited to visit a number of States
in the region next year. Their support for the
independence and impartiality of my work is
invaluable.
I have informed the Security Council today that
the people of Darfur are being attacked by members of
the Government in their homes and in the camps. This
is the reality. Ahmad Harun, a man charged with 50
counts of crimes against humanity and war crimes
should not be entrusted with his victims’ safety. He
must be arrested.
Maintaining Harun in his position is a clear
indication of collusion with other officials. Who is
taking responsibility for supporting him? This is the
new case I will bring to the Judges. Maintaining Harun
in his position is a direct threat to millions of victims
and to the humanitarian workers and peacekeepers
seeking to protect them.
When will there be a better time to arrest Harun?
How many more women and girls have to be raped?
How many persons have to be killed? Must we really
wait, again, for the destruction of entire communities?
I ask the Security Council for consistency. I ask
the Security Council to send a strong and unanimous
message today to the Government of the Sudan,
requesting compliance with resolution 1593 (2005),
requesting the execution of the arrest warrants. This
same consistency is needed throughout the United
Nations. It would be both inaccurate and confusing to
convey in any way to the Government of the Sudan
that the arrest warrants and the obligation to comply
with resolution 1593 (2005) will go away.

6

The only realistic solution today is to request the
removal and arrest of Harun as a first step to any
solution. That will send a signal to the perpetrators of
crimes in Darfur that the international community is
not only watching, but will also hold them accountable
for their actions. The Council can make a difference; it
can break the criminal system. What is at stake is, quite
simply, the life or death of 2.5 million people.
The President: I thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for
his briefing. I shall now call on the members of the
Security Council who wish to take the floor.
Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me, first of all, on behalf of
Panama and my delegation, to express our gratitude for
the report of Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo, in particular
for his outstanding work at the head of the Office of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). We are aware of the difficult task that the
Prosecutor of that institution faces, and we urge him to
continue to tackle his work with the same ability with
which he has done so over all of these years.
The crime of genocide and crimes against
humanity that the world witnessed at the end of the last
century resulted, inter alia, in the establishment of
special criminal tribunals for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia. Furthermore, they motivated a group of
States to form a universal tribunal to try this type of
crime. The Rome Statute, through which the
International Criminal Court was established, stipulates
in article 13 (b) that the Security Council, acting under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, can refer to
the Court a situation in which there are indications that
one or more such crimes that are under the Court’s
competence have been committed. Indeed, in
resolution 1593 (2005) the Security Council referred
the situation in Darfur to the Prosecutor of the Court
for investigation and, if necessary, to try individuals
held responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law and of human rights. Moreover, the
Council decided that the Government of the Sudan and
the other parties to the conflict in Darfur should
cooperate with the Court and with the Prosecutor.
After 20 months of investigation, the Prosecutor
determined the existence of sufficient evidence to try
Colonel Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb for crimes
against humanity committed in Darfur. The Judges of
the Court, as a result, issued arrest warrants for both of
these individuals in April 2007. To date, the

07-6267

S/PV.5789

Government of the Sudan has ignored those warrants,
as was confirmed to us today by Mr. Moreno-Ocampo,
and does not permit the Court to fulfil its duties.
Moreover, that represents contempt for international
obligations on the part of the Sudan and disregard for
the authority of this Council.
The Sudan’s lack of compliance violates the
fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter.
Moreover, if the Council were to ignore that contempt,
that would open space for future acts of contempt.
Therefore, it is the duty of this Council to demand that
the Government of the Sudan and all other parties to
the conflict in Darfur fulfil their obligation to
cooperate with the Court, as set out in resolution 1593
(2005). Otherwise, this Council would not be fulfilling
its own obligations under the Charter.
At the same time, we are concerned that the
civilian population continues to suffer from
coordinated attacks and systematic violations of human
rights. We cannot allow the conflict in Darfur to
continue to serve as an incentive for ongoing crimes
against the dignity of the human being. We support the
International Criminal Court in its investigation of all
of these cases.
Finally, with regard to the attacks on the members
of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in Darfur,
they must be subject to the strictest investigation by
both the United Nations and the Government of the
Sudan.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): In spite
of the distressing nature of today’s debate, I would first
like to use this opportunity to thank the Ambassador of
Indonesia for the way he presided over the Council
during November, to wish you, Mr. President, success
and to assure you of our support during your
presidency.
I would like to thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for the
detailed, very moving and concise report he has
presented to us in compliance with resolution
1593 (2005). Through that resolution, the Security
Council referred to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) the situation in Darfur since
1 July 2002. In accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter, the Council thus intended to make the fight
against impunity for the crimes committed in Darfur a
key element in the solution to the threat to peace and
security in the Sudan and in the region, of which the
Council was seized.

07-6267

France welcomes the fact that the Security
Council has shouldered its responsibilities to ensure
that the fight against impunity does not remain a dead
letter, as the atrocities committed in Darfur are
contrary to the founding principles of the United
Nations. Twenty months later, the report presented by
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, a perfectly clear and precise
report, makes the following affirmations.
First, crimes that come under the jurisdiction of
the ICC and which come under the purview of
resolution 1593 (2005) continue to be committed in
Darfur, including against the 2.5 million persons who
have been forcibly displaced to the camps, and against
humanitarian personnel. The Prosecutor spoke of
massive crimes, and, like him, we note the extent of the
acts of sexual violence, arbitrary arrests and
assassinations. I also note the organized, voluntary and
concerted nature of those systematic acts of violence.
Secondly, the Sudanese Government is not
cooperating with the Court, nor is it implementing the
arrest warrants the Court issued on 27 April for war
crimes and crimes against humanity against Ahmad
Harun, the former Minister for the Interior and the
current Minister for Humanitarian Affairs, and
Ali Kushayb, the head of the militia. The Prosecutor
has indicated the direct involvement of these
individuals in the crimes committed in Darfur.
Thirdly, not only is the Sudanese Government not
executing the arrest warrants, but is in fact impeding
the work of the Court by denying the existence of the
alleged crimes and by appointing Ahmad Harun to a
post which has given him direct power over the
individuals whose displacement he ordered under his
previous functions, and — the height of irony or of
provocation — putting him in charge of the Sudan’s
relations with the United Nations. As for Ali Kushayb,
his actions and freedom of movement have in no way
been impeded.
In paragraph 2 of resolution 1593 (2005), the
Security Council decided “that the Government of
Sudan and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur,
shall cooperate fully with and provide any necessary
assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor”. This is a
decision taken by the Council.
Despite the in-depth investigation conducted by
the Prosecutor, which clearly detailed the manner in
which the crimes committed by Ahmad Harun and Ali
Kushayb were perpetrated, the Sudanese Government

7

S/PV.5789

denies the crimes and protects those individuals. The
Government has not followed up with the required
legal proceedings in view of the results of the
Prosecutor’s investigation. The conditions for applying
the principle of complementarity, which permits the
Court to exercise its jurisdiction, have thus been
fulfilled.
The lack of cooperation by the Sudanese
authorities prevents the Court from exercising its
jurisdiction. As a result, France shares the conclusion
outlined by Mr. Moreno-Ocampo that the Sudanese
Government has not fulfilled its legal obligations in the
implementation of resolution 1593 (2005). The
Prosecutor has just recalled for us that Harun alone is
currently charged with 50 counts of war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
Our Council must react in view of these facts. We
must do our utmost to support the efforts of the Court
so that it is able to fulfil the task we entrusted to it
when we referred to it the situation in Darfur. Clearly,
that requires the execution of the arrest warrants
against Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb. The Sudanese
Government must be reminded of its obligations and
responsibilities. We owe that to the thousands of
victims and the 2.5 million internally displaced persons
who still live in the terror of the camps.
In its resolution, the Council encouraged the
Court to support international cooperation with efforts
to promote the rule of law, protect human rights and
combat impunity in Darfur. It underscored the need to
promote healing and reconciliation in order to
strengthen efforts to restore durable peace.
In that spirit that we must today forcefully
express our support for the International Criminal
Court in fulfilling its mission. It is the indispensable
complement of our actions to bring about political
reconstruction and to ensure security on the ground
through the deployment of a hybrid force — which, as
I recall, is still being impeded, in particular by
obstacles created by the Sudanese Government.
My Government wishes therefore to state very
clearly that the Security Council should adopt a
declaration reminding the Sudan very firmly of its
obligation to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I join
my colleagues in thanking Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo

8

for all the efforts he and his Office have made over the
past six months to implement the mandates conferred
by the Security Council on him to investigate the
situation in Darfur. And I would like to thank him in
particular for his report and his statement today, which
was a frank and disturbing account of recent events in
Darfur and in the Sudan relevant to the mandate of the
International Criminal Court (ICC).
The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
ICC. We see it as a central pillar of the international
community’s efforts to combat impunity for the most
serious crimes of international concern. Justice is an
essential part of delivering a sustainable peace in
Darfur, as we recognized when the Security Council
adopted resolution 1593 (2005). It is important that
those who have been accused of the most serious
crimes are brought to justice.
My Government is therefore gravely concerned
that the two individuals for whom the Court has issued
arrest warrants remain at large and that the
Government of the Sudan has not given any
cooperation to the Court. We note that since the
warrants were transmitted to the Government of the
Sudan in June this year, instead of cooperating with the
Court in the execution of the warrants, as it is legally
obliged to do under resolution 1593 (2005), the
Government has instead adopted the course of
protecting the indictees. The Prosecutor’s accounts of
the activities of Ahmad Harun and the protection he
enjoys from the Sudanese Government is of special
concern.
The Government of the Sudan clearly has the
ability to arrest and surrender the two indictees to the
Court but has chosen not to do so, in defiance both of
the International Criminal Court and of the Security
Council.
We are also deeply concerned by the Prosecutor’s
reports of ongoing crimes in Darfur against civilians,
including displaced persons within their camps, and
against humanitarian workers and United Nations and
African Union personnel. The numerous incidents
catalogued in the Prosecutor’s report illustrate the very
grave humanitarian situation which continues to exist
in Darfur. My Government deplores acts of violence
committed by all parties to the conflict and calls on all
sides to work together towards a peaceful resolution.
I therefore urge the Government of the Sudan, on
behalf of the Government of the United Kingdom, to

07-6267

S/PV.5789

comply with its obligations under resolution 1593
(2005) and to cooperate with the Court, specifically by
ensuring the immediate arrest and surrender of the two
indictees.
We also call on all other parties to the conflict in
Darfur to cooperate fully with and provide any
necessary assistance to the Court and its Prosecutor.
There can be no impunity for the terrible crimes
committed in Darfur.
The Security Council should, in the view of the
United Kingdom, give its full and public backing to the
International Criminal Court. In the light of the
Prosecutor’s account of the failure of the Government
of the Sudan to cooperate, that warrants a formal
response by the Council today, as suggested by the
Permanent Representatives of Panama and France. I
agree with their proposals and I hope that such a
response can be agreed.
Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): First
of all I wish to thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo for
his briefing, which has moved us and cannot leave us
indifferent. I wish to reiterate the importance that
Belgium attributes to the key role of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in combating impunity and
suppressing crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes.
My country has had the opportunity on several
occasions to express its firm support for the Court, in
particular through its Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt
during the Security Council debate at the level of heads
of State and Government in September, under the
French presidency (see S/PV.5749). The Prime
Minister expressed very clearly the feeling of horror
and revulsion caused by crimes committed in Uganda
and called for the immediate arrest of Mr. Joseph Kony
and other individuals against whom the Court has
issued arrest warrants.
As regards the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, my delegation is delighted with
the excellent cooperation between the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Court
which has lead to the transfer of Mr. Thomas Lubanga
and Mr. Germain Katanga to The Hague.
With regard to the situation in the Central African
Republic, which is currently the subject of an inquiry
of the Office of the Prosecutor, we are following that
situation very carefully.

07-6267

The situation we are discussing this morning, that
of Darfur, is different from previous situations
mentioned since it was referred to the Prosecutor by
this Security Council in resolution 1593 (2005). The
question here is not therefore to know if we support the
International Criminal Court in general terms. The
question concerns respect for a resolution of the
Security Council — adopted under Chapter VII of the
Charter — which unambiguously stipulates that
“the Government of Sudan and all other parties to
the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate fully with
and provide any necessary assistance to the Court
and the Prosecutor”. (resolution 1593 (2005),
para. 2)
From the report before us, it would seem not only
that the Government of the Sudan is failing to
cooperate with the Prosecutor as required by the
Security Council, but also that, since the issuance of
arrest warrants by the Court’s Pre-Trial Chamber
against Mr. Ahmad Harun and Mr. Ali Kushayb, the
signs of official support for those two persons have
continued.
This blatant refusal to cooperate shows great
contempt not only for alleged victims of crimes against
humanity and war crimes, but also for decisions taken
by the Security Council on behalf of the international
community. That is why my delegation, like others, is
in favour of a clear reminder by the Council of the
terms of resolution 1593 (2005) and the obligations set
out therein, not only so that justice can be done, but
also so that due respect for the Council can be recalled.
As the Council recalled in the presidential
statement
adopted
on
24
October
2007
(S/PRST/2007/41), on the situation in the Sudan, “due
process must take its course”. Clearly, the requirement
of justice is a requirement in and of itself, but we are
convinced that it is also a factor for peace and stability
that is part of a larger process. In the activities of the
International Criminal Court related to the Sudan, it is
not only the fight against impunity for past crimes that
is at stake. The report of Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo
reminds us how worrisome the violence in Darfur is
today and that, at this very moment, crimes falling
under the Court’s jurisdiction are being committed in
the region on a large scale and in a systematic and
deliberate manner. We shall continue to follow very
closely the developments in the situation and the
activities of the Office of the Prosecutor in that regard.

9

S/PV.5789

In Darfur, the search for a comprehensive
solution involves a four-pronged approach: political,
military, humanitarian and judicial. We regard the
elements of such a fourfold approach as
complementary.
Finally, I should like to stress that we are also
paying close attention to other parts of Prosecutor
Moreno-Ocampo’s report, particularly its description
of the impact of the situation in Chad and the Central
African Republic.
Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I wish to join others in thanking Mr. Luis
Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for his briefing and for his sixmonthly report on the work done by his Office in
investigating the situation in Darfur.
The Russian delegation commends the efforts of
the Prosecutor’s Office to resolve the very difficult
issue of bringing to justice those accused of
committing crimes in Darfur. However, it would
probably be a mistake to limit the work of the ICC in
the Sudan to combating impunity. We regard that work
in broader terms, as part of the overall efforts to
resolve the situation in the region.
It is with great regret that we have learned that
cooperation between the ICC and the Government of
the Sudan is now in a state of near collapse. Clearly,
the current atmosphere of mistrust between the Sudan
and the ICC is not helping the investigation. We need
to step up our efforts to promote a constructive
dialogue between the parties. We call on the Sudanese
authorities to take the necessary measures in that
regard, including within the framework of existing
legal procedures and mechanisms.
An important aspect of creating an atmosphere of
trust would be for the investigation to focus on crimes
committed by rebels. Efforts by the Prosecutor to that
end would assist the peace process and encourage all
parties to the conflict to seek dialogue and a cessation
of violence. Another important aspect would be full
involvement by the Sudanese legal system in
investigating the crimes committed. Further promotion
of dialogue between the ICC and the African Union
could also facilitate the situation.
Monitoring the humanitarian situation in Darfur
is an important part of the work of the Prosecutor’s
Office. We are grateful to the Prosecutor for the

10

information that he has given us. Although this subject
is addressed in other reports and discussed separately
in the Security Council, it would be desirable, in terms
of the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005), to
devote attention to situations that obviously involve
crimes: for example, attacks against civilians and
peacekeeping convoys. We believe it is regrettable that
the investigation has not yet managed to fully address
the attack on peacekeepers in Haskanita.
The report presented in the briefing describes a
shift to a new, politically sensitive phase in the
investigation in Darfur. At this juncture, we must act
with extreme caution to promote the Hybrid Operation
in the region, fully mindful of the consequences that
any actions regarding the situation in the region could
have for hundreds of thousands of people.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on Italy’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the current month. You and your
team can count on our full support. We also wish to
thank the Permanent Representative of Indonesia for
his important work as President last month.
China wishes to thank Prosecutor MorenoOcampo for his briefing and commends the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for its efforts to
resolve the problem of impunity in Darfur, Sudan. The
causes of the problem in Darfur are complex. Any
settlement plan must ensure that the correct solution is
found.
After years of dealing with the issue, the
international community’s approach to resolving the
problem of Darfur is continuing to develop. Currently,
the consensus on all sides is that, in dealing with the
Darfur problem, we should comprehensively address
all its aspects — political, security, humanitarian,
development and judicial. We must strike a balance in
undertaking measures involving those aspects.
Appropriate and sound decisions should also be taken
on the basis of the priorities involved at various times.
Even more important, all aspects of such efforts should
be complementary and mutually reinforcing, not
truncated and isolated.
From the very outset, China has believed that the
most urgent aspect of resolving the problem of Darfur
is to stabilize and improve the security situation. At
this point, the international community is moving
forward with its two-track approach and accelerating

07-6267

S/PV.5789

the deployment of the Hybrid Operation on the ground.
At the same time, it is striving to move forward the
political negotiations on Darfur. That is now the overall
objective in the Darfur situation, and work on all other
aspects should contribute to its attainment.
China supports the international community’s
continuing efforts to resolve the problem of impunity
in the region. We hope that judicial bodies in the Sudan
will continue to make efforts in that regard. We
encourage the Government of the Sudan to continue to
step up its communications, establish mutual trust and
strengthen cooperation with the ICC.
In our view, it is only through an improvement of
the situation in Darfur and the stabilization of the
political situation that the problem of impunity can be
resolved. Only then will judicial fairness be
fundamentally achieved. The ICC became involved in
the problem of Darfur on the basis of a Security
Council resolution mandate. Its work should also
complement the efforts of the international community
to advance the political process and deploy
peacekeepers. It is necessary to seek and obtain the
support and cooperation of the Sudanese Government.
To ignore the overall political and security situation
there, simply stress ending impunity and push solely
for mandatory measures is an approach unlikely to
result in cooperation and support from the Sudanese
Government. It would also hardly be conducive to the
overall efforts of the international community to
resolve the problem of Darfur.
Ending impunity is an essential component of
resolving the problem of Darfur. We support the ICC in
playing a constructive role and hope that the Security
Council will achieve a comprehensive resolution to the
problem of Darfur.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): We also would like to
thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for his valuable
and sobering briefing, as well as for his comprehensive
report to the Security Council pursuant to resolution
1593 (2005). We would also like to take this
opportunity to commend the Prosecutor for his
outstanding work.
Slovakia is deeply concerned about the serious
crimes and gross violations of human rights in Darfur,
and especially about the systematic pattern of targeting
civilians, including women and children. We also
strongly deplore the ongoing deliberate attacks against

07-6267

United Nations personnel, African Union staff and a
number of relief workers in the region. In that regard,
we would like to underline the responsibility of the
Government of the Sudan to bring an end to crimes in
Darfur and to not allow impunity. We would like to
reiterate our view that bringing to justice the
perpetrators of those horrible crimes and abuses should
be an integral component of a comprehensive solution
for Darfur. We also believe that it will be hard, if not
impossible, to achieve lasting peace in Darfur without
addressing impunity.
We note with concern the observation that the
Government of the Sudan has refused to cooperate with
the ICC and has failed to execute the arrest warrants
issued against Ahmad Muhammad Harun and Ali
Kushayb. We wish to underline that the Government’s
lack of cooperation with the ICC is unacceptable. In
our view, it is also totally unacceptable that Mr. Harun
continues to serve as Sudan’s Minister of State for
Humanitarian Affairs, with authority over the refugee
camps that were created as a direct consequence of his
allegedly criminal activities in Darfur. It is shocking
that he also controls the flow of humanitarian aid in
Darfur. Moreover, we agree with the observation that
his presence in the Government creates the impression
that the Government of the Sudan is protecting the
indictees, or even supporting the horrible crimes.
We would therefore like to emphasize that under
resolution 1593 (2005) all States, including the Sudan,
must cooperate fully with, and provide any necessary
assistance to, the ICC and its Prosecutor. In that regard,
we call on the Government of the Sudan to accept the
ICC’s jurisdiction and to start effective cooperation
with it, including by arresting those two individuals
and surrendering them to the ICC.
Finally, we agree with Mr. Moreno-Ocampo and
previous speakers that the Security Council must send
a strong and unanimous message to all perpetrators that
it will not tolerate impunity and disregard for
international legal obligations. We would like to
express our support for the proposal to adopt a clear
Security Council statement in that regard.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): Let
me say up front that the concerns of the United States
about the Rome Statute and the International Criminal
Court (ICC) are well known and have not changed. In
spite of those concerns, we very much appreciate the

11

S/PV.5789

report of Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo with respect to
his work pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
The United States has consistently supported
bringing to justice those responsible for crimes, human
rights violations and atrocities in Darfur. The violence
in Darfur must end. Those who have committed
atrocities in Darfur must be brought to account.
We share the Prosecutor’s assessments that the
ongoing situation in Darfur is alarming and that justice
for crimes against the people of Darfur is needed to
enhance security and send a warning to individuals
who might resort to criminality as a way of achieving
their aims.
The United States is particularly troubled by the
Prosecutor’s report that the Government of the Sudan
is still not cooperating and has taken no steps to arrest
and surrender the two individuals that are subject to
ICC arrest warrants, namely, Ahmad Muhammad
Harun, current Minister of State for Humanitarian
Affairs, and the Janjaweed leader known as Ali
Kushayb. We call on the Sudanese Government to
cooperate fully with the ICC, as required by resolution
1593 (2005).
As we noted following the Prosecutor’s last
briefing to the Council on Darfur, the United States has
imposed targeted economic sanctions against certain
individuals responsible for the violence, a transport
company that has moved weapons to the Janjaweed
militia and Government forces, and companies owned
or controlled by the Government of the Sudan.
We also share the Prosecutor’s concern about the
increasing number of attacks, not only on displaced
persons and other innocent civilians but also on
personnel of the African Union and the United Nations
and international aid workers. Violence and criminality
against those who came to help the suffering people of
Darfur are intolerable. Impunity for such acts must
end.
The United States continues to be deeply
committed to peace, stability and the provision of
humanitarian aid for the people of the Sudan.
Presidential Special Envoy Natsios and Deputy
Secretary Negroponte have both visited the Sudan the
past year to consult with all parties to stress our
continued support for the Darfur Peace Agreement and
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations

12

Hybrid Operation in Darfur as mandated by resolution
1769 (2007). We also continue to urge those who have
not signed the Darfur Peace Agreement or agreed to
participate in the peace process led jointly by the
United Nations and the African Union to do so quickly,
so that efforts to rebuild Darfur may accelerate.
The United States believes strongly in the need
for accountability for acts of genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed in Darfur. We look
forward to continuing to work with other members of
the Council on constructive steps to achieve that
important objective.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Allow me, first, to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December and to assure you of my delegation’s full
support in the conduct of your work. I should also like
to thank you for the kind words addressed to Indonesia
as President of the Council for the month of November.
We thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his briefing
regarding the activities of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) since June 2007.
Various atrocities continue to be committed by all
sides in Darfur. We note that since the Prosecutor’s
briefing last June, the ICC has delivered requests to the
Government of the Sudan for the arrest and surrender
of certain individuals. Those requests were also
reiterated in statements by the Prosecutor and Court
officials, including by the President of the ICC to the
General Assembly. My delegation notes and
appreciates the Prosecutor’s efforts to pursue contacts
with the Sudan’s neighbours, the United Nations
Secretariat, the African Union (AU), the League of
Arab States, local groups, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and others. We also note the
Prosecutor’s position that alleged attacks committed by
rebel factions against peacekeepers and humanitarian
convoys warrant further investigations.
It is deeply troubling that the conflict in Darfur is
continuing, with the attending consequences of a
worsening humanitarian situation. The displacement of
the population, the deliberate attacks on civilians,
humanitarian personnel and peacekeepers as well as
tribal clashes can, if unchecked, only create more
difficulties for the establishment of peace. The civilian
toll of the conflict also gives us pause. It has also been
the worst year for the African Union Mission in Sudan
(AMIS) peacekeepers in terms of staff killed and

07-6267

S/PV.5789

wounded — more than half of the AMIS personnel
killed since the mission’s deployment in 2004 were
killed this year. The Council condemned the Haskanita
attack against AMIS at the end of September, which
killed 10 AU peacekeepers. The Council has also
demanded that no effort be spared to identify and bring
to justice the perpetrators.
My delegation condemns the continued gross
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in Darfur. These crimes are egregious
affronts to the norms, rules and collective conscience
of the international community. The perpetrators of
those acts must be brought to justice. We extend our
deepest sympathies and solidarity to the victims for
their suffering, as well as to the people of the Sudan,
who continue to face the impact of conflicts in their
country. In the interest of the victims and the
community as a whole, justice must be served without
unnecessary delay.
This Council received important briefings from
Special Envoy Jan Eliasson and Under-SecretaryGeneral Guéhenno last week on the status of the
political process and deployment of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). Using the Addis Ababa conclusions of last
year as a yardstick, we believe we are making some
headway in the political process and the deployment of
UNAMID. The briefings, however, also made clear the
challenges confronting those efforts. They include the
boycott of the Sirte talks, a lack of critical specialized
units for UNAMID and difficulties in the talks between
the Secretariat and the Sudanese authorities on the
follow-up to resolution 1769 (2007).
These developments point to the need for the
Council to continue to enhance its efforts to attain a
political framework for peace and a sustainable
ceasefire, supported by effective peacekeeping.
Moreover, we believe that it is essential that the
Council maintain its unity, encourage the parties in the
Sudan to participate constructively in the peace process
and push forward with the Hybrid Operation.
While peace cannot be complete and sustainable
without justice, justice cannot prosper in the absence of
peace. The implementation of resolution 1593 (2005)
should pay due regard to the wider efforts to achieve
peace in the Sudan. Dialogue and cooperation with the
Government of the Sudan is key.

07-6267

The role of the ICC, in accordance with the Rome
Statute, should be complementary to national criminal
jurisdiction. We believe that the implementation of
resolution 1593 (2005) and action taken by the
Prosecutor shall neither nullify the principle of
complementarity nor prevent the Sudanese national
court from invoking its jurisdiction against the
perpetrators. We also believe that the cooperation of
the Government of the Sudan with the ICC should be
addressed in a comprehensive manner in the context of
achieving peace and security.
Finally, we wish to underline the dependence of
the Court on the conduct of its work. We believe that
once a case has been referred to the Court, including by
the Council, there should be no interference in the legal
process. At the same time, we recognize and underline
the responsibility of the Security Council to ensure that
the Government of the Sudan complies fully with the
provisions of Security Council resolution 1593 (2005).
There cannot be any impunity.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Let me congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency for the
month of December, and assure you of my delegation’s
support. Allow me also to thank the Ambassador of
Indonesia for his sterling work in presiding over the
Council during the month of November. I also wish to
express my delegation’s appreciation to the Prosecutor
for International Criminal Court for his statement
before this chamber and in particular for the important
work that he is doing.
South Africa is a member of the International
Criminal Court, and we remain committed to
supporting the important work of the Court. We see the
International Criminal Court as central to ending
impunity for international crimes and to establishing
conditions under which justice and the rule of law can
be maintained. The Court, through its ability to deter
further commission of international crimes, serves as
an advocate of adherence to the rule of law, and thus
we expect cooperation with its work.
We are acutely aware of the challenges facing the
Prosecutor, arising primarily from the fact that the
International Criminal Court does not have its own
police or army to serve its warrants of arrest, and
therefore depends entirely on the cooperation of States.
It would seem to us that there is a responsibility upon
the Security Council to demand the cooperation of

13

S/PV.5789

States, particularly in cases where the Security Council
has referred cases to the Court.
In resolution 1593 (2005), the Security Council
called upon the Government of the Sudan and all other
parties in Darfur to cooperate fully and to provide
necessary assistance to the Courts and the Prosecutor
pursuant to that resolution. The Council also
recognized in that resolution that, while the States not
party to the Rome Statute have no obligation under the
Statute, it none the less urged that all States and
concerned
regional
and
other
international
organizations cooperate fully with the Court. We urge
the Government of the Sudan, and other parties
involved in Darfur, to cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Court.
We believe that there can be no military solution
to the conflict in Darfur. A political process inclusive
of all parties should be vigorously pursued. At the
same time, we would hope that the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur will be
deployed on the ground as soon as possible to help stop
the ongoing carnage in Darfur. This is the least that the
people of Darfur would expect, as they are subjected to
persecution, abuses and violations of fundamental
human rights.
It is for this reason that we would support the
Council’s issuing a declaration reaffirming its position.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): I also wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of December,
and I assure you, Sir, of the cooperation of my
delegation. I also thank you, Sir, for organizing this
informative briefing.
My
delegation
commends
Ambassador
Natalegawa for the excellent work done during
Indonesia’s presidency in November.
Ghana shares the view that the question of justice
for the victims of war crimes and crimes against
humanity is a integral part of the peace process and
national reconciliation. In this regard, we wish to
emphasize that the destabilizing effects of impunity are
very real and must not be underestimated, especially
within the context of the Sudan. We firmly believe that
resolution 1593 (2005) has a special place in the Darfur
peace process that must be fully implemented with the
support of both the Government of the Sudan and the
International Criminal Court. My delegation, therefore,

14

remains concerned about the lack of significant
progress in the judicial process in relation to the case
involving those individuals for whom arrest warrants
were issued in April 2007.
In this context, we call on the Government of the
Sudan not to take any steps that could be construed as
an affront or challenge to the Council’s authority. We
are of the view that the lack of cooperation by the
Government of the Sudan with the Council and the
International Criminal Court is not in the interest of
any party. Appropriate measures must therefore be
taken to break this impasse. In this regard, firm
persuasion and pressure from the international
community must be sustained. It is only then that we
can make progress in this matter. To prolong the
stalemate will send the wrong signal to potential and
actual perpetrators of the most serious crimes
elsewhere.
The recent killing of 10 peacekeepers of the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) reinforces
our belief that when war crimes go unpunished, that
only emboldens the spoilers to continue obstructing
progress towards a political settlement and durable
peace in Darfur.
On the question of admissibility, we agree with
the Prosecutor that under the provisions of the Rome
Statute the situation on the ground gives a strong basis
for the admissibility of the Darfur situation before the
Court. The Court therefore has a solid legal and moral
basis to exercise jurisdiction.
Finally, we encourage the Office of the
Prosecutor to continue with its outreach programme
aimed at sensitizing victims and communities. It is
vitally important that the Sudanese people see the
International Criminal Court as an important ally in the
protection of human rights.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this important
month, whose agenda is full of important, sensitive
topics. We are fully confident of your wisdom and
ability, and we assure you of our full cooperation with
you and your delegation. I would also like to extend
our thanks and appreciation to the delegation of
Indonesia for its outstanding work during the month of
November.

07-6267

S/PV.5789

Allow me also to thank Mr. Luis MorenoOcampo, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for his report on the situation in Darfur,
submitted pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). We wish
him continued success in his work.
Everyone agrees on the need to apply and uphold
the principles of the rule of law, criminal
accountability and justice, both in Darfur and in other
areas of conflict, especially through punishing those
who have committed violations of international
humanitarian law. We therefore remain concerned
about the direct and deliberate attacks by factions of
rebel movement that remain outside the framework of
the Darfur Peace Agreement, targeting peacekeepers,
humanitarian personnel and even vehicles delivering
humanitarian assistance, as well as setting up
ambushes, looting and killing humanitarian personnel
and African Union military observers, or threatening
them at gunpoint.
The most striking evidence of this situation is
October’s murderous terrorist attack on the African
Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) in Haskanita. The
Security Council has already condemned that attack
and has demanded that no effort be spared to identify
the perpetrators and bring them to justice. All such
violations are crimes within the jurisdiction of the
Sudanese judiciary and the International Criminal
Court. The criminals stand in the way of progress
towards peace in Darfur and should therefore be
punished in accordance with the law.
My delegation calls on the Government of the
Sudan to pursue its investigations, to prosecute all
those charged with crimes against humanity in Darfur,
pursuant to Sudanese criminal law, international
humanitarian law and the relevant international
conventions, and to take all actions necessary to
prevent impunity. In this regard, we also call on the
Prosecutor unfailingly to recall that the jurisdiction of
the ICC is complementary to national jurisdiction. We
therefore call on him to refer his cases and
investigations to the Sudanese judiciary, as appropriate.
We also call on the Prosecutor to continue to
perform his work in a discreet and professional manner
and not to draw conclusions about the nature of the
crimes committed or the persons accused of
committing them until he has fully and impartially
completed his investigations and until he has carefully
and objectively evaluated the investigations and

07-6267

proceedings conducted by the Sudanese judiciary. We
call on the Government of the Sudan, for its part, to
cooperate with the Prosecutor of the ICC to achieve
those goals.
I would like on this occasion to assure the
Council that the State of Qatar has made strenuous and
sustained efforts to urge the Government of the Sudan
to cooperate with the Court in accordance with
international legitimacy. We should not view the ICC
or its Prosecutor as political tools in the hands of the
Security Council; rather, the Court must be seen as an
independent and impartial judicial body that strives to
reach a loftier goal: achieving justice and not political
goals or purposes.
In this regard, we support the finding of the
Prosecutor that there is considerable uncertainty
surrounding the list of names submitted by the
International Commission of Inquiry and persons
named by the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) or by the Security
Council itself in resolution 1672 (2006), and that the
identification of indictees by the Office of the
Prosecutor is not limited to the list of suspects
established by those bodies.
Expediting the investigations and indicting or
prosecuting all those suspected of committing
violations of international humanitarian law, both at the
national and international levels, must not be to the
detriment of justice and the rights of indictees to a fair
trial where all their procedural rights are guaranteed
and the standards and principles of due process
respected. Having said that, we call on all parties to
take into account national and international judicial
procedures and not to seek to influence them in any
way whatsoever, but rather to support them fully in
order to reach the ultimate goal, namely, justice and the
rule of law, so that security, peace and stability can
prevail in Darfur.
The references in the Prosecutor’s report to the
lack of information regarding measures taken by the
Government of the Sudan to protect the international
forces — apart from being undocumented allegations
that have been denied by the Government of the
Sudan — constitute a departure from the purview of
the report mandated by the Security Council in
resolution 1593 (2005), since that matter constitutes a
political issue unrelated to the work of the Court.

15

S/PV.5789

That is also the case, for instance, with respect to
the report’s assessment of the policies of the
Government of the Sudan, the allegation that Sudanese
aircraft have been painted with African Union or
United Nations colours and flags to be used in the
campaign against the rebellion in Darfur, and the
conclusion that such actions undermine the work of the
United Nations and the African Union. All those views
mark a change in the Prosecutor’s methodology, to
which we have become accustomed, in which he has
confined himself to addressing issues that are related
to the judicial process, not to the political process or
the Hybrid Operation.
It is worth noting that the Government of the
Sudan, from the legal point of view, has several
options, not only that of handing over the suspects. In
fact, the Government of the Sudan can, in accordance
with articles 19 and 82 of the Statute of the
International
Criminal
Court,
challenge
the
admissibility of the case. We must, therefore, not
prejudge an offence by putting emphasis on the arrest
and handing over of the wanted individuals as the only
option. That option is not the only one as long as the
possibility of appeal is still open.
Consequently, we must understand the legal and
judicial rights of the Sudan according to the Statute of
the Court. As we have already said, taking any action
outside the legal and judiciary processes would be at
the expense of justice and the right of the indictees to a
fair trial, including the right to appeal. As for our
observations on the briefing by the Prosecutor and the
statements of some States, we see that the right of the
Government of the Sudan to challenge the decision of
the Pre-Trial Chamber based on articles 19 and 82 of
the Statute of the ICC is being ignored while focus is
being put only on the aspect of arresting the indictees
and handing them over.
Once again, we stress that the Council must
proceed cautiously in this case. The invitation by the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to the
Security Council and the regional organizations to urge
the Government of the Sudan to cooperate with the
Court must not be interpreted as a request for action on
the part of the Council against the Sudan, for this issue
is a legal and judicial issue that we do not want to
politicize in any way. We believe that the Prosecutor
agrees with us on that matter.

16

Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to start by congratulating you, Ambassador
Spatafora, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December 2007. We are
certain that under your leadership we will be able to
successfully conclude of the work planned for this
month. I can pledge my delegation’s full support to this
end. I would also like to acknowledge the work
accomplished by Ambassador Natalegawa and his team
and to congratulate them on the excellent manner in
which they conducted the Council’s work during
November.
I would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Moreno-Ocampo,
on his detailed and precise presentation on the
investigations into the situation in Darfur and on the
level of cooperation with the Government of the Sudan
in this regard. What the Prosecutor has told us in his
report gives rise to great concern. The lack of
cooperation between the Government of the Sudan and
the Prosecutor’s Office and the fact that the Sudanese
Government has not taken action in order to implement
the arrest warrants issued by the Court is of particular
concern. Additionally, one of the indictees continues to
exercise official duties within the Government and,
paradoxically, in the humanitarian sphere. In turn, the
Prosecutor has also indicated that crimes for which the
Court holds jurisdiction continue to be committed in
Darfur.
We take note of the Prosecutor’s view that those
crimes are taking place with the knowledge of the
military and civil authorities of the Sudan. The
Prosecutor’s evaluation of the complementarity issue
has been rigorous and he has concluded that national
jurisdiction has not launched nor is it in the process of
launching legal proceedings in respect of those
individuals sought by the Prosecutor.
The Security Council acknowledges that the
situation in Darfur constitutes a serious threat to
international peace and security, which has already
resulted in the numerous deaths of innocent people and
has endangered the lives of millions of lives of
internally displaced peoples. It was this Council that
referred the situation in Darfur to the ICC in 2005 with
the understanding that the sanctions for the serious
crimes perpetrated and the end to impunity as a
dissuasive element would serve to restore peace in this
region.

07-6267

S/PV.5789

The Government of the Sudan has the legal
obligation to cooperation with the Court in accordance
with resolution 1593 (2005). As a Member State of the
United Nations, the Sudan is therefore obliged to fulfil
the provisions of the United Nations Charter, that is, to
abide by Security Council resolutions. Its quality as a
non-State party to the Rome Statute is not relevant in
this context.
Therefore, we call, once again, on the
Government of the Sudan to immediately arrest and to
transfer Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb to the ICC. In
turn, we are of the view that the Council must uphold
the relevance of its decisions and ensure that these
decisions are fulfilled. In view of the Prosecutor’s
report, the Security Council must act in a consequent
manner in accordance with its responsibilities with
regard to the maintenance of international peace and
security and must, therefore, express the need for the
Sudanese Government to comply with resolution 1593
(2005) and to cooperate with the ICC.
Finally, Peru would like to reiterate its support of
the work accomplished by the Prosecutor of the ICC
and to congratulate him on his professionalism and
impartiality.
Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for December and, of course, to assure you of the full
cooperation of my delegation. My delegation would
also like to express its thanks to the Indonesian
delegation and, of course, Ambassador Natelegawa for
the brilliant presidency last month.
We have very carefully followed the presentation
of the sixth report of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) that has just been given to us by the Prosecutor,
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, who we welcome.
Having listened to his presentation, we would
like to note that this report reveals the ongoing
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Darfur
and the ongoing war crimes, crimes against humanity
and grave violations of international humanitarian law.
All this cannot fail to affect our collective conscience.
This is the opportunity for my delegation to
welcome the efforts of the Prosecutor and his team. We
would like to assure him of our support and we have
been able to express this support to him during our
meetings last August. The Congo has always supported

07-6267

all of the efforts of the Security Council and all actions
to combat impunity.
In the specific case of Darfur, the Congo has to
deplore the lack of cooperation from the Sudanese
Government. Everyone involved must be brought
before justice and we would like to call on the
Sudanese Government to take the necessary steps
under its jurisdiction. However, in saying this, the
Congo would like to insist on the fact that all of the
perpetrators in Darfur must be charged. Here, we are
thinking as well of those on the other side, those in the
rebel movements for instance. If the two indictees cited
by the Prosecutor represent, as he said, the first stage,
the second stage should be visible as well.
Impartiality will serve as the criterion for judging
the action of the Court and, of course, the Security
Council. A firm and unanimous message would be one
that spared no parties. The perpetrators of attacks
against the African Union peacekeepers — this was
something mentioned in previous consultations —
must also answer for their actions. We would call upon
the ICC to pursue its inquiries in this regard. All
perpetrators of crimes against humanity, human rights
violations and atrocities, wherever they may be, in
Darfur or elsewhere, must be made responsible for
their actions.
That is the role of the Court, and we will support
it in all its efforts in that regard. It is through such
work, to paraphrase the representative of Belgium, that
justice will become a factor for peace and stability. We
agree with those who spoke earlier that the Council
must provide all its support to the International
Criminal Court in carrying out its work.
The President: I want, in my capacity as
President, to thank very warmly all my colleagues who
have expressed their congratulations and their
commitment to support and cooperation. That will be
essential, and as President I appreciate it very much.
The strength and credibility of the Council will depend
on the solidity of its unity.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Italy.
First of all, like previous speakers, Italy strongly
appreciates Mr. Moreno-Ocampo’s briefing and
reiterates its full support for the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and its Prosecutor.

17

S/PV.5789

Italy reaffirms its strong conviction that the fight
against impunity for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law must be a
priority of the international community. Such grave
violations must be prosecuted and punished either at
the national or the international level. That is a must,
not only because such violations are intrinsically
outrageous, but also because they represent a
continuous threat to international peace and security.
Bearing that in mind, the Security Council, in its
resolution 1593 (2005) — as many others have noted
here around the table, but I think it is good to recall
once more that decision of the Council, just to send the
strong message that all of us want to send — decided
to refer the situation in Darfur to the International
Criminal Court, stating that “the Government of Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur, shall
cooperate fully with and provide any necessary
assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor pursuant to
this resolution” (resolution 1593 (2005), para. 2).
Cooperation is a dynamic process that requires an
ongoing dialogue between all the parties concerned and
mutual confidence to establish productive relationships
based on mutual respect. That cannot be achieved
without the fulfilment of obligations deriving from the
United Nations Charter and other relevant provisions
of international law. We are concerned by the reported
lack of cooperation of the Government of the Sudan in
the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005).
Italy commends the efforts made by various
national and international actors to bring a
comprehensive and lasting peace to Darfur. It must be
noted, however, that those efforts have not been
sufficient to relieve the civilian population from
violence and suffering. In particular, further efforts
have to be made to establish accountability for crimes
committed in Darfur, starting with the execution of the
arrest warrants issued by the ICC last April.

18

I think it is important to keep in mind what
several previous speakers have highlighted — the
multidimensional nature of the process. We have the
political dimension, the security dimension, the
development dimension, the humanitarian dimension
and the human rights/rule of law/no culture of
impunity dimension. All those tracks, as has been said,
are mutually reinforcing. Mutually reinforcing means
that it is not a zero-sum game. It is not, for example,
that if we accelerate on the political track, we have to
decelerate on other tracks. I think we have to keep that
in mind.
The execution of ICC arrest warrants should not
be seen as the sole purpose of the cooperation process,
as has been said by other speakers before me. The
prosecution of all the alleged perpetrators is of crucial
importance in preventing further offences and in
settling accounts with the past. We understand that
investigation activities are still going on in Darfur, and
in that regard Italy notes that the Prosecutor has
informed the Council that his Office “has also
documented attacks committed by rebel factions that
warrant further investigation by the Office”.
Finally, we strongly support a response of the
Council, as has been mentioned by others, to the
briefing heard today in order to reaffirm resolution
1593 (2005) and the need for all parties to the conflict
in Darfur to cooperate fully with the International
Criminal Court, including in the execution of the arrest
warrants. I hope that we will be able to send a strong
message.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

07-6267
