United Nations

A/RES/56/126

General Assembly

Distr.: General
25 January 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 112

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/56/576)]

56/126. Situation of older women in society
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the obligations of all States to promote and protect human rights
and fundamental freedoms as stated in the Charter of the United Nations, and
emphasizing also their obligations under the human rights instruments, in particular
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 1
and the Optional Protocol thereto, 2
Recalling its resolution 44/76 of 8 December 1989 on elderly women,
Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/23 of 4 May 1982 on elderly women
and the World Assembly on Ageing and 1986/26 of 23 May 1986 and 1989/38 of
24 May 1989 on elderly women, and resolution 36/4 of 20 March 1992 of the
Commission on the Status of Women, on the integration of elderly women into
development, 3
Recalling also the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century” 4 and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, 5 in
particular their provisions regarding older women,
Welcoming the convening of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, to be held
at Madrid in April 2002,
Aware that women constitute the majority of older populations in all regions of
the world and represent an important human resource, whose contribution to society
has not been fully recognized,
Recognizing the increasing role of older women in taking the responsibility of
providing care and assistance to victims of human immunodeficiency virus/acquired

_______________
1

Resolution 34/180, annex.
Resolution 54/4, annex.
3
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1992, Supplement No. 4 (E/1992/24), chap. I,
sect. C.
4
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
5
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
2

01 48252

A/RES/56/126

immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) in various regions of the world,
particularly in developing countries,
Affirming the dual challenges of ageing and disability, and affirming also that
older persons have specific health needs and that, with the increase in life
expectancy and the growing number of older women, their health concerns require
particular attention and further research,
Aware that few statistics are available on the situation of older women, and
recognizing the importance of data, including data disaggregated by age and sex, as
an essential element of planning and policy evaluations,
Recognizing that women of all ages, in particular older women, continue to
suffer from discrimination and lack of opportunities,
Emphasizing that Governments bear the primary responsibility for creating an
enabling environment for the economic and social development of their citizens, and
noting with appreciation the valuable contributions of civil society, including nongovernmental organizations, in calling attention to the specific needs of older women,
1.
Stresses the importance of mainstreaming a gender perspective, taking
into account the needs of older women, in policy and planning processes at all
levels;
Also stresses the need to eliminate discrimination on the basis of gender
2.
and age and ensure equal rights and their full enjoyment for women of all ages;
Urges Governments and regional and international organizations,
3.
including the United Nations system in cooperation with civil society, including the
non-governmental organizations concerned, to promote programmes for healthy
active ageing that stress the independence, equality, participation and security of
older women and undertake gender-specific research and programmes to address
their needs;
4.
Emphasizes the need for Governments and regional and international
organizations, including the United Nations system and the international financial
institutions, to develop and improve the collection, analysis and dissemination of
data disaggregated by age and sex;
5.
Urges Governments to take measures to enable all older women to be
engaged actively in all aspects of life, as well as to assume a variety of roles in
communities, public life and decision-making, and to develop and implement
policies and programmes in cooperation with civil society, including the nongovernmental organizations concerned, to ensure their full enjoyment of human
rights and quality of life, as well as to address their needs, with a view to
contributing to the realization of a society for all ages;
6.
Invites Governments, the United Nations system and international
organizations to consider, in their development planning, the increasing
responsibilities of older women in providing care and assistance to victims of
HIV/AIDS;
7.
Invites Governments and the United Nations system to give attention to
the situation of older women in the context of the Second World Assembly on
Ageing, to be held at Madrid in April 2002, including the integration of a gender
perspective into the outcome document.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 2001

2
