SECURITY. COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2469*”

MEETING:

NEW

31 AUGUST

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2469)

1

-. . . . . . . . . . . . . ..<....................

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 2 August 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15902) . . .

WPV.2469

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed’of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes’of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2469th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 31 August 1983, at 11 a.m.
President: Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of the Congo in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

de NANTEUIL

‘F’resenr: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2469)
1. Adoption

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gayama (Congo)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

of the agenda

2. Letter dated 2 August 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/15902)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I wish
to draw the attention of Council members to the following documents: S/15928, containing a letter dated 11
August from the representative of Chad to the President
of the Council; S/15935, containing a letter dated 18
August from the representative of the Sudan to the President of the Council; and S/15936, containing a letter
dated 19 August from the representative of the Congo to
the Secretary-General.

The meeting was caBed to order at 11.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 2 August 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15902)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
conformity with decisions taken at previous meetings on
this item [2462nd 2463~d, 2465th and 2467th meetings], J
invite the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Chad and the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to take places at the Council table; I
invite the representatives of Benin, Egypt, Guinea, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Ivory,Coast, Kenya, Liberia, the
Niger, Senegal, Somalia, the Sudan and the United
Republic of Cameroon to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

4. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom): I understand that this meeting has been called at the ‘instance of
the Government of Chad, and I do not wonder at that,
since four weeks have passed since it made its application
to the Council at the beginning of August [2462nd meeting]. I had not expected to find the United Kingdom the
first speaker on such an occasion. However, since there
seems a certain reluctance on the part of others I am very
willing to begin this important debate-if that is the right
word. I myself do not find an occasion today for polemics, for great argument, which is the normal meaning of
debate; I find today an occasion for the statement of some
fundamental principles, with special reference to the situation before us, which has been brought to us by the
Government of Chad.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Karom Ahmed
(Chad) and Mr. Burwin (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) tookplaces at the Council table; Mr. Soglo (Benin), Mr. Khalil
(Egypt), Mr. Kaba (Guinea), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Essy (Ivory Coast), Mr.
Okeyo (Kenya), Mr. Kofa (Liberia), Mr. Oumarou (Niger)
Mr. Sylla (Senegal), Mr. Madar (Somalia), Mr. EFaki
(Sudan) and Mr. Towo Atangana (United Republic of Cameroon) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

5. As I say, four weeks have passed. In that time, the
dimensions of the conflict have become more serious, and
.there have been further casualties. Prolonged efforts have
been made by members of the Council to secure agreement on a resolution to initiate some form of Council
action. My delegation much regrets that these efforts have
not so far succeeded. I should today like to record the
United Kingdom’s view that the Council should not let
this matter drop. In so doing I wish to underline some of
the principles which are at stake.
I

6. I do not need to restate the United Kingdom’s attitude to the recent invasion of northern Chad and to the
conflict which continues in that country. Our strong views
on the inadmissibility of external intervention and the use
of force are well known to members of the Council. But I
consider that, as members of the Council with responsibilities which transcend national interests, we should reflect
on the role which the Council has played on two separate
occasions this year with regard to the grave problems
facing one of the world’s poorest and weakest countries.
-It would be dangerous to neglect the implications, not
only for the parties to this dispute, but for Africa as a
whole and, indeed, for the credibility of the Council.

member of the Council is aware of this. Predictably it has
been denied by the party concerned, though I .hope.ihat
this indicates that a prudent line of retreat is being maintained. We will all be encouraged to hear that further
steps are being-taken by the OAU. But this does not
absolve the Council of the need to build on the modest
foundations which we carefully laid down in April., We
cannot honestly consider that we have discharged our
responsibilities while‘this conflict continues and while we
ourselves have initiated no specific steps to bring about a
solution.
~
11. The conflict is of itself of the utmost seriousness. It
threatens the lives and livelihood of a nation-an African
nation. The principles at stake are of fundamental importance. If we do not stand up for them, the consequences
for such disputes and for our standing as a Council are
grave.

7.. In March [S/15643] the Government
of Chad
requested the Council’s assistance in resolving a dispute
with Libya which affected Chad’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. The dispute was of very long standing. Pre.vious efforts to find a solution-through
bilateral
negotiations, through the recognized regional organization and through the Council itself-had not succeeded.
The Government of Chad was justified in turning to us
again. It is precisely for such circumstances that the Security Council exists.

:-.
:.:.
:.:.
:_
:_
.-.
: ‘.

12. I have in mind the principle enshrined in Article 2, ’
paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations that
“All Members shall refrain . . .’ from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State” and the principles and provisions in
Article 2, paragraph 3, and Article 33, for .the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Our attempt in April to head off
the threat or use of force failed. Now force has been used. .,

8. In response to Chad’s appeal the Council acted cautiously and deliberately. Some felt that the Council should
have adopted a more definitive stance-that it should, for
example, have considered ways by which the dispute
could be referred to the International Court of Justice.
They had a point, but I think the Council was right at that
stage to adopt a course which both parties accepted and
which commanded the support ‘of all members of the
Council. In the presidential statement of 6 April,
[S/I568sJ which was accepted with statesmanship and
restraint by the Government of Chad, we called on Chad
and Libya to settle their differences without undue delay.
and by peaceful means; we urged both sides to refrain
from any actions which could aggravate the situation; and
we appealed to them to make the fullest use of the mechanisms available within the regional organization, including the Good Offices Committee established by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU).

L

13.> I also have in mind the principles of territorial integrity and its consequence, the inviolability
of national
boundaries. We have been reminded by many speakers
whose countries are members of the OAU that this is a
principle which is particularly cherished by the countries
of Africa. To deal with the legacy of colonial boundaries
and the risk of innumerable conflicts, the OAU decided
by its resolution AHGlRes.16
(I), adopted at the first
session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government, held at Cairo in 1964, to respect the borders existing
on their achievement of national independence. The
United Kingdom attaches cardinal importance to the principle that frontiers should not be changed by force. It will
not help the cause of peace throughout the continent of
Africa if we condone the erosion of this principle. There is -.
a risk here of opening .a Pandora’s box of ‘troubles.

9. We must now face up frankly to the fact that the
Council’s appeal in April has not been heeded. We are
rightly much concerned with our own effectiveness as a
Council. We have spent time and effort this year in a
serious review of the general principles which govern our
work. Here we face a specific example. What has happened since April? Sadly, but not surprisingly, the two
parties have not achieved any form of bilateral accommodation. Equally sadly, our hopes that a solution could.be
achieved through the OAU have not so far been realized.
And most reprehensibly our appeal for a peaceful settlement and ‘our call on both sides to refrain from any
actions which-could aggravate the-current situation have
been defied by one of the parties.

14. Another principle which is directly in question is
that of non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
No one would deny the existence of internal problems
within Chad. But it is essential that the people and the
Government of Chad should be left to deal with these
problems as they themselves decide, with such outside
assistance as they. themselves may request. Assistance
from the OAU led to the Lagos Accord [S/14.378, ~nnix
4. If the present external intervention against that
Government was terminated, the people of Chad could
once again embark on the course of national reconciliation and the urgent task of reconstruction. Here again is a
principle on which the OAU has expressed, rightly, strong
views. Is there not a risk that, if they’are flouted in one
case, they may be flouted in others?

10. We face a situation, as many previous speakers have
pointed out, in which in recent weeks there has been a
clear and indisputable
external armed intervention
against the Government of the Republic of Chad. Every

15. The inherent right of Chad to selfdefence against
armed. attack has implicitly been -called in question by
2

..

I

Council of the serious deterioration of the situation in his
country [S/1590fl. At the Council’s meeting of 16 Augusts
[2467th meeting] I had occasion to state my Government’s
position on events in Chad. The armed intervention
against the Government of Chad has since continued and
is likely to aggravate further the conflict in that country.

certain speakers. Facing external intervention and possessing only a tiny force of its own, the Government of Chad
has exercised its right to seek the help of friendly States in
defending the security of its country. To equate such a
request-and
the response to it of members of the
Council-with
external intervention is a grotesque distortion of the facts, as the representative of the Niger graphically demonstrated in his statement to us on 12 August
[2&.5fh meeting]. As I said in my earlier intervention in
this debate [ibid], if we cannot use words honestly, if we
cannot face the facts squarely, we cannot fulfil our duties
as members of the Council

21. In view of this situation it is in our opinion high time
that the present debate resulted in appropriate action by
the Council. We should be neglecting our special responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations to maintain
international peace and security if we failed to take action
in this case. It is therefore a matter of concern to my’
Government that the Council has so far been unable to
undertake any such action.

16. Those of US who sit in the Council have been made
aware of an attempt by one,of the parties to turn a border
dispute into something close to an ideological dispute.
.There has been an attempt to drum up support from a
articular group of ideologically oriented countries irrespective of their connection with the matter. Is it wise of this
party to drag this internal African matter into the context
of East-West rivalry?

22. It has become clear from our debate that the international community holds divergent views on the situation
in Chad. Nevertheless we should be able to reach a common understanding and to act accordingly on the basis of
certain elements to which all parties concerned should be
able to subscribe.

17. In conclusion, I must record my Government’s
regret that the Council has not so far insisted on the withdrawal of the armed forces intervening against Chad, and
an end to attempts to destabilize that country by military
means; and has not condemned the use of force and the
military occupation of the territory of a neighbouring
country. We naturally welcome the steps which are being
taken to find a settlement by the Chairman of the OAU,
and we wish him every success. But we believe that
members of the Council should continue to keep the conflict under active review. We should keep in close contact
with the parties. We should, each of us, try to form an
objective assessment of developments on the ground.
Moreover, all of us should continuously bear in mind the
fundamental principles which are involved in this dispute.
Irrespective ,,of the attitude ‘of individual Governments
towards the details of this dispute, these principles need to
be nourished and supported. To do so is surely in the
interests of Africa as a whole, of the world in general and,
certainly, of the standing of the Council. All of us
members of the Council, collectively and individually,
have an interest in this. Indeed, ‘we have a responsibility to
the world community.

23. First, during the debate all speakers have expressed
their deep concern at the serious aggravation of the military situation in Chad, and nobody has disputed that the
conflict between Chad and Libya should be solved
through negotiations and not by force.
24. Secondly, we have noted that quite a few delegations
support the idea that the OAU should reintensify its
efforts with a view to securing a peaceful settlement. The
Netherlands, for its part, on 16 August stated that negotiations could be renewed within the context of the OAU in
conformity with the resolution’ adopted by the Heads of
State and Government of the OAU at the nineteenth session of the Assembly, held at Addis Ababa in June, inviting Chad and Libya to seek a negotiated solution to their
differences within the context of the Ad Hoc Mediation
‘Committee established by the OAU [ibid., para. Z5J.
25. Thirdly, it would seem that a great majority of
members of the Council should be able to agree that the
least the Council could do is to request the SecretaryGeneral to take appropriate measures in order actively to
follow the situation in Chad and keep the Council
informed about the developments in that country.

18. Accordingly, we must act effectively to support these
‘principles. My Government would have been glad to support a draft resolution which did so. We must also apply
the principles to the case before us. Again my Government would have been glad to do this, As things stand, all
of us must continue to search for ways in which the Council might directly promote a peaceful soiution. To this
end, we should be prepared to resume this debate at any
time.

26. Although we could also imagine more decisive
action by the Council, which in our opinion would be
fully justified in view of the clear violations of the Charter
of the United Nations that have taken place in Chad, my
Government would be prepared to support a draft resolution of the Security Council containing the abovementioned elements, to which all parties to the conflict
should be able to subscribe. In our view this is the minimum the Council could and should do under the present
circumstances. We are therefore sorry to note that the
Council has so far been unable to act in accordance with
its duties and responsibilities under the Charter. Are we
really to conclude that, faced with an instance of armed
intervention in a State Member of the United Nations, the
Council cannot even express its concern at the grave situa-

19. We must not allow the conflict between Libya and
Chad to be added to the list of disputes which the Security
Council observes in handwringing impotence and about
which it does little or nothing.
20. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands): Almost a month
has elapsed since the President of Chad informed the
3

tion in that country, cannot even encourage a relevant
regional organization to undertake mediation efforts or
even instruct the Secretary-General to monitor the situation closely?

33. The situation now is evidently a more complex one.
In the course of the debate a number of major elements
have been raised before the Council, among them the
question of recognition and the’ legitimacy of Govemments and intervention by foreign forces.

27. We still hope that those who have so far shown
themselves to be reluctant to support such a minimal,
non-partisan and moderate stance of the Security Council
will change their minds. The conflict on the ground i in
Chad continues, and the Council cannot .and should not
remain silent. The Council must therefore remain seized
of this question, and the Netherlands,- for its part, will
continue its efforts to contribute to a peaceful solution of
the grave situation in Chad.
-_

-_
:_
.‘_
.‘_
‘_
;_‘_
.‘_
.‘,‘,
‘,
_-

34. In this confused situation’ it is absolutely essential
that the correct perspective always be maintained.‘The
Council must resist efforts to lead it along paths which
would move it further away from the solution we desire.
We, the members of the Council, need to be careful
always to maintain in the forefront of our consideration
the interests and aspirations of the people of Chad.
35. It is’ the understanding of the Guyana delegation
that those interests and aspirations ‘are that the people of
Chad be allowed to live free from intervention or any type
of interference in their internal ‘affairs; that they be
allowed to chart their own course of national, political,
economic and social development in pursuit of their right
to self-determination;
that they be permitted to live in
peace and in good relations with all their neighbours and
be given the opportunity to protect their territorial integrity and have their national territory free ,of all foreign
troops.

28. Mr. SINCLAIR
(Guyana): This is-the second time
‘in the course of this year that the Council has, at Chad’s
initiative, been seized of the question of arrned’intervention and outside interference in that country’s internal
affairs. The United Nations, in the Charter of the Organization and in the relevant resolutions and decisions of the
Council and the General Assembly, has resolutely set its
face against intervention and’ interference in the internal
affairs of States, and :with sound reason;
.I
29. Intervention foments internal conflict, Intervention
sustains and seeks to influence the outcome of such conflict, and even of war. Not infrequently, intervention has
the effect of frustrating the processes of nation-building.

36. This brings into focus certain cardinal principles to
which Guyana attaches the utmost importance. We feel
that in its consideration of this matter the Council must
be guided by these principles if it is to achieve a lasting
peace and a just settlement of the question. We speak of
the principle that States are obliged to show the fullest
respect for the national independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of other States. We believe that States
must likewise show the fullest respect for the principle of
non-intervention
and non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States. Guyana also reiterates that States
have a right to solicit help ‘if they feel threatened with
aggression or intervention or interference in their internal
affairs.

30. On 6 April, after consideration of the complaint by
the Government of Chad, the Council, through its President, issued a statement [S/25688] which called upon the
parties to settle their differences without delay and by
peaceful means on the basis of the relevant principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the Charter of the
Organization of African Unity and to make the fullest use
of the mechanisms within the regional organisation.
,:
31. Though’at that time both parties expressed their wil‘lingness to discuss their differences and to resolve them
peacefully, the fact that the Council is once again dalled
upon to consider this question is clear evidence that the
call made by the‘Counci1 on that occasion and the proposals contained in the statement to which I, have referred
have not been implemented.. My delegation sincerely
regrets this non-implementation,
which unfortunately has
resulted in the continuation and deterioration of the situation in Chad.

37. My delegation believes that the Council, in keeping
with its ,primary responsibility. for the maintenance of
international peace and security, must &clear and forthright in its response to the complaint by the Government
of Chad. In the discharge of that responsibility, the Council has an obligation to take steps to facilitate the urgent
achievement of the gdals and aspirations of the Chad

,32. This worsening situation is creating serious tensions
and instability among .North African ,States and in the
Mediterranean region also. $iy delegation .has also noted
with concern and regret the manner in which these developments are being manipulated by powerful outside.forces whose interests’.are unrelated ,to those of Chad or to
Africa as a whole. This external involvement can only
exacerbate the problem already existing, hinder efforts to
have the Mediterranean respected as a zone of peace, security and co-operation, and .pose .an even greater threat to
: international peace and security in general.

38. My delegation believes that a helpful response by the
Council could have been the establishment and prompt
dispatch of a fact-finding mission to assess the situation
on the ground and to make a determination as to the
extent to which the relevant principles are being violated
and to which the attainment .of the goals and aspirations
of the people of Chad is being obstructed, if at all, and by
whom. That mission would thereafter make its report to
the Council. ,We are of the view, however, that the positions of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and of
the OAU on this question must be respected.
4

those who encourage aggression to pay particular heed:
that commitment to the ‘freedom and independence of
Chad continues.

39. My delegation betis
that if we were to defer to the
position of the OAU on this matter, the Council would be
acting fully in accordance with Article 52, paragraph 3, of
the Charter of the United Nations. This Article states very
clearly, however, in paragraph 4 that it in no way impairs
the application of Articles 34 and 35. My delegation
would like to place particular emphasis on the right of a
State, as expressed in Article 35, to bring a dispute to the
attention of the Security Council. This we do because, as
members of the Council are aware, there are some
regional organizations which exclude from membership
States Members of the United Nations.
.
40. I wish to conclude by expressing the sincerest wishes
of the delegation of Guyana and of the Government of
Guyana for the early success of the efforts of the OAU in
this matter.

44. There are, we believe, other winners in this process,
however fruitless its outcome to date may be. Chad surely
is one. Its posture throughout has been courageous and
dignified. Its .spokesmen have treated the -lies and the
invective of Libya with the quiet contempt they deserve.
Zaire also has been a winner, in its immediate, powerful
response to Chad’s appeal for help and-in concert with
the representative of Togo-in its genuine search for consensus within the Council’s non-aligned group. The fact
that this effort was unavailing, that indeed it never had a
chance of success in view of the prevailing cynicism and
the deliberate manipulation of the Council’s consultative
process-well, none of this reflects discredit on either
Zaire or Togo.
.

41. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America):
And so, exactly 28 days since we heard the massively-documented complaint of the sole, legitimate Government of Chad against the flagrant aggression of Libya,
fully four weeks since we listened to the appeal of Chad
for urgent help in combating that aggression, the Council
meets one more time-and for what reason? To affirm its
fundamental irrelevance to the realities of international
gangsterism and to admit its utter futility as an effective
instrument of international peace and security.

45. We believe there has been another clear and significant signal given in the course of the Council’s consideration of Chad’s complaint: the virtually unanimous voice
of Chad’s African neighbours in condemnation of Libyan
aggression and in courageous support of the Government
of Chad, the Government of President Hissein Habre. It
has been an impressive display of adherence to the princi-pies that are supposed to impel the United Nations to
effective action, and of a clear-eyed realism that not to
oppose aggression is quite simply to incite more, and
more flagrant, aggression-graver threats to international
peace and security, closer and closer to home.

42. Indeed, this is not a proud day for the United
Nations Security Council. The losers in the proceedings of
this past month are many. There is of course the Security
Council itself, which has been cynically manipulatedand worse, which has permitted itself to. be cynically
manipulated. There is the Charter of the United Nations,
which has been so contemptuously violated. There is that
group within the Council which has been throughout an
entire month of negotiation the victim of the most radical
among its members. And again, what is worse is that this
group has been a willing victim, and that the negotiations
have been dishonest from the beginning. Every concession
by the honourable and the reasonable has been frustrated
by yet another non-negotiable demand by the extremistsencouraged from within the Council’s permanent membership, we do not for one moment doubt, by Libya’s
benefactor and protector, the Soviet Union.

46. If ever there was a documented case of unprovoked
aggression, this was it. We cannot conceive of a situation
in which the aggressor was more unmistakably identified.
Equally, we find it impossible to imagine an appeal more
meritorious than that addressed to us, .on 3 August, by
Chad [2462nd meeting].
^_
47. By the very same token, our response should have
been unequivocal and immediate. On 4 August we should
have been prepared to vote on a draft resolution that
condemned Libyan aggression and that demanded the cessation. of fighting and the immediate withdrawal of
Libyan forces from the territory of Chad+hus clearing
the way for Chad to reconcile its own internal differences,
and to control its own destiny’as a free and independent
nation, utilizing the good offices of the OAU or possibly
of the United Nations itself in this effort of selfdetermination.

43. It is tempting, if only for the sake of symmetry, to
balance losers with winners and thus to credit Libya with
a victory for its naked, unprovoked aggression. But to
draw any such conclusion from the charade of the last
month in the Council-and
let there be not a moment’s
doubt on this score either-would
be a very, very great
mistake. For there were some among this Council’s own
membership who did not wait for the Council or rely on
the Council to respond to the urgent appeal of Chad.
There were those whorealized that aggression had to be
deterred, who accepted their obligation-under
the Charter,. indeed-to
help Chad defend itself, who were prepared to make that commitment. My Government was
one of those. Zaire was another. France was a third. Our
commitment to the freedom and independence of Chad is
strong and tangible, and we would urge the aggressor and

48. Would such a draft resolution have. succeeded?
Almost surely not. But such a draft resolution would keep
faith with the mandate of the Charter and would ‘serve
one very important purpose additionally: it would identify for all the world to see those who reject the use of
force as an instrument of international
relations, ‘and
those who not only condone ‘the use of force but even
support and encourage it.
49. As I have said already, the absence of such a draft
resolution makes this far frdm a proud day for the Council and the world Organization. But more than that, it is a
5

day of the .gravest danger-and
particularly for those
small and relatively defenceless nations, like Chad, which
are the actual or the intended or .the potential victims of
aggression.

been reflected in the acerbity of some of the statements
made by the protagonists. If the Council is to make any
useful’contributioti
towards resolving the issues that have
been raised, it would be necessary to concentrate on the
realities of the situation beyond the polemics and the verbal sparring iri the debate.

50. In a very important sense, the United States does not
need the United Nations-certainly
not for its protection,
certainly not for its defence. But for many nations around
the world, particularly those which constitute the nonaligned group within the Council, an appeal to the united
Nations may represent their ultimate and essential
recourse. Universal adherence to the principles of the
Charter may be their only guarantee against the adventurism of a Qaddafi or against global imperialism-imperfect,
yes, but the best this imperfect world has yet been able to
devise.

‘_

51. The inherent authority of this gpproximation of a
world community
is not, however, self-enforcing. It
requires the courage of the Member States’ avowed convictions and the determination to resist aggression and the
willingness to stand up and be counted.

_-_
.‘,
*-,
e’,
,‘.
,-,
e’,
_‘_
,-,
,-s’,
,+.
,‘_
P’,
,‘,
_‘,
,-.
_‘_

52. We must therefore pose this question: by their inability or unwillingness to act, by their readiness to be victimized and manipulated,
by their contribution
to the
.undermining of the effectiveness of the Council and of the
United Nations generally, are the members of the Security
Council helping to arm their own executioners? We are
appalled by the answer that, so far, this proceeding
appears to provide.

57. In its more than 20 years of independent life, Chad
has seen little tranquillity or peace. Internecine conflicts
-have throughout ravaged that country and attracted foreign intervention more than once and from more than one
direction. In this tragic situation, the people of Chad are
the primary victims whose aspirations for peace, for deliverance from extreme poverty and for national reconstruction continue to be a dream awaiting fulfilment.
58. When Chad brought its complaint to the Council,
the internal conflict in the country and the acts of foreign
intervention in its affairs had escalated to an unprecedented level. The circumstances surrounding these events
may invite vaiying interpretations,
and charges and
counter-charges made in the Council’s debate may evoke
different reactions, but the principles which are being
flouted and which need to be upheld remain sacrosanct
and inviolate.
56. The external interference in Chad’s affairs, in utter
disregard for respect for its political independence and
territorial integrity, is the central issue constituting the
international dimension of the Chad crisis. It is for the
people of Chad to choose their leaders and their system of
government. They must be left to themselves to settle their
political differences and order their affairs in peace, without outside interference or pressure. Neighbours cannot
arrogate to themselves the right to pick a winner of their
own choice, back him with all available resources and
confer legitimacy on him. Our firm opposition to such a
propensity in any part of the woild requires no
reiteration.

53. Mr. Shah NAWAZ (Pakistan): Since this is the last
day of August and my first statement in a formal meeting
of the Council under your presidency, Sir, I shall begin by
expressing our deep appreciation of the outstanding
manner in which you have guided the work of the Council. Your widely acknowledged wisdom and experience
have greatly benefitted the Council, especially in its deliberations over the situation of breach of peace in strifeafflicted and war-tom Chad..

60. At the same time, we are concerned over outside
Powers aligning themselves in this internal conflict. Their
itivolvement will worsen the situation, kompound dificulties and prolong the tragedy of the people of Chad. This
issue, if drawn into the vortex of East-West confrontation, would become insoluble.

54. I should also like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Ling Qing,
who guided the work of the Council last month tith’great
skill, wisdom and statesmanship.
55. Earlier during the debate [ibid] we received with
deep concern the information provided by Mr. Korom
Ahmed, the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and
Co-operation of Chad, and by that country’s representative, about the intolerable conditions inside Chad. We
listened to their complaint of Libyan military intervention
in the conflict. We ,also took note of the statement made
by the Libyan representative disclaiming such an ‘involvement on the part of his country.

61. Since I have touched upon the Libyan complaint
which relates to the situation in the North African region,
I feel obliged to offer a few observations to set out our
views. It is quite clear that the factors that lie at the he&t
of the current crises in the region, of which Libya is a part,
are varied and complex.
62. We are conscious of the implications of the Libyan
complaint and the spectre of destabilization which it
evokes. It is our earnest hope that such fears will prove to
be unfounded and that all the countries of the region,
including Libya, can continue to live in peace and security
and .have the unintdrrupted opportunity of devoting their
energies to the paramount task of national reconstruction.

56. We have also taken note of the statements made
before the Council by several other delegations, both on
the complaint brought by Chad and on a separate complaint by Libya [S/15914
which was concurrently
debated. These twin debates have, regrettably, generated
an atmosphere of confrontation and hostility which has
6

63. At the same time. we cannot but deDlore the existence or creation of circumstances in which a small country feels threatened or experiences violations of its
sovereignty and, unable to defend itself with its own
resources, feels compelled to resort to measures which
could further limit its sovereignty and independence, even
though its right to do so is unquestionable.

68. Regrettably that moment has passed. The unconscionably long and arid debate in and outside the Council
occupied a portion of time during which the convulsions
that shook Chad settled with recognizable contours. In
the new situation, the Council should for the time being
confine its role to encouraging the OAU, which has
already taken certain important initiatives, to carry these
forward to their logical conclusion.

64. The transcendent interests of the great Powers which
often lead to the projection of their power in countries
and regions far beyond their frontiers is a fact of international life which cannot be wished away by a mere reiteration of principles of non-intervention and non-interference. The smaller nations can construct a barrier against
intervention, first of all, by setting their own affairs in
order and by conducting their relations with each other in
conformity with the principles which they profess. It is the
strife within and conflicts among the smaller nations
themselves and the failure on the part of larger countries
to respect the sovereignty and independence of small
neighbours which all too frequently attract foreign
intervention.

69. As we look at the background of the crisis in Chad,
we feel increasingly convinced that the African States
themselves have provided practical, just and credible
answers to the Chad problem in the past. It is unfortunate
that the agreement worked out by them four years’ago at
Lagos [S/14378. annex 4, which was blessed by the OAU,
was not given a chance to be fully implemented. At this
stage, what is important is not to apportion blame but to
revert -without delay to the course which has been lost.
70. Earlier this year also, when Chad brought a complaint to the Council in regard to the Aouzou Strip
[S/15643], the President of the Council, in a statement
issued on behalf of its members on 6 April [S/15688],
appealed, to the two countries to make full use of the
mechanism available within the OAU. It may be recalled
that in June last the OAU decided to activate its AdHoc
Committee on the Libya-Chad dispute under the chairmanship of Gabon.

65. Such is our perception of the situation in Chad and
North Africa and the interplay of regional and extraregional factors in it. Regrettably, the Council, despite its
strenuous efforts, has not come up with a decision which
could fully respond to the conditions of intervention and
conflict in Chad on the basis of principles and at the same
time enjoy the support of all members of the Council.

71. We repose our hopes, once again, in the efforts of
the OAU and in its ability to bring relief to the grave
situation in Chad, and we feel heartened by the prompt
initiative of the Chairman of the OAU which is already
under way. At the same time, we fully realize that since
April the situation in Chad has become aggravated far
beyond the description of a mere bilateral dispute
between Libya and Chad or a civil strife between the two
contenders of power. It has assumed an international
dimension of great complexity with serious implications
for the peace and security of the entire region. In the
circumstances the Council must remain seized of the situation, which continues to pose a threat to regional and
international peace and security.

66. In our view a nroner resnonse from the Council
should have the following elements: first, affirmation of
respect for the political independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Chad and observance of the
principles of non-use of force, non-interference and nonintervention in the internal affairs of States; secondly, the
termination of all foreign intervention, the withdrawal of
foreign forces and a call on the parties involved in the
conflict to disengage so as to allow the process of peace to
gather momentum; and thirdly, encouragement and support for efforts by the OAU to achieve a peaceful solution
of the problem afflicting Chad.

72. Should the efforts of the OAU fail to bear fruit, the
Council should resume its consideration of the situation
and take -appropriate measures in the discharge of its
Charter responsibilities.

67. When Chad brought its complaint to the Council
about a month ago, the facts of the situation on the
ground were much disputed and each protagonist had
drawn a picture of the situation that reflected its own
strongly-held view and conflicted with that of the others.
The Council could not simply select one set of facts as the
basis for its approach to the problem, nor could it find a
way of escape by partially or wholly relying on media
reports on the situation. That in our view was the time for
the Council to dispatch a fact-finding mission to Chad
under the auspices of the Secretary-General with a mandate to submit a- report to the Council within a specified
period. That was also the time when we would have
wished to see the Council take a decision combining the
three elements I have just mentioned as its integral measures. Such a step would have enabled the Council to play
.,an effective role in the resolution of the problem.

73. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Today, here in’ the
Council before it began its meeting, I asked a representative what we could really expect at this meeting and he
answered me that, as was perfectly understandable and
natural, judging from some of the speakers inscribed to
speak, we would hear expressions of disappointment, disillusionment and even despair.
74. Indeed, one precisely limited group of States came
forth with an entire series of statements expressing feelings of disappointment and despair, and there is a simple
reason for this. They have not been able to draw the
Council into activities inappropriate for it.
7

75. Their activities resulted, as was inevitable, in failure.
Their efforts failed because they have tried in the Council
to defend and advance an unjust and mistaken cause.
They have been trying, from outside and with the assistance of the Council, to dictate their conditions to an
entire continent, without giving the Africans themselves
the right to settle their own affairs.
76. The policy pursued in the Council by that group of
States constitutes an act of open defence of the OAU.
77. I shall be specific. First, although the OAU has
repeatedly expressed its advocacy of an immediate cessation of the armed hostilities and bloodshed in Chad, that
group of States has not heeded the appeal of the OAU,
because it was not to its liking. Secondly, the OAU has
vigorously expressed its position that outside intervention-both
African and non-African-in
Chad’s affairs
should cease. Yet in none of the statements made by the
aforementioned group of States has anything been said
about non-interference. That group of States evidently
feels it is right to intervene from outside in Africa’s internal affairs. Thirdly, the OAU has advocated national
reconciliation of the various factions and groups in Chad.
But that group of States is evidently in favour of war-a
war of extermination in Chad, war until Chad’s last citizen is exterminated. Fourthly, the OAU has officially
requested, through the President of the Council, that the
Council not take any action, so as to make it possible for
the OAU to continue its efforts. Yet that group of States is
rejecting that request by the OAU as well.
78. Thus, two separate policies have clearly emerged
from the Council’s consideration of this item: one is
“Africa for the Africans*‘-letting
the OAU settle this
difficult problem itself. That policy is supported by the
Soviet ,Union, and the Soviet Union will continue to sup
port it. The other policy is “Africa as a sphere of
influence” -a policy upheld by those who would like to
continue to resolve Africa’s affairs by themselves, those
who would like to return Africa to the sad times of the
Berlin Congress. But such a policy is the echo of a remote
past: it has also been rejected by most of the members of
the Council. Therefore this policy which has been pursued
by one narrow group of States in the Council was
obviously doomed to failure and, accordingly, has failed.

8 1. Mr. GAYAMA (Congo) (inrequretation from French):
Mr. President, the States Members of the United Nations
and in particular the members of the Council are already
familiar with your vast diplomatic experience. That is why
most of the preceding speakers have very rightly extended
their congratulations to you for the effective way in which
you have so far been conducting the Council’s work. My
delegation cannot fail to join in the sentiments expressed
by those speakers.
82. No one is better qualified than you, Sir, the representative of France, to direct the debate on this question of
Chad, given the role that your country is now playing and
that it has always played in matters regarding Chad, both
prior to and since that country’s independence. My delegation would mention in particular the role your country
has played in affording Chad and its people the opportunity to achieve reconciliation and to establish a just and
lasting peace in that country.
,
83. With the new outbreak of war in Chad over the past
two months, the fraternal people of that country, which
has suffered so severely in recent years, has been living
through an atrocious tragedy not of its own making, in
the words used by my country’s President, Colonel Denis
Sassou-Nguesso, ‘in his address to his African colleagues
and other guests at the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the Congolese revolution to describe the disturbing situation prevailing in that friendly country.
84. On that occasion, moved by the sincere desire and
fraternal concern to contribute, in no matter how small a
way, to alleviating the heavy burden on the fraternal
people of Chad, the heads of State of central Africa and
the current Chairman of the OAU conducted, in a responsible and constructive way, a “broad exchange of views on
the situation that has prevailed in Chad over the past few
years”.
85. With the permission of members of the Council, I
should like to highlight the declaration that resulted from
that exchange of views, as it is contained in the annex to
document S/15936 which we have addressed to the
Secretary-General. The Declaration of Brazzaville on the
situation in Chad, as the document is entitled, was
prompted mainly by the deep concern aroused by the
extreme gravity of the problem and of the obvious risks of
its becoming internationalized. It will therefore come as ,
no surprise that the heads of State clearly indicated that
the solution to this conflict is not military, but political.

79. Finallv. I wish to refer to the uathetic words uttered
here today-by one representative, Ito the effect that the
Security Council has been unable to do anything in this
matter for 28 days now. But it is precisely his delegation
which, not for just some days but for many years, has
been blocking action by the Council against the Israeli
aggressors. It is precisely that delegation which, not just
for several days but for many years, has been blocking
action in the Council against the South African racists.
Therefore, the aforementioned lamentations are nothing
more than crocodile tears.

86. Some action was therefore deemed necessary, and,
as was most fitting, the current Chairman of the OAU
was requested to establish contact with all the parties concerned with a view to achieving, first, a cease-fire;
secondly, the withdrawal of all foreign troops; and,
thirdly, a commitment
on the part of all countries to
refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of Chad.

80. The PRESIDENT
(infervreratiun from French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Congo. I’invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

87. For the accuracy of the verbatim record, we should
also mention two points: first, that one of the countries
that participated in the meeting, Zaire, was unable to take
a position on the results set forth in the Declaration;

.

.e

secondly, that several other delegations represented in
Brazzaville at other than the head-of&ate level followed
those discussions closdy and expressed their interest.

94. My country therefore hopes, above all, for a final
settlement of the problem of Chad through the reconciliation of all Chadians, free from foreign interference.

88. In order properly to assessthe intrinsic value of the
Declaration of Brazz&lle, my delegation would like to
draw the attention-of members of the Council to the fact
that it is, above all, the result of the first attempt at diplomatic action voluntarily undertaken by a group of political leaders at the highest level aimed at demonstrating the
presence and watchfulness of Africa with regard to a
problem that our continent, today more than ever before,
has the right and the duty to solve.

95. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The.
next speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. I invite him to make his statement. .‘

89. The surest way of doing so is by peaceful means, one
of the essential bases for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In the view of the Congo, the problem
cannot be solved by a resort to violence. That can only
turn the land of Chad into a charnel-house, which would
be of benefit only to foreign countries at the expense of
the people of Chad.
90. We need only note the great solicitude being lavished today on Chad by the weapons merchants. It is
somewhat, suspect, however, considering that none of
those countries showed the ‘slightest generosity when it
was a matter of Chad’s economic and social development.
This helps us to understand the true motives behind the
take-over being attempted in Chad and, beyond that
country, in all of Africa.
91. My delegation would, in all modesty, invite
members of the Council to take this as food for thought
and to look upon the Declaration of Brazzaville as the
modest proposal of a group of countries bound together
by their friendship for Chad, one put forward as an alternative to war, ,which would wreak incalculable devastation on the life of a people and a nation.
92. Convinced of the need for peaceful coexistence, harmony and understanding among States or groups of
States, whatever their philosophy or their political, economic or social system, the People’s Republic of the
Congo advocate mutual respect, non-intervention
and
anti-imperialism.
In addition, our familiarity with the
people of Chad and their problems is not merely theoretical; it is a tangible reality of which we have had daily
experience thanks to our many historic and human ties.
Hence the People’s Republic of the Congo has always felt
honoured to be the bearer of peace and harmony with
regard to Chad, as well as to other neighbouring countries
of central Africa.
93. This constant practice of ,the policy of goodneighbourliness,
the constant concern of President
Sassou-Nguesso and of the Government of the Congo,
cannot be related to any passing interest or temporary
factor. For that reason, my country has always attempted
to preserve its ability to act as a conciliator rather than to
lend its support to interventionist manoeuvres which, in
the end, alienate the independence of Africa and play into
the hands of the worst enemies of its freedom.

96.

Mr. BURWIN

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

(inrerpre-

hztion from Arabic): I should like to begin my statement by

drawing the Council’s attention to certain facts and clarifying matters.
97. Some members of the Council are still insisting on
distorting the.actual situation prevailing in Chad. Those
members have tried to use the Council, as a means of
propaganda against Libya. And here I refer to statements
made by the representatives of the United Kingdom, the
Netherlands and the United States.
98. In order that facts not be misrepresented, my country’s delegation stresses once again that there is in Chad a
civil war, the consequence of a long history of colonialism
inflicted on the African continent, the vestiges of which
influence many African countries.
99. This civil war in Chad has ideological, religious, tribal and ethnic roots and is being encouraged by the imperialist countries. What made this situation worse is the
mutiny of one of the eleven Chad contingents, meaning
the Army of the North under Hissein HabrC, which is
being supported and protected by French, Zairian and
American forces, as well as mercenaries.
100. We are convinced that the attempts to convert the
internal strife in Chad into a conflict between Libya and
Chad are not but desperate attempts to use this Council
as a forum. for propaganda against the Jamahiriya. Such
attempts are led by the United States, whose Administration is the enemy of the Libyan people in particular, and
of the African and Arab peoples in general.
101. The United States and France have tried to gain
legitimacy for their stooge, Hissein Habrt, in Chad in
order to protect their interests. That is unacceptable to my
country, and, I believe, to the majority of members of the
Council.
102. The Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
stresses its firm position that stems from the fact that the
presence of imperialist forces in an African country represents a direct threat to Libya and its neighbours. It would
be preferable for the Council to call upon those forces to
withdraw and allow the people of Chad to solve their
problems by themselves or through- initiatives of the
OAU.
103. The representative’ of the United States uttered
many misrepresentations with regard to Libya. I merely
wish to say that at this time his Administration is exerting
a show of force in various parts of the world and threatening peoples of Latin America, South-East Asia, the Middle East and Africa.

104. In drawing the Council’s attention to his point of
view, he forgot to mention that the United States itself has
exercised its right of veto more than 30 times against the
interests of peoples. Recently it was the only country that
supported the illegitimacy, expansion and use of force in
the acquisition of territory, as well as the massacring of
the Palestinian people, when it exercised its right of veto
against a draft resolution on that matter.
105. It is not surprising that the leaders of outmoded
imperialism should hasten to launch an attack against a
country wishing to be free from all kinds of pressure. It is
not surprising that they should hasten to install their own
stooges-something
that was mentioned by the representative of the United States. Currently they are trying to
protect their stooge, HabrC, against the will of the people
of Chad.
106. The United States and other imperialist countries
care nothing about the interests of Chad or those of the
other peoples of Africa, let alone those of the Palestinian
and Arab peoples. The President of the United States said
that Chad comes within the sphere of influence of France.
That means that the world is divided into spheres of
influence.
107. The representative of the American Administration was telling the truth when he mentioned that his country did not need the United Nations. Indeed the American Administration,
along with Zionist organizations, is
trying to put an end to the Organization, thus getting rid
of any control over flexing its muscles and using all its
capabilities to put the world in the grip of American
monopolies.
108. Some representatives referred to principles and said
that they should be upheld. But we believe that a multifaceted policy exists. We have never heard the protagonists of colonialism make any such references when the
Council discussed intervention, threats and hostile acts on
the part of the American Administration
against the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya or Nicaragua. We would have
,hoped that those concerned with peace and with principles would have been able to refer to the flexing of muscles and the threat and use of force against an Arab
people trying to live in peace and .to practise a policy of
non-alignment and frankly express their opinions against
the American Administration’s
unjust and unethical policy against the African peoples, the Palestinian people, the
Arab peoples and the peoples of Central America.
109. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya seeks peace and
prosperity for the people of Chad, for the situation in
Chad must have consequences for neighbouring countries. Any aggravation of the situation in Chad, or in any
part of the neighbouring countries, particularly Libya,
would directly or indirectly affect their security, because
what is taking place must affect them. We therefore hope
that the people of Chad will be able to realize national
conciliation and to set up a Government, or to encourage
or preserve the Transitional
Government of National
Unity established through the Lagos Accord [S/14378,
clllnex 4, and not through the use of force, and blessed by

the OAU. It enjoys the support of the majority of the
people of Chad. We hope that our brothers in Chad will
be able to preserve their country and to remove the
French and Zairian troops from their country. The Jamahiriya is ready to co-operate with its sister African nations
and with their disputing Chadian brothers if they so wish.
It is ready to contribute to any initiatives, just as it has in
the past, in order to put an end to-the civil war and to
bring about national reconciliation.
1IO. The Jamahiriya supports the initiatives undertaken
by the OAU and believes that the proper solution is to
leave the whole matter to that Organization, whose Chairman. has undertaken consultations on the matter. Several
statements have been released, all calling for an end to the
tragedy in Chad and national reconciliation.
111. The Jamahiriya rejects the use of the situation in
Chad by the United States and other imperialist countries
as a pretext for interference in the internal affairs of the
Jamahiriya or other neighbouring countries in preparation for campaigns against the Libyan people.
11.2. In conclusion, I believe that the proper solution
will be to implement the Lagos Accord and to uphold the
national Government, supporting it and leaving the Chadian people to make its own decisions.

’

113. The PRESIDENT
(interpreturion from French): As
President of the Council I would draw attention to the
statement just made by the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya. He has once again trampled on the
authority of the Council. We are meeting here to hear a
complaint by the legitimate Government of Chad, a
Government whose legitimacy has been recognized by the
Council in the statement of 6 April last, which I need not
recall [S/15688]. It has also been recognized by the majority of members of the OAU and by the OAU itself.
‘-_
114. The next speaker is Mr. Korom Ahmed, the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of
Chad, upon whom I call.
115. Mr. KOROM
AHMED
(Chad) (interpretation
from French): I shall not stoop to the level of Qaddafi’s
representative to respond to his madness. I prefer to maintain the proper level of this discussion and to address the
question that is of such importance to Chad.
116. It is with great bitterness and profound disappointment that I once again, on behalf of my delegation,
address this august assemblage.
117. First of all, I wish to extend our most heartfelt
thanks and gratitude to all the members of the Council
and all the representatives of the friendly countries,
Members of the Organization, that have spoken in the
debate on the question before the Council in total support
of the just cause of Chad.
118. The text that- has been proposed for adoption, a
purely procedural text, in our view constitutes the very
least that we could have expected of the Council. It will be
10

_

.

.

123: There can be no doubt that this is a serious evasion
of responsibility by the non-aligned members of the Council. It is a dangerous and grave precedent for the future
not only of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
whose principles and ideals the group is by definition
entrusted with defending within the United Nations, but
also of the Council, whose principal mission, we recall, is
the maintenance of international peace and security.

recalled that throughout the discussion of the question
before the Council our delegation has presented most
striking evidence of Libya’s outright aggression against
Chad.and its martyred people. It will also be recalled that
throughout the course of this debate, which is a very painful one for our delegation, we have brought before the
Council the facts of the situation, irrefutable proof of this
brutal aggression, and have denounced the actions of the
new imperialism now surfacing in Africa. We have given
evidence of the annexationism and interventionism
of
Colonel Qaddafi’s Libya, which threaten the peace, stability and security not only of a small, peaceful country such
as Chad but of most of the countries of the region as well.

124. Certain States members of the Council, and in par-’
titular those that belong to the Movement of NonAligned Countries, would like this .serious issue to be
referred purely and simply, without any further action, to
the OAU. We agree with such action in principle, but that
group was acting as spokesman of the Libyan aggressor.
We recall that the dispute between Chad and Libya was
submitted by Chad to the OAU at the fourteenth session
of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government, held
at Libreville in 1977. But, as always, Libya, which seems
to lay down the law within the OAU, has since then virtually blocked the functioning of the AdHoc Committee on
the Chad-Libya dispute, established at that meeting.z
That is why, in the face of the occupation of part of our
territory and the worsening of Libyan aggression, Chad
asked the Council to compel Colonel Qaddafi’s Libya to
listen to reason by the adoption of a suitable text.

119. In order to. attain its objectives and carry out its
sordid and diabolical plans, Colonel Qaddafi’s Libya, with
the blessing, assistance and encouragement of a permanent
member of the Council, the Soviet Union, established a
military arsenal of unusual size in order to occupy by force
today the northern half of our country, as in the past it
occupied Aouzciu, in defiance of the principles of international law .and of all the principles of the Charter of’the
Organization of African Unity and the Charter of the
United Nations. Libya is once again using the most sophisticated weapons against a country that has more need of
bread than of gunpowder. I repeat that those weapons are
principally Soviet. Colonel Qaddafi is deploying against
innocent, unarmed, civilian populations his horde, the
Islamic Legion. Sufficient evidence of this barbaric policy
has been brought to the Council.

125. The draft resolution submitted by our delegation to
the non-aligned group and the purely procedural text presented by the President of the Council clearly stressed the
important role which should be played by the OAU in the
search for a peaceful solution to this painful problem. It is
therefore difficult’ to understand how a certain number of
members of the Council insist on the need to refer the
question purely and simply to the OAU, thus meeting the
demand of Libya, an aggressor country which the Council
should logically condemn unhesitatingly.

120. It is in this context that the Chad delegation, wishing to preserve both the spirit and the principles of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, to which Chad and
Libya belong, submitted a draft resolution on the problem concerning it to the group of eight countries of the
Movement. In order to make it possible for that group to
arrive at a consensus text demonstrating the solidarity
and unity of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
the delegation of Chad made enormous concessions. In
spite of the willingness of our delegation, and in the face
of the lack of political will on the part of Libya, everpresent in the non-aligned group, the group was, unfortunately, again to our great disappointment,
unable to
arrive at a compromise text in accordance with the relevant principles of our movement.

126. Should we therefore take it that force’can prevail
over law, that might always makes right? How otherwise
are we to explain the fact that Chad, a small,-poor country with no other means of exerting pressure tharrthe
strength of its just cause, has not prevailed over a rich and
arrogant Libya, whose brutal aggression has been so
clearly demonstrated? Or are we faced with a manifestation of the demands of a small group of developing countries which would consider the non-aligned countries to
be the supposed natural allies of the Soviet Union, and
which from the outset placed this war of aggression,
waged by Libya against my country’ in the context of the
East-West conflict? If this is so, may I remind the Council
that we have a new era before us, one fraught with
hitherto unknown dangers. May I also remind the nonaligned countries that the Foreign Ministers and heads of
Delegation of non-aligned countries participating in the
thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly, at their
meeting held in New York from 4 to 9 October 1982,
issued an appeal to all the members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries not to interfere in Chad’s internal
affairs [S/254.54, annex, para. 331.

121. Frankly, we were not expecting these disappointing
results, in so far as small countries, of which Chad is one,
have always had great faith in the principles of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the principles contained in the Charter of the Organization of African Unity
and the Charter of the United Nations.
122. We believe that a country that suffers aggression,
- as is the case of Chad, is entitled ‘to come before the
Council, whose essential task is the maintenance of peace
and security in the world. All the members of the Council,
and in particular the non-aligned, have a very important
role to play in this field, since this is a conflict between
two members of the _ ,Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries.

127. At this very moment, as I address this body,
Qaddafi’s Libya continues to strengthen its military appa11

ratus, with dozens of Soviet combat planes and Soviet
equipment based on Chad territory and with more than
6,000 Libyans in the north of the country. The situation is
extremely serious. Hence, in spite of the fact that the
Council is momentarily paralysed, we continue to believe
in its responsibility for taking the appropriate measures to
restore peace to Chad and thus to the region. Therefore,
for our delegation the debate remains open and Chad
reserves its right to return to the Council at any time.
128. In conclusion, Mr. President, I should like to
express to you and to the chairman of the non-aligned
group, the -representative of Togo, our most sincere
thanks for the very commendable, intensive efforts that
you have both made to arrive at a compromise text taking
account of the serious situation prevaiiing in Chad. Unfortunately, all those efforts have not been crowned with
success. None the less, we believe that they have contributed to clarifying the positions of all in the face of this
painful problem facing my country. We believe that this
precedent will serve as a lesson for all small countries that
suffer the risk of aggression in the future by powerful,
arrogant countries such as Libya.

131. I shall not return to the substance of the debate,
that is, the situation that led the Government of Chad to
bring a complaint against the Libyan invasion before
the Council. The Chad situation is now known to all, and
the position of France, which I set forth in my statement
on 12 August [24552/r meeting], was lucidly developed
in extenso by the President of the French Republic on
26 August.
132. I should merely like to recall, at this stage of our
debate and taking into account the consultations I have
had in recent days, the position of my country with regard
to the respective roles of the OAU and the’ United
Nations.
133. France attaches great importance to the role of
regional organizations. In particular, it gives constant support to the OAU, which it sees as an irreplaceable framework for the settlement of African conflicts. This is
particularly true of the conflict in Chad, with respect to
which the French Government resolutely supports the
efforts of the OAU. Moreover, an OAU mission is in
Paris today where it is being received by the highest
authorities. Thus, bearing in mind the initiative being prcpared by the regional Organization, we agree in this case
that the Council, without in any way evading its responsibilities in this matter, should not take a position today.

129. In conclusion, I should like to make a brief comment in response to the statement just made by the representative of the Congo. The Declaration adopted
al
Brazzaville spoke of non-interference by the neighbours
of Chad. I am surprised that the representative of the
Congo did not mention that paragraph in his statement
and I hope a correction will therefore be made to the
statement he has just made, so that the Council may take
note of it.

The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

NOTES

130. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to speak as the representative of FRANCE.

’ A/38/312,
2 A/32/310,

annex,
annex

resolution
II. decision

AHG/Res.l06
AHGDec.108

.’

12

(XIX).
(XIV).

..

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

pubiications
your bookstore

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from booMore\
and di>tilbutora
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
Neu

SE PROdURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Umes sont en vente
du monde entier..
Informez-vous
aup&
de votre
Section
des ventes.
New York ou Geneve.

ICAK

nOJI?‘YMTb

M3AAHMH

Oprawf3aniiH
06benwewtblx
Bo Bcex pafiotiax
wipa.

HautiR
Harronwe

Mara3HHC

Km
nHuIHTe
no
H3naHHk.
kibti-iiopI(

OpratiW3aUWI
XeHeaa.

COMO
Las

CONSEGUIR

anpecy:
HIlH

PC’BLICACIONES

publicaciones
de las Naciones
tOdaS psrtes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

L’!iIES

dans les llbrairtes
et leb aeenc‘e$
dtipwtalrc\
libraire
nu adressez-bous8
: Natwnx
C’nte\;

OPTAHM3AUM-kl

M3natiHn
w arewweax
nponante

DES NATIONS

throughout
the
Yorh or Gene\a.

OKbE~MHEHHblX
MOXHO

KyntlTb

cnpaBK;ri

06 w3aiitiflx

DE LAS

06aeiurthiHblx

NACIONES

HAl&ln

B KHH’XHbli

B Bautext
Hauuii,

~iara3tit+a\
KW!xHO\t
CeK;ulln
no

UNIDAS

Unidas
esten en venta en iibrerias
y casas dtstribuidoras
en
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas.
Secci6n
de Ventas.
