United Nations

S/PV.3900(Resumption)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-third Year

3900th Meeting
Tuesday, 30 June 1998, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Monteiro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Portugal)

Members:

Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Buallay
Mr. Amorim
Mr. Qin Huasun
Mr. Sáenz Biolley
Mr. Dejammet
Mr. Essonghé
Mr. Jagne
Mr. Owada
Mr. Mahugu
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Türk
Mr. Dahlgren
Sir John Weston
Mr. Richardson

Agenda
The situation in the occupied Arab territories
Letter dated 23 June 1998 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1998/558)

98-85552 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The meeting resumed at 3.40 p.m.
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 30 June 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of Qatar to the United Nations,
which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that the Security Council
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Mokhtar
Lamani, Permanent Observer for the Organization of
the Islamic Conference to the United Nations, during
the Council’s discussion on the item entitled “The
situation in the occupied Arab territories”.
That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/1998/592.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to Mr. Lamani.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from Arabic): It gives me great pleasure to begin by
extending to you, Mr. President, our sincere
congratulations.
We would also like to take this opportunity to express
our condolences on the death of Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye,
who lost his life as a martyr in the performance of his
mission as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Angola, while carrying out his noble
humanitarian effort.
I would also like to express our sincere appreciation
for your response, Mr. President, and for the response of
the other members of the Security Council, to the request
made by the Arab Group to hold this emergency meeting to
consider the serious decision, taken by the extremist Israeli
Government on 21 June, to adopt the programme declared
by the Israeli Prime Minister on 18 June aimed at
strengthening Israel’s illegitimate grip on Jerusalem. That
provocative decision was intended to expand the municipal
boundaries of the city of Jerusalem to include Israeli
settlements on the West Bank, to establish greater
municipal authority and to annex more occupied Palestinian
territories into the municipality of Jerusalem, thereby

2

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
erasing the Arab character of the city and altering its
status from a Holy City characterized by love and
tolerance into a city that is totally within the Israeli grip.
This would result in erasing its Arab identity and altering
its demographic composition while Judaizing it totally.
While my country believes that this Israeli decision
represents one aggression in a series of Israeli aggressions
against Arab and Palestinian occupied territories, we
strongly and categorically condemn and reject it. The
Syrian Arab Republic regards that decision as not only a
provocation of the Palestinian and Arab peoples, in
particular, and of the peoples of the world,
including Muslims and Christians, in general but also as
a flagrant violation of international law and the
resolutions of the Security Council, especially the 16
resolutions the Security Council has already adopted on
Jerusalem. Security Council resolution 478 (1980) stresses
in paragraph 3 that,
“all legislative and administrative measures and
actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, which
have altered or purport to alter the character and
status of the Holy City of Jerusalem, and in
particular the recent 'basic law' on Jerusalem, are
null and void”.
This new Israeli decision is yet another flagrant
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and
of the Hague Convention of 1907. The Syrian Arab
Republic considers this new Israeli decision as null and
void and of no legal consequence.
The new plan of the Israeli Prime Minister is within
the framework of systematic procedures and steps aimed
at destroying the peace process in its entirety. The
decisions taken by the Israeli Government with regard to
Jerusalem and its policies of annexing occupied Arab
territories are the practical embodiment of the policies of
“ethnic cleansing” that were strongly denounced and
condemned by the international community with regard to
Bosnia, for example. These measures taken by Israel
remind us of the cantonization policy adopted by the
racist regime of South Africa before the victory over
apartheid.
The process of “ethnic cleansing” conducted by
Israel against the Palestinian people has led millions of
Palestinians to leave their homeland and, if this continues,
will force scores of thousands more to go into exile.
Palestinians, who have always lived on the land of their
forefathers, now hold only 0.5 per cent of their land;

Security Council
Fifty-third year

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998

while the Israelis, who have brutally and through repression
and mass massacres confiscated the land, control 99 per
cent of all Palestinian land.

unimaginable for those who live under occupation to
accept it or to adapt and adjust themselves to the practices
of the Israeli occupation.

It is noteworthy that international warnings have been
addressed to certain countries. Navies are being moved on
the high seas and planes are being redeployed, while those
who commit those actions do not bother to denounce in
their statements or in a few words Israel’s actions as being
contradictory to human rights and to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations and the Geneva
Conventions.

The Israeli Prime Minister recently declared that his
Government will continue to build settlements in every
place in the Holy City, and reiterated his commitment to
build the settlement in Jebel Abu Ghneim in defiance of
international resolutions and calls of condemnation. The
President of the Israeli Knesset associated himself with
his Prime Minister by saying:

Scores of resolutions have been adopted by the
Security Council and the General Assembly to demand that
Israel withdraw from the occupied Arab territories, cease
the confiscation of land and refrain from taking any action
that would alter the geographic, demographic and legal
status of the occupied territories. However, Israel has
treated those resolutions with total disregard. We believe
that this raises the following questions.
Why are laws, resolutions and international sanctions
made applicable to certain States but not to Israel? Why
does Israel remain an outlaw? Why does it challenge and
defy these laws and the Council?
In this context, since the Israeli Prime Minister took
power he has taken the following actions in contradiction
of Security Council and General Assembly resolutions:
digging a tunnel next to the Al-Aqsa Mosque; establishing
a new settlement in Jebel Abu Ghneim and planning for the
construction of 6,500 housing units; undertaking
archaeological excavations at Burj al-Laqlaq, within
occupied East Jerusalem, as part of Israeli plans to build a
settlement in the heart of occupied Jerusalem; providing
protection to extremist settlers and support for their
attempts to confiscate housing units such as those in
Silwan, in East Jerusalem; confiscating additional occupied
Arab lands in order to build settlements; making plans to
build new settlements and encircling roads; demolishing
Palestinian houses and withdrawing Palestinian identity
cards; and persisting in not adhering to agreements,
commitments and the destruction of the peace process. The
list is very long.
This pattern of behaviour by the Israeli Government
would lead us to say that the accumulation of oppression,
injustice and tragedy to which the Palestinian people and
the other Arab citizens in occupied Arab territories are
subjected can only lead to an explosion endangering the
security and stability of the whole region. It is

“The appropriate Israeli response to the
statement by the United States Secretary of
State with regard to Jerusalem lies in the
intensification of settler activities in the city
and the implementation of Israeli designs
without heed for any declarations or positions
against it.”
The policies of the extremist Israeli Government
have led to a total paralysis of the peace process on all of
its tracks. If it were not for the deceptive appearance of
movement once in a while that does not deal with the
matters of substance on the Palestinian track, during the
last two years, the world would have seen the true picture
in a tangible manner and would have realized that the
Israeli Prime Minister has completely stopped the peace
process from his first day in office, especially by having
followed the policies of his ancestors in the expulsion of
Arabs from their lands and bringing in new Jewish
settlers from all over the world to replace them.
Nevertheless, the international community is about
to discover the glaring truth, since the conflict between
the extremists in the Israeli Government which was about
only 2 per cent of the lands of the West Bank, has
become a very explosive issue which may affect the
American sponsor as well.
Syria will never give up one iota of its land, and will
not permit regression from what has been achieved
through previous negotiations. We will always insist on
resuming the negotiations from the point where they
stopped. In this regard, we would like to reiterate that
strategic option of the Arabs for the establishment of a
just and lasting peace is based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), which
all demand the complete Israeli withdrawal from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967, and
from southern Lebanon and the Bekaa to the recognized
international boundaries. Moveover, Syria will always do

3

Security Council
Fifty-third year
its best to guarantee the legitimate national rights of the
Palestinian people, including the right to self-determination
and to the establishment of its independent State on its own
soil.
The Israeli Government, by turning its back on its
agreements, pledges and commitments reached during the
peace process that started in Madrid in 1991, is solely
responsible for destroying the peace process. While we
appreciate the increasing international awareness of the
reality of Israeli policies and their objectives, which are
inimical to peace, we would like to urge the sponsors of the
peace process, the countries of the European Union and
friendly and peace-loving States, to continue their serious
work in order to compel Israel to commit itself to the
implementation of the resolutions of international legitimacy
and to fulfil the agreements, pledges and commitments
which have been agreed upon as well as to resume the
negotiations on both the Syrian and Lebanese tracks from
the points at which they stopped.
In view of this bitter reality at which we have arrived
through what is called the “Israeli political kitchen”, and
the misleading attempts of the head of the Israeli
Government to justify its measures, the Security Council is
now called upon to bear its responsibilities in the
maintenance of international peace and security by
defending its credibility and its resolutions, by having Israel
respect these resolutions, by condemning the Israeli
decision to expand the geographic boundaries of Jerusalem
and by compelling Israel to rescind this serious and
provocative decision which, among other measures,
represents another time bomb that would lead to an
explosion of the whole region. The Security Council should
also reiterate Israel's commitment to apply its relevant
resolutions and those of the General Assembly, particularly
resolution 446 (1979) to the effect of establishing an
international commission of the Security Council to monitor
and follow up the situation in order to prevent settler
activities in Jerusalem and the Arab and Palestinian
occupied territories.

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
procedures that would prevent Israel from implementing
its plan to expand the boundaries of Jerusalem,
particularly since the Council is duty-bound to apply the
provisions of the Charter with regard to giving effect to
its resolutions without any double standard. Here we
would like to recall these Security Council resolutions:
252 (1968), 267 (1969), 271 (1969), 298 (1971), 446
(1979), 452 (1979), 465 (1980) and 476 (1980). We
believe that a mere expression of concern or denunciation
by this Council is no longer enough to have Israel change
its aggressive decisions and settler and expansionist plans,
either in the Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, or
in other Arab occupied territories, including the occupied
Syrian Golan and southern Lebanon.
The issue requires that the Security Council move
effectively and decisively and take the necessary practical
measures to rescind the decision and plan of the Israeli
Government to expand the boundaries of Jerusalem and
to bring pressure to bear on Israel in order for it to
resume the talks on all tracks from the point where they
stopped. In this regard, it is necessary to reaffirm the
necessity of avoiding any double standard, especially with
regard to the maintenance of peace and security, and most
particularly when it comes to an issue such as Jerusalem.
This is so especially because Israel's continuation of this
extremist policy would lead to the destruction of the
peace process and would endanger security and stability
in the region.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic for his kind words addressed to me
and members of the Security Council.
The next speaker is the representative of Yemen. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

At a time when we support the Palestinian people in
order to guarantee their legitimate rights, we would like to
urge the international community to provide all types of
assistance and support to them.

Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (interpretation from
Arabic): As this is the last meeting to be held under your
presidency, Sir, I should like sincerely to congratulate you
on the remarkable manner in which you have presided
over the Council’s work this month. At the outset, I also
wish to thank you for having convened this special
meeting to address the situation in Jerusalem, despite the
reluctance and opposition of some.

In the light of the above, we look forward to the
Security Council's taking a position on the side of the right
and the just, a position of determination to protect
international peace and security. The Security Council
should adopt the necessary and mandatory measures and

Jerusalem is the symbol of the Arab-Israeli conflict
and is at the heart of the Palestinian question. It will
remain so until comprehensive peace is reestablished in
the Middle East, including in the Holy City. On 21 June,
the Israeli Government, the occupying Power, took the

4

Security Council
Fifty-third year
very serious decision to expand the municipal boundaries of
Jerusalem, to undertake new construction projects, to
include Israeli settlements and to annex significant
territories of the West Bank to Jerusalem. This is a clear
attempt to efface the character of the city, alter its
demography to create a Jewish majority, do away with its
Arab identity, and destroy the legal and natural status of
Jerusalem, a city that belongs to all three monotheistic
religions.
My Government strongly condemns this decision of
the Israeli Government, which blatantly violates the Madrid
peace framework, all relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions and the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949, and challenges international legitimacy. The Security
Council has adopted 16 resolutions on Jerusalem and
repeatedly affirmed that any legislative or administrative
measure taken by Israel to alter the legal status and the
demographic composition of the city is null and void. The
Council has also affirmed that the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 is applicable to all territories occupied
by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem.
My delegation invites the Security Council, the organ
responsible for maintaining international peace and security,
to fulfil its obligations and duties under the Charter by
adopting practical and tangible measures to prevent Israel
from repeatedly violating the Council’s resolutions. The
Council should enact urgent and expeditious measures to
prevent the Israeli Government from implementing its
decision on Jerusalem and its settlement policy.
Ever since the extremist Government in Israel came to
power, it has relentlessly sought, in all seriousness and
enthusiasm, to distance itself from the Oslo accords and to
undermine and impede the peace process. All of this has
taken place at a time when opportunities to establish peace
have arisen. The Palestinian Authority has demonstrated its
adherence to the peace process by discharging its
responsibilities vis-à-vis that process. We urge this Council
to reassume its role in accordance with resolution 242
(1967), the essential basis for achieving a just and
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.
The President: I thank the representative of Yemen
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Lebanon. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon) (interpretation from
Arabic): I am pleased to begin my statement today by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. The work of the
Council has been conducted with efficiency and skill
under your presidency.
I am also pleased to extend to Ambassador Mahugu,
the Permanent Representative of Kenya, our appreciation
for his work last month.
Today, the Security Council is again addressing a
topic of great importance to the future of peace in the
Middle East: the Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories, particularly in holy Jerusalem. This
city has a special status, the uniqueness of which is
represented by the spiritual heritage of the followers of all
three revealed religions and the deep religious feelings
associated with it, particularly in the Arab and Islamic
worlds.
We have spoken on this topic in the Council on a
number of occasions in recent years and we do so again
today in the wake of the adoption by the Israeli
Government, on 21 June 1998, of a programme
announced by the Prime Minister, which aims at
strengthening Israel’s illegal hold on Jerusalem. The plan
would expand the boundaries of Jerusalem and would
extend the municipal authority so as to include some
Jewish settlements in the West Bank, establishing a socalled “umbrella authority”. This is a concrete step
towards the illegal annexation of more occupied
Palestinian land to the already illegally expanded
Jerusalem municipality.
With the convening of the Madrid Conference in
1991 and the establishment of the foundations and
principles of the peace process, we had hoped that a new
dawn had broken over the region in which just, lasting
and permanent peace would prevail. But Israel’s
expansionist settler policy and confiscation of territories
dealt a blow to these hopes, which the new Israeli
Government has all but extinguished. It has openly
reneged on the commitments on which the peace process
is based, made settlement an integral part of its political
priorities, and adopted new and dangerous measures to
annex East Jerusalem. Thus, once again and for the fourth
time in two years, we return to the Security Council to
focus our attention on Israel’s illegal measures and
practices in occupied East Jerusalem, aimed at
consolidating its attempts to alter the legal status and
demographic composition of that city.

5

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Last year the Israeli Government began building a new
settlement that includes 6,500 housing units at Jebel Abu
Ghneim. Today it is trying to expand the area of settlement.
That is being done in the context of a series of similar
measures taken by Israel, including its declared intention to
build another settlement at Ras Al-Amud, within the
original borders of East Jerusalem, in the wake of its
demolition of buildings at Burj al-Laqlaq in order to
establish yet another settlement in their place. All of this is
the prelude to another campaign aimed at reducing the Arab
and Palestinian population of Jerusalem. We have always
warned that these policies and illegal measures to expand
Jerusalem are extremely dangerous.
The Israeli authorities are still holding to the new
tunnel that was built under Al-Haram Al-Sharif, despite
Security Council resolution 1073 (1996). The Security
Council has so far adopted 16 resolutions on Jerusalem, and
has repeatedly announced that all measures and
arrangements adopted by Israel, the occupying Power,
including those legislative and administrative arrangements
that aim to change the legal status and demographic
composition and character of the city, are null and void and
without any legal validity. Moreover, the Security Council
has repeatedly declared that the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949 applies to all the territories occupied by Israel in
1967, including Jerusalem.
Given this context, we should like to affirm the
following principles. First, we express our full solidarity
with the Palestinian people, who refuse to submit to the
occupation, no matter how powerful that occupation may
be. Secondly, the settlement and expansionist measures,
justified by the Israelis on the pretext of security, which has
brought numerous Israeli Governments to power, have
proved to be a failure. Those measures have led to an
escalation of violence and an increase in tension between
the Arabs and the Israelis. What peace can be established
as long as occupation continues? A peace that is a fait
accompli imposed by force cannot survive, and is doomed
to ignominious failure.
Thirdly, the current problem is not an emergency; it is
the result of basic Israeli mentality and policy. To deal with
that problem we therefore need the international
community, as represented by this Council, to take a clear
position reaffirming to the Israeli Government its rejection
of the annexation of the occupied Arab territories, including
East Jerusalem, and its policy of settlement in other
occupied Arab territories.

6

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
East Jerusalem, like other towns and villages in the
West Bank and Gaza Strip, are territories that were seized
by force by Israel in 1967. Occupation will not bestow
any legitimacy with the passage of time. The provisions
of international law state that those territories, which were
acquired by force, must be evacuated. The international
community should never recognize that occupation.
Those Arab territories, including East Jerusalem, are
subject to the provisions of the Hague Convention of
1907 and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
Therefore Israel, as the occupying Power, must not make
any changes in these territories. The Security Council has
adopted a long list of resolutions, all of which demand
that Israel respect its commitments and obligations as the
occupying Power. The most important of these is
resolution 478 (1980), which determines that all
legislative and administrative measures and actions taken
by Israel, the occupying Power, which have altered or
purport to alter the character and status of the Holy City
of Jerusalem, and in particular the recently “basic law” on
Jerusalem, are null and void and must be rescinded
forthwith.
We hope that the Security Council will oppose the
threats posed to Jerusalem by the Israeli Government’s
actions and violations of international law and by the
blockade it has imposed on that Holy City, in addition to
the demolition of houses, the confiscation of identity
cards and the building of settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories.
The Security Council, which is responsible for
international peace and security, must adopt specific,
concrete measures to stop the Israeli plan to expand the
borders of Jerusalem and any other Israeli violations of
international law and of Security Council resolutions.
In issuing this call we are working honestly and
sincerely for the future of peace in the region. Adopting
a relaxed attitude towards Israeli leaders has brought only
violence and destruction for Arabs and Israelis alike. Our
position is in conformity with the previous resolutions of
the Council and all resolutions of international legitimacy.
It is also in conformity with the high precepts of
international law, which remains the cornerstone of
today’s civilized world.
We believe that it is the duty of the Council to work
for the implementation of the provisions of the Charter
and the resolutions that it has adopted in other regions of

Security Council
Fifty-third year
the world as well as in the Middle East on the basis of one
and the same standard. We should not forget Security
Council resolutions 252 (1968), 267 (1969), 271 (1969),
298 (1971) and 476 (1980), which all considered the
legislative and administrative measures as well as other
actions adopted by Israel in Jerusalem to be null and void.
We call for a resolution that will clearly express the
international community’s rejection of and opposition to
Israel’s policy and its measures to annex the occupied
territories or expand the settlements. We would like such a
resolution to include specific measures to commit Israel to
act in conformity with international legitimacy. Time is not
on the side of peace. There is a sense of foreboding, of an
evil that might spill over and that may not be confined to
the region.
Respect for previous Security Council resolutions on
Jerusalem must remain one of the main requisites for the
achievement of peace in the Middle East. If the Council
were to turn a blind eye to such Israeli actions, it would
call into question the credibility of the Council’s criteria
and standards which the Council applies in dealing with
various questions. Real peace is at hand, provided that we
work for it on the bases that we all agreed together in
Madrid. The most important of these are land for peace and
the full implementation of international legitimacy. This
requires Israel to withdraw from the occupied Arab
territories, including Jerusalem and the Golan, to the lines
of 4 June 1967, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well as resolution
425 (1978), which calls for strict respect by Israel for the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence
of Lebanon within its internationally recognized borders.
It also calls upon Israel to stop its military action
against the territorial integrity of Lebanon immediately and
to withdraw its troops from all Lebanese territory.
We call upon the cosponsors of the peace process and
the international community to continue to bring pressure
to bear on Israel to implement the pledges and
commitments it has entered into and to resume negotiations
on both the Lebanese and Syrian tracks from the point
where they stopped. The incomplete measures that have
been taken within the peace process should not free Israel
from the pressure of public opinion and of the international
community and should not allow it to continue its massive
settlement activities.

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
The President: I thank the representative of
Lebanon for the kind words he addressed to me and to
my predecessor.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Ka (Senegal), Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People (interpretation from French): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on the outstanding manner in
which you have handled all of the important matters
before the Security Council and on the excellent work
you have accomplished since the beginning of your term.
I should like also to congratulate your predecessor, my
brother and friend Mr. Mahugu, Permanent Representative
of Kenya, on his timely initiatives and on the significant
achievements he recorded during his presidency of the
Council last month.
The Security Council is meeting once again today to
consider the serious situation that has resulted from the
recent actions of the Israeli Government. In my capacity
as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, I should like
to express the firm condemnation of our Committee of the
illegal decision taken by the occupying Power to extend
the borders of the municipality of Jerusalem, thereby
consecrating, through unacceptable administrative and
legal ploys, its authority over territories that do not belong
to it.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian people has consistently drawn
the attention of the General Assembly and the Security
Council not only to the massive and repeated violations
on the part of the occupying Power of the relevant
resolutions of the Assembly and the Council, but also to
the numerous obstacles that Israel has set up to impede
the peace process, which had given us all so much hope.
The question of Jerusalem is at the heart of the
Israeli-Arab conflict, and any unilateral attempt to alter
the status of the Holy City, its demographic composition
and its geographic and institutional structure represents a
grave violation and a threat to the security and stability of
the region.

7

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The Government of the occupying Power, through the
policy of fait accompli, has set about modifying unilaterally
and in violation of international law the religious, cultural
and historical characteristics as well as the Arabic, Islamic
and Christian identity of Jerusalem. It will stop at nothing
to achieve its objective of Judaizing Jerusalem. It has
resorted to the destruction of houses; the confiscation of
land; the illegal extension of settlements, particularly in
East Jerusalem; the encircling and isolation of the Holy
City by armed settlers; and the confiscation and destruction
of the identity papers of Palestinians citizens, who have
been expelled from their own city.
Indeed, for more than 18 months, a silent deportation
of Palestinians from East Jerusalem has been taking place
before our eyes. Hundreds of people are being expelled
from their land with the precise objective of preserving a
permanent and uncontested majority of Jews in the city. Let
us not forget that these expelled Palestinians are not
immigrants. They were born in Jerusalem, and their houses
and families are in Jerusalem. Their fundamental rights can
never be disregarded.
Other provocations include the sealing off of
territories, torture, punitive expeditions, administrative
detention, and the violation of the civil, political, economic,
social and cultural rights of the Palestinians.
The recent adoption of a quota system as part of a
plan concerning Jerusalem aims to ensure that by the year
2020 Jews will constitute 70 per cent of the population of
Jerusalem and Arabs only 30 per cent. Such unilateral
decisions represent not only a provocation for the
Palestinian people but also major setbacks in the peace
process, which has been on hold for more than a year.
Our Committee strongly denounces that decision,
which is a clear violation of international law, of the Fourth
Geneva Convention and of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. That decision by the Israeli authorities also
violates the letter and spirit of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions, particularly those adopted during the
tenth emergency special session.
The United Nations and several intergovernmental
organizations have repeatedly reaffirmed the special status
of Jerusalem as well as their position that Israel’s
occupation is illegal and its actions therefore null and void
under international law.
The recent Israeli decision concerning greater
Jerusalem represents, in our view, a fresh example of such

8

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
illegal measures. The establishment and expansion of
settlements, the isolation of East Jerusalem from the West
Bank, the measures taken against Palestinian residency
status, and the archaeological excavations are all ongoing
sources of concern to the international community.
Our Committee is deeply concerned at the nonrespect by the occupying Power of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, including the 16 resolutions adopted by the
Council on the city of Jerusalem. The Committee
considers that the decisions taken by the occupying Power
regarding the Holy City of Jerusalem are null and void.
The Committee therefore joins its voice to those of the
States Members of the United Nations in inviting the
Israeli Government to reconsider its decision and to put
an end to the policy of fait accompli with respect to the
Holy City, whose future must be determined solely within
the framework of the final status negotiations.
The Committee launches an urgent appeal to the
authorities of the occupying Power to renounce the
measures already taken or envisaged to change the
geographic, demographic, religious and institutional
characteristics of the city of Jerusalem, as well as of the
other Arab territories occupied since 1967.
The Committee, through me, would lastly like to call
on the Israeli Government to commit itself to the
implementation of the agreements already concluded with
the Palestinian Authority in order to create the necessary
conditions for the resumption of the peace process and the
full and effective implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, particularly Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
It must be recalled that Jerusalem belongs to both
the Palestinians and the Israelis, to Muslims, to Christians
and to Jews. That city is a mosaic of all cultures, of all
religions and of all the peoples that have enriched
Jerusalem from time immemorial up to this day.
Jerusalem must remain the city of peace, made up of
present and future emotions, dreams and realities. It must
be the birthplace of love and coexistence between all
peoples and their beliefs.
Finally, allow me to express our deep gratitude to all
the members of the Council for having made the decision
to convene this open meeting on such an important and
delicate matter. In so doing, the Security Council remains
loyal to its calling and to the role entrusted to it by the
United Nations.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People hopes that at the
conclusion of this debate, the Security Council will
demonstrate to international public opinion its willingness
to contribute to making this sensitive region of the world a
zone of peace and cooperation. It hopes, lastly, that the
Council will take timely measures, with the support of the
sponsors of the peace process, to put an end to the
unilateral decisions concerning control over the Holy City
of Jerusalem, which, I reiterate, must remain the living
symbol of peaceful coexistence between religions and
peoples that are different yet complementary.
The President: I thank the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People for his kind words addressed to me, to
my predecessor and to other members of the Security
Council.
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Jordan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.
Mr. Abu-Nimah (Jordan)(interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to extend to you, Sir, my
warmest congratulations on your outstanding presidency. I
would also like to thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Kenya, for having presided over the
Council’s endeavours with his usual wisdom.
I also wish to express my condolences on the untimely
passing of Maître Alioune Blondin Beye, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General who died in the
exercise of his functions.
I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
holding this meeting to discuss a most important matter: the
decision of the Israeli Government to expand the city of
Jerusalem towards the occupied Arab territories to the
north, west and south. This is an illegal decision in
contravention of various resolutions of the General
Assembly and of this Council, in particular those
resolutions that reject Israel's decision to annex the Arab
part of Jerusalem. That decision also contravenes the 1993
agreements that deferred the question of the status of
Jerusalem to the final stage of the negotiations, and in
accordance with those agreements, the status of Jerusalem
was to remain unchanged until agreement was reached at
the final stage of the negotiations.
That decision also runs counter to the 1949 Geneva
Convention and all international laws that guarantee

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
protection for persons under occupation and their
property. We call upon the Council to reaffirm its refusal
to accept these changes, to reaffirm its early resolutions
in connection with Jerusalem and to demand that Israel
respect and implement them, as it does of other States.
We are pleased that preceding speakers have confirmed
this position.
The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan has firmly opposed and condemned Israel's
decision. Our Minister for Foreign Affairs stated on 22
June 1998, that Jordan categorically rejects this decision
and considers it null and void. He added that any attempts
to whitewash the decision taken by Mr. Netanyahu are
unacceptable and would fail to convince anyone.
The Deputy Prime Minister of Jordan has also called
on all international Powers to convince Israel that its
action are null and void and that it is destructive to the
peace process and all that was achieved by other leaders
who made the ultimate sacrifice for peace and for the
well-being of future generations.
In this regard, the Jordanian House of
Representatives adopted a decision on 23 June
condemning the Israeli decision on Jerusalem and
describing it as one more link in the chain of flagrant
violations of resolutions on Jerusalem and the policy of
annexing Arab territory. This reflects Israel's defiance of
resolutions of international legitimacy and the harm it
does to hundreds of millions of Arabs and Muslims.
Furthermore, our Government repeated its
condemnation of and indignation at all Israeli attempts to
alter the Arab character of Jerusalem, particularly the plan
to expand the city. The Islamic and Arab Ummah was
also called on to oppose this desecration of their sacred
rights. All international organizations and peace- and
justice-loving countries have been called on to oppose this
decision by all means, because the Israeli decision will
have the most harmful consequences for the peace process
now and in the future.
This Israeli decision links the chain of illegal
measures adopted by Israel and brought to the attention of
the Council, particularly the opening of the tunnel near a
number of sacred Islamic sites, which led to bloody and
tragic events, and the building in Jebel Abu Ghneim of
Israeli settlements, a decision that was opposed by the
entire international community and all Arab States and
that brought the peace process to a halt.

9

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The Israeli decision was also condemned by the
General Assembly. We warned against the dangers of
Israeli policies that destroy the foundations of peace. We
said that the destruction of homes, the expulsion of
inhabitants from Burj al-Laqlaq, the confiscation of the
identity cards of the original settlers of Jerusalem, the
confiscation of Arab land, the sealing off of the city of
Jerusalem to prevent Arabs from going there for medical
treatment, study or religious services, the ongoing isolation
of Palestinian cities, the thwarting of freedom of movement
and the expansion of settlement colonies are all inherently
dangerous acts. They widen the gap of acrimony, deepen
the feelings of despair and frustration and therefore
constitute a threat to security.
It is clear that Israel, in its decision to expand the city
of Jerusalem, aims at creating an opportunity to Judaize the
city and strengthen its hold on it. In fact, the Prime
Minister of Israel candidly declared that the objective of
that plan was to keep the Arab population under 30 per
cent. It is also clear that Israel plans to expand its
settlement projects in Arab territories at the expense of the
legitimate inhabitants, and to create new facts on the
ground prior to the final stage of negotiations. This is a
path strewn with dangers.
Though we continuously reiterate our rejection of
violence as a means of settling disputes, we believe that the
measures adopted by the Israeli Government are a means
par excellence of sowing the seeds of violence and
terrorism. Therefore, from this rostrum, we call upon the
Israeli Government to reconsider policies which consolidate
the gains of force and war, to undertake the implementation
of agreements and to accept the bases we have all agreed
to as foundations for peace. It was that peace which we
began together at Madrid, in a blessed initiative, through
which major progress has been achieved.
However, Israel has opted for closing this path, and
has refused counsel even from its closest friends and allies.
We in the Middle East are confronting major dangers. We
must close ranks in order to avoid the negative
consequences of such acts. The continuation of these illegal
acts of aggression against the simplest yet the most sacred
of people’s rights, against their properties, their hopes and
their future, we will not allow us to expect anything but the
abyss of violence, conflict and hatred. In Jordan, this is not
the option we chose, and it will never be.
The President: I thank the representative of Jordan
for his kind words addressed to me and to my predecessor.

10

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Tunisia. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and to express my appreciation for your
efforts. I would also like to pay tribute to your
predecessor, the Ambassador of Kenya, for his role in
presiding over the Council last month.
The Security Council is meeting for the third time in
a little over a year to consider the situation in the
occupied Arab territories, particularly in the Holy City of
Jerusalem, where on 21 June the Israeli Cabinet adopted
a decision that would expand the boundaries of the
municipality of Jerusalem to include some of the adjacent
settlements and large areas of the West Bank. This new
Israeli decision is one of the most dangerous Israel has
adopted with regard to the Holy City. It represents a step
in a programme that is perfectly clear to all and that aims
to achieve several objectives. Among these objectives are
the annexation of more Palestinian territory to the
municipality of Jerusalem, whose authority was previously
expanded illegally, the alteration of the demographic
composition of the city, the obliteration of its character,
and the change of its status as the Holy City for all
revealed religions, as well as the eradication of its Arab
identity.
The new Israeli decision and the plan that it implies
represent not only a provocation of the Palestinian people,
its will and its leadership, but also a challenge to the will
of the international community and a clear violation of
international law and legitimacy. As we all know, this is
in complete contradiction of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War. It also repudiates the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, particularly the more
than 16 relevant resolutions of the Security Council
regarding the city of Jerusalem, including in particular
resolution 252 (1968). That resolution provides that all
measures and actions adopted by Israel with regard to
Jerusalem are null and void.
This is not the first measure on Jerusalem adopted
by Israel. Rather, it is but a step in a long series of
measures and illegal actions that aim to change the facts
on the ground in favour of Israel. These include the
building of settlements such as the one at Jebel Abu
Ghneim — an issue on which this Council could not

Security Council
Fifty-third year
come to a decision but which is still being considered by
the emergency special session of the General Assembly.
This is in addition to other measures that aim to tighten the
grip, economically and socially, on the Palestinian people.
In spite of repeated calls from the international
community, Israel persists in challenging the will of the
international community by refusing to implement the
commitments and pledges that it assumed in the framework
of the peace process and of other concluded agreements.
Among these is the agreement to consider the status of
Jerusalem in the final stage of the peace process and the
agreement not to adopt, in the interim, any measures that
would change the existing situation.
What is needed today is for the Council to adopt firm
measures to prevail upon Israel to rescind its decision. That
would represent a positive step in the efforts to give
impetus to the peace process. This is what Tunisia has been
working for: the establishment of a permanent and just
peace in the Middle East, in order to give substance to the
principle of land for peace and in a manner that would
guarantee the Palestinian people’s right to establish their
own independent State, with Jerusalem as its capital, and
the right of the other Arab peoples concerned to have their
lands restored to them.
The whole world is looking to the Council today to
see what urgent measures can be adopted in this direction
to affirm its credibility, maintain its prestige and safeguard
the aspirations for peace and security in the Middle East.
The President: I thank the representative of Tunisia
for his kind words addressed to me and to my predecessor.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Bangladesh. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): My delegation would
first of all like to convey to you, Sir, as you conclude your
responsibilities as President of the Council, our deep and
sincere appreciation for the able and effective manner in
which you have conducted the business of the Council
during the very heavily loaded month of June.

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
international conferences — to bring about a just solution
to the Palestine question and to achieve a lasting peace in
the Middle East. We fully share the concern expressed by
the representative of the Sudan in his letter to the
President of the Security Council in document
S/1998/558, dated 23 June 1998, transmitted in his
capacity as Chairman of the Arab Group, regarding the
decision of the Israeli Government to expand the
boundaries of the municipality of Jerusalem and to create
a “municipal umbrella” that would include a number of
Jewish settlements on the West Bank.
The situation in the occupied territories is a matter
of grave concern to the international community. A single
country’s continued defiance of international law and all
United Nations resolutions and the systematic violations
of human rights in the occupied territories are indeed
unfortunate. The United Nations has stressed the need to
preserve the territorial integrity of all occupied territories
and to guarantee the freedom of movement of persons and
goods in the territories, including the removal of
restrictions into and from East Jerusalem and freedom of
movement to and from the outside world.
The United Nations has also demanded immediate
and full cessation of construction in all Israeli settlement
activities, as well as of all illegal measures and actions in
Jerusalem. To our utter disappointment, Israel has not
only paid scant attention to the demands of the
international community, but has continued its illegal
measures and actions that violate the territorial integrity
of the occupied territories and impose restrictions on the
freedom of movement of persons and goods.
It is all the more regrettable that recently the Israeli
Government approved a programme to strengthen Israel’s
illegal hold on Jerusalem. This programme, if
implemented, would expand the border of Jerusalem and
extend the municipal authority over some Jewish
settlements in the West Bank under the “municipal
umbrella”.

Bangladesh would like to join others in thanking the
Security Council for the timely convening of this meeting
to consider the situation in the occupied Arab territories.

This is unacceptable. Bangladesh calls upon the
Security Council and the international community to have
Israel refrain from this gross violation of international law
and the relevant resolutions on Jerusalem adopted by this
body. We reiterate our full support for the decisions of
the United Nations with regard to the legal status,
demographic composition and character of Jerusalem.

Much work still needs to be done — notwithstanding
so many resolutions, United Nations sessions and

Israeli settlements in the occupied territories have
always been a source of tension, as these settlements

11

Security Council
Fifty-third year

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998

violate the land rights of the people under occupation.
Unfortunately, Israel, in defiance of United Nations
resolutions, including General Assembly resolutions
ES-10/2, ES-10/3 and ES-l0/4, continues to pursue
repressive policies in the occupied territories, including
Jerusalem. These resolutions demand immediate and full
cessation of construction in Jebel Abu Ghneim and of all
other Israeli settlement activities, as well as of all illegal
measures and actions in Jerusalem. The resolutions also
underline the obligation of the High Contracting Parties to
the Geneva Convention to ensure respect of the Convention
by Israel.

strengthening international peace, security and progress.
We call upon all concerned to ensure that the peace
accords are complied with fully and negotiations with the
Palestinian Authority are pursued in a congenial
atmosphere.

Bangladesh is concerned at Israel’s flagrant violation
of human rights and its imposition of the instrument of
oppression against the Palestinian people under the pretext
of security considerations. Retaliation for individual
offences is taking the form of collective punishment, such
as blockading, demolition of houses, confiscation of
property, deportation and the conduct of collective searches.
Bangladesh is watching with concern the developments
regarding the systematic campaign being carried out by
Israel to demoralize the people of the occupied territories,
particularly the Palestinians, with a view to perpetuating its
illegal occupation under various pretexts.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
United Nations has an abiding responsibility in resolving
the problems arising from the illegal occupation by Israel,
as foreign occupation in itself constitutes a flagrant
violation of international law. The people of Palestine are
seeking protection under international law and the
establishment of a sovereign, independent State of
Palestine with Jerusalem as its capital. Bangladesh
expresses total solidarity with them.

Bangladesh is committed, by its Constitution, to
supporting oppressed peoples throughout the world. Thus,
we have consistently expressed our strong solidarity with
our Palestinian brethren, always and everywhere,
particularly at the United Nations and in all of the major
international forums. My delegation would like to stress the
need for full implementation of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which form the basis of the
Middle East Peace process, and the need for immediate and
scrupulous implementation of the agreements reached
between the parties, including the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from the West Bank and the commencement of the
negotiations on the final settlement.

The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Saudi Arabia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table.

Bangladesh calls upon the international community to
re-inject momentum into the peace process and to deploy
all the necessary efforts and initiatives to bring the peace
process back on track and to ensure its continuity and
success.
We believe that it is absolutely necessary to end all
illegal measures and actions by Israel in the interest of
restoring mutual confidence and promoting peace. It cannot
be over-emphasized that the achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the Middle
East conflict will constitute a significant contribution to

12

We believe that the peace process can be effectively
advanced by the withdrawal of all troops from the
occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, stopping
settlement in those areas with immediate effect and
allowing the Palestinian diaspora to return to their
homeland.

The President: I thank the representative of
Bangladesh for his warm remarks addressed to me.

Mr. Al-Ahmed (Saudi Arabia)(interpretation from
Arabic): It gives me pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the Council presidency for this month,
and I wish you full success in the performance of your
duties. I would also like to express our appreciation to
your predecessor for the great role he played as the
President of the Security Council last month.
If the Palestinian problem represents the crux of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, then the issue of Holy Jerusalem is
at the heart of that problem and is the pivotal element for
dealing with the peace process depends on it. The future
of the peace process depends on it.
We are gravely concerned to see how the Israeli
authorities continue to take actions and measures with the
intention of altering Holy Jerusalem’s demographic and
structural character and attempting to change its Arab
character and to Judaize the city and its legal, historical,
religious and cultural reality.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
This is a violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 and the Hague Convention of 1907.
These acts and measures also adversely influence the
negotiations on the future of Jerusalem, which are supposed
to take place when the final status of the city is addressed.
The Holy City of Jerusalem is of the utmost
importance to the Arab and Muslim worlds, as well as to
the world community and the three monotheistic religions
in general. That is why the illegal Israeli policies and
practices in Jerusalem are highly dangerous.
The Israeli Government’s approval of the plan to
expand the boundaries of the municipality of Jerusalem and
its jurisdiction is designed to strengthen Israel’s grip on the
city and the neighbouring areas and to isolate the city from
the rest of the West Bank in a series of illegal policies and
acts, notwithstanding the fact that the international
community and the Security Council have issued clear
resolutions declaring such policies illegal, null and void. In
addition, the international community has demanded that
Israel desist from such policies and practices. Despite all
these clear signals, the Israeli authorities continue their
dangerous practices and policies in the occupied Palestinian
territories, disregarding every convention and recognizing
no right, as if no deterrent could make them revert to
observing legal norms.
Some of the most continually destabilizing factors in
the occupied territories are manifest in the Israeli
Government’s pursuit of its provocative policies and
practices in violation of international law and legal
resolutions. One can only imagine how dangerous this
would be within Holy Jerusalem. The city is the first kiblah
and the third-holiest place for Muslims, and the center of
Muslims’ attention. They will not be satisfied until all their
rights are restored to them in this Holy City. The
announcement by the Israeli Government that it intends to
tighten its illegal control of the city of Jerusalem, despite
all Arab, Islamic and international warnings, constitutes a
new challenge to the international community and will
negatively affect the peace process and the future of peace
and stability in the region.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia affirms that no lasting
peace will be achieved in the Middle East without a just
solution to the issue of the Holy City of Jerusalem in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), which demand Israel’s withdrawal from the
Arab territories occupied in 1967, and resolution 252
(1968), which deals with Jerusalem. Accordingly, the future
of the Middle East and peace in that region are in the hands

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
of the international community. Unless the international
community moves to save this peace by demanding that
Israel cease its settlement practices and policies in the city
of Jerusalem, the peace process in the Middle East and
the integrity of the agreements already signed between
parties to the conflict will be seriously threatened, since
this behaviour affects the most important issue in the
Arab-Israeli conflict.
As we express our grave concern over this decision,
we affirm that the Israeli plan to expand the boundaries
of the municipality of the Holy City of Jerusalem will
shatter the peace process and may be the straw that
breaks the back of peace, because the West Bank is not
outside the city of Jerusalem. Thus, the expansion of
Jerusalem eastward, westward, northward or southward —
or even skyward and underground — is still unacceptable,
contravenes international treaties and resolutions, and will
not be accepted by the Arab and Muslim worlds.
The Government of the Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques considers that the decision of the current Israeli
Government to expand the boundaries of the municipality
of Jerusalem is illegal and constitutes a dangerous
violation of international conventions and agreements.
This decision reaffirms the continuation of the Israeli
Government’s plans to Judaize the city of Jerusalem and
efface its Arab and Islamic character. Saudi Arabia also
believes that such policies and practices contribute to
increasing tension and undermine the credibility of and
confidence in the Israeli Government in the context of the
peace process.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, under the leadership
of the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, denounces
and rejects Israel’s ongoing irresponsible behaviour in one
of the most delicate and sensitive aspects of the peace
process. We also emphasize the extreme gravity of this
decision and ask the Security Council to make every
effort necessary to ensure that Israel, as the occupying
Power, will desist from these policies and practices, and
in particular will completely halt all settlement activity in
Arab Jerusalem. Failure to achieve this will plunge the
region back into a spiral of conflict, tension and
instability.
We reiterate our belief that the Security Council, as
the organ responsible for maintaining international peace
and security, is obligated to take the necessary concrete
measures to stop the Israeli violations in the Holy City of
Jerusalem. Israeli violations of international law and the
resolutions of the Security Council must cease forthwith.

13

Security Council
Fifty-third year
We are hopeful that the Security Council will assume
its responsibilities with regard to the Holy City of
Jerusalem so as to prove to the entire world that it is on the
side of right.
The President: I thank the representative of Saudi
Arabia for the kind words he addressed to me and my
predecessor.
The next speaker is the representative of Iraq. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Hamdoon (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic): I
am pleased at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I should also like to congratulate you on the
utmost efficiency with which you have conducted the work
of the Council.
We welcome the convening of this meeting to discuss
a situation that seriously threatens international peace and
security: the question of Jerusalem and Palestine. Israel’s
measures to Judaize Jerusalem and to efface its Arab
identity fall within its expansionist plan aimed at acquiring
Arab territories by force. Jerusalem, in particular, has a
special religious and historical significance, not only for
Arabs and Palestinians, but for the Islamic and Christian
worlds as a whole.
It is where the prophet Mohammed ascended to
heaven, and it is the cradle of Christianity. Therefore, trying
in any way to alter its identity, legal status or demographic
composition represents a clear challenge to the feelings of
those in both the Islamic and Christian worlds, in addition
to being a clear violation of Security Council resolutions.
The international community calls upon the Security
Council, which bears responsibility under the Charter, to
pay sufficient attention to that issue and give it due
importance and to adopt as soon as possible measures to
stop the Judaization of that Holy City.
The Security Council must face a fact that can no
longer be denied or ignored: since 1990 its practices have
been characterized — even pervaded — by selectivity of
criteria, double standards and the use of the machinery of
the Council for narrow self-interest. A clear example is the
way in which the Council deals with the Palestinian
question in general and the issue of Jerusalem in particular.
We have been and are still being told by a permanent
member of the Council that the question of Palestine and

14

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
the Arab-Israeli conflict have no place on the agenda of
the Council. That country has matched words with deeds,
and during the past few years has prevented the Council
from examining the question of Palestine and Jerusalem.
When the Council has considered that question in the
past, that country has used the veto to abort the adoption
of any serious measure by the Council. Yet we all know
that there is nothing more dangerous to international
peace and security than the expansionist policy of Israel,
coupled with its possession of all weapons of mass
destruction, including more than 200 nuclear warheads.
It is a painful irony that the representative of that
permanent member of the Council has in the past week
insisted on refusing to allow the Council to consider the
question of Jerusalem, while at the same time insisting
that it discuss press allegations that there has been a lack
of compliance by Iraq with Security Council resolution
833 (1993). That representative also insisted that the
Council discuss, and the President of the Council ask the
Ambassador of Iraq to explain, an Iraqi letter responding
to press statements made by the assistant of the Secretary
of State that represented a clear interference in the
internal affairs of Iraq and a provocation and incitement
to overthrow its Government.
The international community expressed anger and
condemnation over the Israeli decision on 21 June 1998
to expand the municipal boundaries of Jerusalem, a
decision that represents a tangible violation of Security
Council resolutions. It also represents a clear
contravention of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
In responding to the wish of the international community,
the Council should therefore adopt a resolution
condemning the Israeli laws and the process of
confiscating occupied Arab territories and should force
the occupying Power to stop all of its programmes and
plans for building settlements and to demolish those
settlements that have already been established.
If the Council prevaricates over adopting a just
resolution to deter the aggressor, it will only lead to a
further weakening of its credibility — and its credibility
is already in a pitiful state right now. It would also lead
to the immeasurable deterioration of the fragile situation
in the area and thereby severely jeopardize international
peace and security.
The President: I thank the representative of Iraq for
the kind words he addressed to me.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Kuwait. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
a return to an atmosphere of tension and instability in the
region.

Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset, I should like to express our appreciation for
your remarkable efforts, Mr. President, in conducting the
Council's business for this month, which has been fraught
with meetings and discussions on many different important
issues relating directly to international peace and security.
I also wish to express our appreciation for the efforts of
Ambassador Mahugu for his successful conduct of the
Council's business and wise guidance of its affairs last
month.

Optimism is gradually fading, replaced by
disappointment at the diminishing possibility of
establishing a just and lasting peace. A lack of confidence
prevails among the parties most concerned with the peace
process. The international community should take a stand
that would deter the Israeli Government and require it to
put an end to these policies and practices, in order to
revitalize the peace process through a reaffirmation of its
commitment to the framework of the Madrid Conference
based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land for peace.

The Council is meeting today to consider a grave and
important issue that is endangering peace and security in
the region of the Middle East: the issue of occupied
Jerusalem, which is at the heart of the Arab-Israeli conflict.

In this context, and proceeding from our keen
interest in the success of the peace process and the need
to support and maintain it, we would like to reaffirm the
following points.

The Security Council and the General Assembly have
already adopted many resolutions on this important and
delicate issue. Regrettably, those resolutions have not been
implemented or even respected by Israel, the occupying
Power. Successive Israeli Governments have not only
ignored the international legally binding resolutions,
disregarding them completely, but have challenged the
resolutions and adopted provocative policies aimed at
perpetuating their occupation of the Arab territories in
general and of the city of Jerusalem in particular, in an
attempt to erase its identity and change its demographic
nature and status as a Holy City for the monotheistic
religions.

First, Kuwait strongly condemns the decision by the
Israeli Government to expand the municipal boundaries of
the city of Jerusalem, as this is a clear and explicit
violation of internationally binding resolutions and in
particular resolution 252 (1968), which considers any acts
taken by Israel with regard to Jerusalem as null and void.
We demand that Israel reverse that decision and desist
from its policies aimed at the Judaization of the city.

The most recent decision, taken by the Israeli
Government on 21 June and aimed at expanding the
municipal boundaries of the city of Jerusalem to include the
settlements surrounding the city and vast areas of land in
the West Bank, is yet further testimony of Israel's
persistence in violating and breaching international legally
binding resolutions and of its total disregard for and lack of
commitment to the bilateral agreements signed with the
Palestinian Authority within the framework of the peace
process.
For two years the peace process has been in a state of
paralysis, if not regression. There have been doubts and
fears that it might not be possible to continue the process
and to preserve the few gains that have been made since it
was launched in Madrid in 1991. The current Israeli
Government has left no room for doubt that its practices
and policies will lead to a failure of the peace process and

Secondly, we demand that Israel, the occupying
Power, recommit itself to abiding by the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and apply those
provisions to all the territories it has been occupying since
1967, including Jerusalem.
Thirdly, we demand that Israel desist from carrying
out any illegal measures or settlement activities that are
aimed only at imposing a fait accompli, and we demand
also that it abide by the agreements reached with the
Palestinian Authority with regard to these issues, which
should be considered within the framework of the final
status negotiations.
Fourthly, Kuwait fully supports the Palestinian
people and their inalienable and legitimate right to
establish their own independent State on their own land,
with Jerusalem as its capital.
Fifthly, we would like to reaffirm the importance of
giving momentum to the peace process on all tracks, in
particular the Lebanese and Syrian tracks, and to stand

15

Security Council
Fifty-third year
firm in the face of Israeli intransigence, which seeks to
achieve security without giving up land.
Israel’s unconditional withdrawal from all occupied
Arab territories, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), is the only
guarantee of peace and security for all the countries of the
region.
In conclusion, we would like to call upon the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, to uphold its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security and to stand firm in the
face of Israeli policies and practices in order to compel the
Israeli Government to respect internationally binding
resolutions and to abide by the bilateral agreements reached
with the Palestinian Authority within the framework of the
peace process.
We would like also to call upon the sponsors of the
peace process — the Russian Federation and the United
States of America in particular — to redouble their efforts
to revitalize the peace process and avoid the possibility of
its failure in a manner that would achieve a just and lasting
peace in the region, leading to a complete Israeli
withdrawal from the occupied Arab territories, including
Jerusalem, the Syrian Golan, southern Lebanon and its
western areas, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The President: I thank the representative of Kuwait
for the kind words he addressed to me and to my
predecessor.
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Oman. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Sameen (Oman) (interpretation from Arabic):
I should like at the outset to convey to you, Sir, my most
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. Without
a doubt, your diplomatic skills and your wisdom augur well
for the success of the Council’s deliberations. I should like
also to congratulate Ambassador Mahugu for the
remarkable manner in which he steered the work of the
Council last month, with the assistance of his colleagues.
The Council is meeting today to consider a very
serious and important question. Indeed, the decision on 21
June by the Israeli Council of Ministers to expand the
municipal boundaries of Jerusalem to include the

16

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
neighbouring settlements and the West Bank, the
destruction of houses and the expulsion of inhabitants
represent escalating measures aimed at enabling the Israeli
Government to strengthen its hold over the Holy City of
Jerusalem, thereby jeopardizing the final phase of the
negotiations.
In view of the special and sensitive status of
Jerusalem and its status in the three major religions, the
Security Council has adopted 16 resolutions on behalf of
the international community. Through these resolutions,
it has reaffirmed that all measures and arrangements taken
by Israel as the occupying Power, including illegal
administrative decisions and arrangements, to alter the
legal status and demographic composition of the city are
null and void and without any legal validity.
Moreover, the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 is
applicable to all territories occupied by Israel in 1967,
including Jerusalem. The Hague Convention of 1907 also
applies to all those territories, including Jerusalem.
The measures taken by the Israeli Government to
expand the municipal boundaries of the city of Jerusalem
and to expand the “municipal umbrella” to include certain
Jewish settlements in the West Bank represent a flagrant
violation of the principles underlying the peace process
and of internationally binding resolutions. These measures
jeopardize the tireless peace efforts that have been
deployed over the past decade and risk igniting an
infernal cycle of conflict and instability.
Since Madrid, the peace process has registered major
achievements.
The Arab world has long viewed the peace process
as a strategic option and has worked sincerely to
implement the process. From the very outset, my country
has chosen that option because it is convinced that peace
is imperative for all the peoples and States of the region,
including Israel.
We are profoundly disturbed to see the peace
process threatened in this way owing to Israel’s lack of
respect for agreed principles and for peace agreements.
This is not Israel’s first violation of the peace process: it
has continued to pursue its settlements policy and has not
fulfilled commitments it entered into. Israel’s failure to
fulfil its commitments and its continued pursuit of the
settlement policy have deadlocked the peace process. The
present impasse is a direct result of these arrogant
policies. The latest decision by Israel is but one in a long

Security Council
Fifty-third year
series of violations. Yet the road to peace is clearly and
unequivocally marked.
My country calls upon all countries with influence, in
particular the co-sponsors of the peace process and the
States members of the European Union, to do their utmost
to help ensure the success of the peace process, and to
bring pressure to bear on Israel to comply with its
commitments. While we are convinced of the importance of
dialogue and direct negotiations between the parties
concerned, the current deadlock in the peace process, and
the gravity of the Israeli decision, pose a threat that could
bring about the collapse of the peace process, which could
in turn have grave consequences for international peace and
security.
We therefore call upon the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibility and urgently to adopt a firm
resolution declaring the Israeli measures to be illegal and
urging that country to renounce its policies. My delegation
would support such a draft resolution and believes that the
text being considered is commensurate with the gravity of
the situation and of the Israeli decision. The text is
balanced and non-confrontational. We hope that it can be
adopted by consensus and that it will consolidate the
Middle East peace process.
The President: I thank the representative of Oman for
the kind words he addressed to me and to my predecessor.
The next speaker is the representative of Mauritania.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania) (interpretation from
Arabic): I wish at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
and to thank you for chairing today’s open debate, which
in our view is of the greatest importance. I wish also to
thank the other members of the Security Council for
agreeing to convene this meeting to discuss the new Israeli
plan to expand the municipal boundaries of Jerusalem. This
situation shows once again that the United Nations and the
Security Council must shoulder their responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security in the
sensitive region of the Middle East.
The decision taken by the Israeli cabinet on 21 June
1998 to expand the municipal boundaries of Jerusalem to
include adjacent settlements and large tracts of the West
Bank would change the characteristics of Jerusalem and
alter its status as a city that is sacred to all revealed

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
religions. It would tighten Israel’s grip on the city,
eradicate its Arab identity and change its demographic
composition and its character. This would be a violation
not only of international law — including the Hague
Rules of 1907 and the fourth Geneva Convention, of
1949 — but also of Security Council resolutions 252
(1968), 476 (1980) and 478 (1980). By all of these,
Israel’s measures in Jerusalem are deemed to be without
legal basis and are therefore invalid.
Members no doubt recall the decision adopted by
Israel early last year to establish a new settlement at Jebel
Abu Ghneim in East Jerusalem. This led to tensions in
the occupied Palestinian territories and to the stalling of
the Middle East peace process. As the Security Council
was unable in the course of two meetings to adopt a
resolution on this item, the General Assembly convened
its tenth emergency special session on 24 April 1997, and
adopted a resolution calling for the immediate and full
cessation of the construction in Jebel Abu Ghneim and of
all other Israeli settlement activities, as well as of all
illegal measures and actions in Jerusalem. In view of
Israel’s lack of compliance with that resolution, the tenth
emergency special session was resumed on three
occasions, when the Assembly adopted further resolutions
condemning the settlement policies.
Israel’s continued defiance of the will of the
international community and its continued refusal to
implement the resolutions of the tenth emergency special
session, added to its new plan to expand the boundaries
of Jerusalem, oblige the international community to adopt
additional measures to compel Israel to respect
international law and United Nations resolutions, in
accordance with the Charter.
We call for the adoption of an unambiguous position
reflecting the will of the international community, which
rejects these policies and the settlements policy. We call
for the convening of an international conference of parties
to the Geneva Convention on measures to enforce the
Convention in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem, in accordance with the resolutions of the tenth
emergency special session.
The dangerous deterioration of the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, and
in the Middle East in general threatens to destroy all
efforts to bring about a just and lasting peace. Mauritania
supports a comprehensive, just peace in the Middle East
based on the outcome of the Madrid Conference, on the
principle of land for peace, and on binding international

17

Security Council
Fifty-third year
resolutions. We call upon the co-sponsors of the peace
process to shoulder their responsibilities and to prevail upon
the Israeli Government to respect the agreements it has
signed, and to make efforts on all tracks of the peace
process. This is imperative both for the region and for the
world at large, and we should all work to achieve it.
The President: I thank the representative of
Mauritania for the kind words he addressed to me and to
the other members of the Security Council.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Indonesia. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): The Indonesian delegation
welcomes the convening of this formal meeting of the
Security Council, for it provides an opportunity for Member
States to express their views on an issue which has
historically preoccupied our Organization.
During the past few months, we have witnessed a
steady deterioration of the situation in the occupied
territories, characterized by an increasing tension that has
been aggravated by a stalemate in the peace process. The
hope engendered by the international community that the
provisions of the peace accords would be scrupulously
implemented are in jeopardy, as the Government of Israel
persists in its refusal to honour its obligations and
commitments. This is incompatible with the norms of
international conduct and principles of justice.
Consequently, the peace process remains paralysed due to
Israel’s intensification of its provocative policies and
practices. Foremost among those are the establishment of
new settlements, the expansion of existing settlements, the
building of roads and other auxiliary sites adjacent to and
between settlements, the issuance of plans for the creation
of new settler units and the revocation of residency rights
and confiscation of identity cards of Palestinians living in
Jerusalem.
Further compounding the already volatile situation is
the recent unilateral and arbitrary decision taken by Israel
to expand the city of Jerusalem’s administrative and
political control beyond its borders, in total violation of
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
pertaining to Jerusalem. This is a calculated and cynical
plan to consolidate Israel’s claim to the Holy City as a
united and eternal capital. It pre-empts the outcome of the
permanent status negotiations by changing the legal status
and demographic composition of Jerusalem. Thus, it
threatens to further undermine the peace process, with

18

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
serious repercussions not only for the Middle East but
also beyond it.
The Security Council cannot remain indifferent and
passive to the series of Israeli onslaughts on the peace
process, as we have a vital stake in ensuring that this
region will not relapse into a flashpoint of crisis fraught
with far-reaching consequences. In this regard, we laud
the efforts for peace undertaken by the parties involved
and their perseverance in the face of formidable obstacles
erected by Israel. The peace process must indeed move
forward and be made irreversible.
For this to materialize, Israel must fully observe the
agreements already reached and negotiate in good faith on
the remaining key issues on the basis of a recognition of
the right of the Palestinians to an independent State with
al-Quds Al-Sharif as their capital.
My delegation also wishes to reiterate that the
attainment of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people is an essential prerequisite for a durable and
comprehensive peace in that region. In the attainment of
this objective, the Security Council must ensure the
unconditional withdrawal of Israel from all occupied
territories, in accordance with its resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 425 (1978).
The Indonesian delegation deems it essential that the
Security Council, as the body responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, send a
clear and unambiguous message to Israel to end its illegal
policies and actions. What is at stake is not only the
future of a nation, but also our shared vision of a Middle
East region transformed from an arena of war, devastation
and antagonisms to one of peace, cooperation and shared
prosperity.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Malaysia. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): With your kind permission,
Mr. President, the Malaysian delegation would like to join
the Council and others in expressing our deep sorrow and
heartfelt condolences over the untimely death of Maître
Alioune Blondin Beye and his colleagues, all of whom
had dedicated themselves to the cause of international
peace and security. Maître Beye’s death is a great loss not
only to his family and country, but also to the
international community.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Malaysia remains concerned over Israeli policies and
practices in the occupied Arab territories. Despite
international condemnation in the recent past, the Israeli
Government remains unrepentant. Its policy on the
expansion of settlements and the application of
administrative measures, including the classification of Arab
residents of Jerusalem as resident aliens or, in certain cases,
foreign immigrants, would complete the encirclement of
Arab-populated East Jerusalem, cutting it off from the rest
of the West Bank.
The latest decision by the Israeli Government on 21
June 1998 to expand the municipal borders of Jerusalem to
include the surrounding settlements and extensive areas in
the West Bank is another blatant act of provocation and a
gross violation of international law. The real goal here is
clear to all. The Israeli Government is taking another step
in its long-term strategy to strengthen irrevocably its hold
on Jerusalem, which it has illegally proclaimed as its united
and eternal capital.
My delegation cannot accept this unilateral Israeli
decision. We see this decision as illegal, invalid and in
contravention of international law. It is but another attempt
to reinforce previous Israeli efforts to effectively alter the
demographic character of the city of Jerusalem in favour of
the Jewish population, thereby predetermining the outcome
of the final status negotiations on Jerusalem between the
parties concerned.
According to General Assembly resolution 181 (II),
which partitioned Palestine into a Jewish State and an Arab
State, the city of Jerusalem should remain as corpus
separatum until its final status is determined through
negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis. The
occupation of East Jerusalem in June 1967 and the
subsequent annexation of the Old City and surrounding
areas by Israel have not been recognized internationally.
And let us not forget that, in addition to numerous General
Assembly resolutions, the Security Council itself has
adopted 16 resolutions regarding the city of Jerusalem and
has repeatedly declared that all measures and actions taken
by Israel which aim at changing the legal status,
demographic composition and character of the city are null
and void and without any legal validity whatsoever.
Malaysia wishes to reiterate that Jerusalem is of great
spiritual importance not only to the Jews, but also to the
entire Islamic community throughout the world, as it is to
Christians everywhere.
My delegation believes that this latest Israeli decision
deserves condemnation. This decision amounts to blatant

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
non- compliance with the terms of reference of the
Madrid Peace Conference and all relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, particularly
Security Council resolution 252 (1968). This decision is
also a clear violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949 and the Hague Convention of 1907. We call on the
Israeli Government to immediately rescind the decision.
Israel should desist from taking any such unilateral
actions which clearly undermine the fragile and stalled
peace process. My delegation cannot accept illegal and
unilateral measures taken by the Israeli Government
which create tension and threaten to further erode the
prospects for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
between Palestine and Israel and throughout the Middle
East.
By continuously embarking on a provocative course,
the Israeli Government, through its unilateral actions, has
placed into serious question its own commitment to the
peace process. It appears to be intent on reverting to the
old ways of taking and keeping what belongs to others,
thus further eroding mutual confidence and trust among
the parties concerned while delaying the implementation
of the peace agreements. My delegation calls upon Israel
to join the Palestinians and others concerned to make
every effort to revive the peace process. Israel must
steadfastly stay the course. While it has the right to be
concerned about its security, Israel must also recognize
that others similarly have the right to be concerned over
their own security. Therefore, we call upon Israel to
eschew aggressive behaviour and instead adopt policies
designed to bring about long-term prosperity and security
both for itself and for its neighbours.
It is now time for Israel to realize that the threats it
perceives are a direct consequence of its own policies and
actions. Israel cannot flourish at the expense of its
neighbours by denying the rightful owners their legitimate
rights and lands and by depriving them of these. Security
certainly cannot be founded on gross injustice. Israel must
have the courage to look beyond the confines of the selfcentred and cloistered notion of security and so-called
military logic. It must be prepared to build effective
partnerships with the Palestinians as well as with all its
neighbours and at all levels.
My delegation believes that the Security Council, in
carrying out its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, should take immediate
steps to ensure the exercise of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including their right to selfdetermination, as well as to promote efforts to encourage

19

Security Council
Fifty-third year
the immediate resumption of the Palestinian-Israeli peace
process. We also urge the co-sponsors of the peace process,
which have invested so much effort, to earnestly encourage
the Israeli Government to honour its obligations and
commitments to the peace agreements, and to continue with
those efforts. Malaysia is firmly convinced that security for
all countries in the Middle East can only be assured by the
establishment of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the region.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Nejad-Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting of the Security Council. We have full confidence
in your leadership and in your efforts to steer the Council’s
deliberations in such a way that the result will reflect the
true view of the international community as a whole on the
issue at hand.
History is now repeating itself before our eyes and in
our lifetime. Little more than 50 years ego, the Zionists
began to move into Palestinian lands. Using every
imaginable tactic, including confiscation, intimidation, force
and terrorism, they occupied and began to change the status
of Palestinian land. The same obstinate policy is now at
work against the Holy City of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. There is
absolutely no change in their policy or the manner in which
they implement it. The Israeli leaders continue to have utter
disregard for the agony, sorrow, homelessness and
bloodshed that their policies and practices have caused
millions of innocent Palestinians for more than five
decades, and for the volumes of reprimand and
condemnation of their policies and practices by international
organizations, particularly by the United Nations.
They robbed the Palestinian people of their land some
50 years ago. Now they are in the process of robbing the
Palestinians and the entire Muslim nation of their heritage
and what they hold to be divine and sacred. The current
Israeli programme envisions strengthening and perpetuating
Israel’s illegal occupation of the Holy City. This
programme includes the creation of an umbrella
municipality with administrative power over the Holy City
and nearby towns in the occupied territories, as well as over
some Jewish settlements in the West Bank. It also includes
the speedy construction of roads and other infrastructure in
those settlements. This programme is engineered to alter the
status of the Holy City by changing its demographic
composition. It is a practical move to annex illegally more

20

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
of the occupied Palestinian territories to the municipality
covering the Holy City, which had already been expanded
illegally and in violation of the rules of international law
and of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council.
In this connection, the President of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, issued a
statement on 25 June warning about the repercussions of
this Israeli plan, which reads in part:
“Undoubtedly, this latest act by Israel will
further exacerbate the Middle East crisis, for, among
other implications, it desecrates the sanctity of AlQuds Al-Sharif, a sanctity which, because of the
depth of psychological attachment and spiritual
affinity of Muslims to this land of Divine Prophets,
has its roots entrenched in their souls.”
The international community in general and the
Islamic world in particular are deeply concerned about
this new Israeli plan, and about the new decision to
initiate new settlement activities in Jabal Abu Ghneim.
Last year the Security Council was called upon to
shoulder its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security by putting an end to the
construction of Jewish settlements there. The Council met
on 5 and 6 March 1997 to consider the situation created
by Israeli plans for new settlement activities in Jabal Abu
Ghneim.
But regrettably, the draft resolution was subjected to
a veto, and the Council was thus prevented from
discharging its constitutional responsibility on this crucial
issue. The inaction of the Security Council emboldened
Israel to defy the wish of the international community,
reflected in General Assembly resolution 51/223, which
was adopted after the frustration of the case before the
Security Council. The matter was put before the Security
Council once more, on 21 March 1997, when the exercise
of the veto again barred the Security Council from taking
a decision, thus giving rise to profound international
disappointment.
Lastly, the tenth emergency special session of the
General Assembly was convened on the basis of General
Assembly resolution 377 (V) of 3 November 1950,
entitled “Uniting for peace”. At the tenth emergency
special session, the Assembly adopted four resolutions on
illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the
rest of the occupied Palestinian territory in 1997 and

Security Council
Fifty-third year
1998. These resolutions, like others, have been totally
disregarded by the Israeli regime, as if they did not exist
and as if the international community was indifferent to its
illegal activities.
Despite such intensive developments and the series of
new resolutions on this subject, the announcement of the
aforementioned programme by the highest-level Israeli
official clearly illustrates Israel’s total defiance of the
international community and the contempt in which the
community’s views are held by the Israeli regime. The
disdain of the Israeli leaders for the principles of
international law and the decisions of the United Nations is
no secret to anyone in this Chamber. It is commonly
acknowledged, deplored and condemned, but very little, if
anything, is done about it.
The present deliberation in the Council of this latest
Israeli act of lawlessness, which has spurred international
outrage, is another test to determine whether the Security
Council will discharge its obligation on behalf of the
general membership of the Organization and thus gain the
credibility that it constitutionally deserves. The international
community expects the Security Council to condemn the
Israeli decision of 21 June 1998, demand that it be
rescinded and adopt practical measures to counter the
organized Israeli steps to alter the historical and
demographic status of the Holy City, so as to enable the
adherents of Judaism, Christianity and Islam to have
unhindered and free access to it.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran for the kind words he addressed to
me.
The next speaker is the representative of Colombia. I
invite her to take a seat at the Council table and to make
her statement.
Mrs. Galindo (Colombia) (interpretation from
Spanish): Let me begin by expressing our satisfaction at
seeing you, Sir, preside over the Security Council’s
deliberations this month.
My delegation wishes to stress the importance of this
debate on the question of the situation in the occupied Arab
territories, to which it attaches special significance. We
believe that this debate is particularly relevant in view of
recent events associated with the matter under
consideration.

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
The question of Jerusalem has been given constant
attention by the international community, and in particular
by the Non-Aligned Movement, which has referred to it
on many occasions. At the Ministerial Meeting held last
year in New Delhi, the Foreign Ministers of States
members of the Movement reaffirmed all the resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly on
Jerusalem as an integral part of the occupied Palestinian
territories, and demanded the implementation, in
particular, of Security Council resolutions 252 (1968), 465
(1980), 478 (1980), 1073 (1996) and General Assembly
resolution 51/223. They deemed that the measures aimed
at altering the legal, geographical and demographic status
of Jerusalem, along with other actions in violation of
these resolutions, are null and void.
In the Final Communiqué adopted at the Ministerial
Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau, held in Cartagena,
Colombia, from 18 to 20 May this year, the Foreign
Ministers and heads of delegation of the Non-Aligned
Movement reiterated their support for the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including its right to its
own homeland and independent State, with Jerusalem as
its capital. At that time, they once again repeated their
demand that Israel withdraw from the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, and the other
Arab territories occupied since 1967.
The Ministers and heads of delegation of the States
members of the Non-Aligned Movement also reaffirmed
their position on occupied East Jerusalem, the illegal
settlements and the applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 to all occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem. In this connection, they demanded
strict compliance with the Security Council’s resolutions
on this matter.
The Ministers of the States members of the
Movement reiterated in Cartagena their support for the
recommendations contained in the resolutions adopted at
the tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly — resolutions ES-10/2, ES-10/3, ES-10/4 and
ES-10/5 — including, inter alia, the recommendation to
convene a conference of the High Contracting Parties to
the Fourth Geneva Convention to discuss how to enforce
compliance with the Convention in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, and to ensure
respect by Israel of the Convention by assuming their
collective responsibility in accordance with its article 1.
The President: I thank the representative of
Colombia for her kind words addressed to me.

21

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): I wish to congratulate the delegation of Kenya on
its presidency and express the hope that the representative
of Portugal enjoys a well-deserved rest this evening after
having so successfully presided over the meetings of this
Council for almost a month.
More than three decades after the Security Council’s
adoption of resolution 242 (1967), Israel continues its
illegal occupation of Palestinian and other Arab territories,
in open defiance of the norms of international law and the
provisions of the many resolutions and decisions of the
General Assembly and this Council.
At its most recent regular session and at its tenth
emergency special session, the General Assembly
considered in detail the deplorable situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The Security Council also held
several meetings last year on this question, especially on
the decision of the Government of Israel to begin building
a new settlement in Jabal Abu Ghneim, in the south of East
Jerusalem. Only the veto of one permanent member
prevented the Council from adopting resolutions on this
matter on 7 and 21 March 1997.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People has reiterated that the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem, is deteriorating alarmingly, in particular with
respect to Israeli settlements and the continued blockades,
which harm the Palestinians economically, violate their
human rights and provoke increased violence and tension.
Despite the urgent appeals of the United Nations, the
settlement policy, instead of disappearing, is being
strengthened. More housing is being built in existing
settlements, encircling roads are being constructed to link
them and the Palestinians of Jerusalem are being denied
residency rights.
The Government of Israel, in a further step in the
wrong direction, has recently announced a new programme
to strengthen and expand its illegal control over Jerusalem.
This programme is a flagrant violation of the provisions of
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and of the many
resolutions adopted by the Security Council and by the
General Assembly at its tenth emergency special session,

22

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
and is placing the peace process in the Middle East in
extreme danger.
Cuba resolutely condemns these and other actions,
which are totally devoid of legal validity and represent a
clear challenge to the international community. General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions on the legal
status of Jerusalem must be respected.
Holding this open debate is the most basic duty of
the Security Council in dealing with the serious
developments in the occupied Palestinian territories. The
legitimate right of Member States to request the Council
to hold open debates so as to deal with questions of
international peace and security can in no way be
questioned or subject to any conditions.
Furthermore, it is worrying that the Council is
unable immediately to adopt a resolution that reflects the
overwhelming majority position of United Nations
Member States and of members of the Security Council
on the issue under discussion, a position that has been
reaffirmed once again today.
We wonder how long we will have to continue to
witness the double standard adopted by some permanent
members of the Security Council, which look after their
national political interests, promoting or blocking as they
see fit decisions on issues considered by the Council,
thereby exploiting the prerogatives afforded them by the
anachronistic right of veto.
The Security Council considers issues that are not
within its competence and interferes with the mandate of
the General Assembly, while at the same time making
inexplicable omissions. Regrettably, the item under
discussion is an excellent example of this tendency.
The Security Council has an opportunity to enhance
its credibility and demonstrate its adherence to the
mandate conferred upon it and to the principles contained
in the Charter of the United Nations. As the body
entrusted with guaranteeing international peace and
security, the Council has an obligation to adopt specific
measures to put a stop to ongoing actions that violate
international law and its own resolutions.
In conclusion, I should like once again to express the
resolute commitment of Cuba to the cause of the
Palestinian people and the achievement of its inalienable
rights.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The President: I thank the representative of Cuba for
the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is Mr. Ali AlSalafi, Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the Office of the
Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States to the
United Nations, to whom the Council has extended an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Salafi (League of Arab States) (interpretation
from Arabic): I should like at the outset to extend to you,
Sir, my congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am also pleased
to express my appreciation to Ambassador Mahugu, the
Permanent Representative of Kenya, for his efforts in
presiding over the Council last month.
The question of Jerusalem is one of the most
important issues that was deferred to the final status
negotiations by the agreements concluded in Oslo in 1993
between the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
Israeli Government. The decision by the Israeli Government
on 21 June to annex to the municipality of Israel several
villages west of the city and some of the settlements in the
Palestinian territories is designed to tighten the Israeli grip
on the Holy City and to separate it from the other
Palestinian territories. The objective of this decision is to
Judaize Jerusalem, eliminate its Arab character and alter its
demographic composition.
The League of Arab States is concerned about these
measures adopted by the Israeli Government, which
represent a clear violation of the agreements reached
between the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
Israeli Government. The Israeli plan to expand the Holy
City, whether to the east or to the west, represents a clear
violation of international legitimacy as established in the 16
resolutions of the Security Council on Jerusalem, especially
252 (1968) and 267 (1969), adopted some 30 years ago.
Security Council resolution 267 (1969), provides, in
paragraph 4
“that all legislative and administrative measures and
actions taken by Israel which purport to alter the
status of Jerusalem, including expropriation of land
and properties thereon, are invalid and cannot change
that status;”
and in paragraph 7

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
“that, in the event of a negative response or no
response from Israel, the Security Council shall
reconvene without delay to consider what further
action should be taken in this matter”.
In addition, the Security Council, in resolution 476
(1980), decided that, inter alia, all measures adopted by
Israel to change the character and status of Jerusalem are
null and void; and in resolution 478 (1980) that, inter
alia, the Council refused to recognize the “basic law”.
It is high time for the Council to assume its
responsibilities for international peace and security in
accordance with the Charter and to examine this issue.
With regard to the status of Holy Jerusalem, it is clear
that Israel is trying to surround Jerusalem with three
settlement belts, leading to a decrease in the percentage
of Arab citizens, who in East Jerusalem now make up 47
per cent, as opposed to 53 per cent for Jewish citizens. If
those figures are combined with figures for the whole of
Jerusalem, the result is a three-to-one ratio in favour of
Jewish citizens.
As for the possession of Palestinian territory, when
the Balfour Declaration was made in 1917, Jews owned
4 per cent of Jerusalem, Arabs 94 per cent and foreigners
2 per cent. Now Jews own 84 per cent of the territory of
Jerusalem, with Arabs owning 14 per cent and foreigners
2 per cent. With regard to the possession of territory in
East Jerusalem, Jews now own 74 per cent of the territory
and Arabs 26 per cent. Israel has seized most of that
territory by force.
That brief comparison of the situation in Jerusalem
clarifies the situation. The programme and plan adopted
by Israel on 21 June are aimed at expanding the
boundaries of Holy Jerusalem to 184 square kilometres —
in 1967 it comprised only 7 square kilometres — so as to
tighten the grip of the municipal authority of Jerusalem as
part of the Israeli plan to Judaize Holy Jerusalem.
Arab States have adopted peace as a strategic option.
This was affirmed at the Summit of Arab States in Cairo
in 1996 and was based on the desire to make it possible
for the area to avoid more wars and more pain and to
develop economically, culturally and in a way that would
make it civilized.
The Israeli Government, however, continued its
practice of settlement expansion in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Holy Jerusalem, in
violation of international law, United Nations resolutions

23

Security Council
Fifty-third year
and the agreements signed with the Palestinian Authority.
The League of Arab States, in view of the stalling of the
peace process as a consequence of Israel's decisions and
practices which constitute negative indications, calls upon
the sponsors of the peace process — the United States and
the Russian Federation — and all peace-loving countries to
take a stand against the irresponsible Israeli measures.
We call upon the United States to maintain its positive
response in the wake of the declaration of that settlement
plan in order to maintain the peace and security of the area
in the interest of all the countries of the region, and to
move the peace process forward towards a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace, because a continuation of the Israeli
policies and practices will plunge the area into the cycle of
conflict once again.
We would like to refer to the 1991 American letter of
assurances wherein the United States does not recognize the
annexation of East Jerusalem or the municipal expansion
and encourages all parties to avoid unilateral measures that
would increase tension, make negotiations more difficult
and pre-empt their final outcome.
The city of Holy Jerusalem is important to the Arabs
as well as to millions of Muslims and Christians throughout
the world. The League of Arab States expresses its
appreciation for the clear international consensus which
condemns the Israeli programme and plans. It calls on all
to support Arab rights in the face of Israeli provocations,
which represent a clear violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. This plan aims at seizing the territory
by force and eliminating the rights of the Palestinian people
in the occupied territories, as well as foreclosing the
possibility of any peaceful solution in the region. We
therefore called for an urgent meeting of the Security
Council so that the Council could assume its responsibilities
in the maintenance of international peace and security under
the Charter of the United Nations and on the basis of the
resolutions of the Council. The Council should take
measures against the plan adopted by the Israeli Cabinet on
21 June. This would send a clear message to Israel to desist
from its practices, which represent a contravention of
international legitimacy and the position adopted by the
international community.
The President: I thank the representative of the
League of Arab States for the kind words he addressed to
me and to my predecessor.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is Mr. Mokhtar
Lamani, Permanent Observer for the Organization of the

24

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
Islamic Conference to the United Nations, to whom the
Security Council has extended an invitation under rule 39
of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Lamani (Organization of the Islamic
Conference) (interpretation from Arabic): The Security
Council is meeting again today to consider how to deal
with Israel's non-compliance with internationally binding
resolutions and the agreements it has signed, in particular
those concerning the Holy City of Jerusalem.
The Israeli Cabinet unanimously adopted, on 21 June
1998, a plan on the expansion of the city of Jerusalem to
include vast areas of land and settlements, which will
require the confiscation of thousands of acres and the
construction of new roads to link the settlements
surrounding Jerusalem. Increasing the size of the city
from 108 to 600 square kilometres and increasing the
population to 1 million persons will effect a demographic
change following which the Palestinians will represent a
small minority. The Israeli Government has thus
unilaterally decided the demographic and geographic
future of the city, flouted the wish of the international
community and prejudged the status of Jerusalem.
This Israeli position is not new, though the present
Israeli Government has only hastened its implementation.
Allow me to draw the Council's attention to the following
facts.
The Council has reaffirmed in previous resolutions
the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention to
occupied Jerusalem and other Arab territories occupied
since 1967. Deeming actions by the occupying Power to
change the status of the city as null and void and legally
invalid, the Council, in resolutions 162 (1961) and 250
(1968), requested that Israel desist from parading its
military power in Jerusalem, and in resolution 251 (1968)
it reaffirmed that demand. However, on 24 May 1998,
Israel conducted military parades in celebration of the
thirty-first anniversary of its occupation of the city.
The Council, through resolution 252 (1968),
reaffirmed the inadmissibility of the acquisition of land by
military force. However, Israel has continued to confiscate
Arab land in Jerusalem and has brought in 70,000 Jewish
families. The process is still ongoing, and what is
happening in Jebel Abu Ghneim and Ras Al-Amud is but
additional, clear testimony to that. Holy Islamic places
were not spared, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in the
occupying Power's campaign to close the Holy City to

Security Council
Fifty-third year
those from the West Bank and Gaza seeking to pray.
Jewish groups were allowed to enter the territory of the AlAqsa Mosque, to dig tunnels and to excavate below the
various historic mosques and buildings, destroying the
Ghawanmeh gate in the historic wall of Jerusalem and
expanding the square of the Al-Buraq Wall.
Repeated condemnation of these actions by the Israeli
authorities has not led to any tangible result, and the
agreements reached in the framework of the peace process
have not been respected, in spite of appeals from all parts
of the world, including from the United States, the
European Community, the Vatican and others.
Here I should like to reiterate that the international
community considers Jerusalem an occupied city and that
the agreements on the transitional self-rule signed between
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization should have
prevented any party from taking any actions that would
affect the final status of the city.
The list of violations and instances of lack of respect
for the Council's resolutions is very lengthy, and I believe
it is but another link in a chain of further challenges and
violations. The Middle East peace process should remain
the highest goal being sought by the international
community but that process is suffering from a total
collapse on all tracks. It is time, therefore, for the Security
Council to take the necessary measures to salvage peace.
The Council, which bears responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, must take a firm stance
that is commensurate with the magnitude and gravity of the
violations and challenges by Israel, which is responsible for
this grave situation.
Any complacency in deterring Israel would be
tantamount to encouraging it to continue in its policy of
non-respect for international law and internationally binding
resolutions. It would also lead to the end of hopes
generated by the Madrid agreements and would return the
entire area to the brink of destruction.
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of Peru
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite the representative of Peru to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Guillen (Peru)(interpretation from Spanish): I
would like to express my thanks to you, Mr. President,
and to extend my greetings to your predecessor, who
presided over this Council with distinction.
There are times when it is necessary to engage in
repetition when positions are immovable and when
circumstances deteriorate. The Peruvian delegation comes
to this meeting to say that there is a situation of
considerable deterioration and constant challenge to
decisions of the Security Council, of the General
Assembly, of other principal organs and of the
Organization as a whole.
In the decision adopted in 1947, it was made very
clear that the situation of the city of Jerusalem should be
that of corpus separatum. In accordance with international
developments in this matter, we have repeated on many
occasions that there should be international guarantees
pertaining to the special status of the city of Jerusalem.
Two proposals submitted to the Security Council
were vetoed on 7 March 1997 and on 21 March 1997,
despite the will of the majority of the membership of this
Council. Because of this, at a special session of the
General Assembly at which a resolution was adopted by
a vast majority, it was clearly established that the status
of Jerusalem was not only a question of, and did not
depend solely on, the bilateral agreements between the
countries. As was stated in the General Assembly and
was expressed in the resolution adopted by a considerable
majority, that status should include internationally
guaranteed provisions.
The current extension of municipal powers outside
the city of Jerusalem is an excessive step that offends the
norms and the decisions adopted by these organs of the
United Nations of which all States present are members.
We believe that such steps will be difficult to rescind in
the future if this deliberate policy continues as it has. We
believe that it is essential that the Security Council adopt
decisions firmly and decisively, and without vetoes, on
this matter.
We believe that the status of Jerusalem is not solely

25

Security Council
Fifty-third year
a political matter. It is not a bilateral issue, nor is it solely
a religious matter. It is a matter of concern to the entire
world. It is a matter in which international law and the
legal norms of the United Nations are involved.
Several thousand years ago, in the Holy Book, the
God of the people of Israel made an appeal that man not
act with hostility towards his neighbour, that he not
subjugate him, lest he provoke God’s wrath. I believe that
these words of that God should be present in the conscience
of all of us here. I believe it is such an ancient matter that
it does not deserve hasty treatment, taboos, hesitation or
acts of weakness that detract from the legitimacy of the
decisions of this Council.
The President: I thank the representative of Peru for
his kind words addressed to me and to my predecessor.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list. The
next meeting of the Security Council to continue
consideration of the item on the agenda will be fixed in
consultations with the members of the Council.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

26

3900th meeting (Resumption)
30 June 1998
