UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

2119th

MEETING:

2 MARCH

1979

lJq
LIE?
Anv
JUN2 -i 1982

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/21

Expression

of thanks to the retiring

19)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
President
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 28 February 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Equatorial
Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13121)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

wPv.2119

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oficial Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is
given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Derisions of the
SeczAty Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2119th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 2 March 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Seifu (Ethiopia) and Mr. Seky,i
(Ghana) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

(Nigeria).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Bitain and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Zambia.

3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received a letter dated 2March from
the representatives of Gabon, Nigeria and Zambia [S/
131311 which reads as follow&

Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2119)

“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council, have the honour to request that the Council, pursuant
to rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, should
extend an invitation to Mr. Callistus Ndlovu, reprcsentative of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe, to participate in
the consideration of the ‘Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia’.”

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 28 February 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Equatorial Guinea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13121)

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to the request.

The meeting was called to order at 4.25 pm

It was so decided.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

4. The PRESIDENT:
The Council is meeting today in
accordance with the request made by the Group of African
States at the United Nations in a letter dated 28 February
from the representative of Equatorial Guinea to the President of the Security Council (S//3121].

1. The PRESIDENT: It is my very pleasant duty at this
the first formal meeting of the Security Council for the
month of March to express appreciation, on behalf of the
members of the Council, to Ambassador Yaccoub Bishara
of Kuwait for his services as President of the Council during
the month of February. I pay a tribute to him for the
admirable manner in which he presided with great diplomatic skill over the Council’s work last month.

5. The first speaker is the representative of Ethiopia. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

Adoption of tbe agenda

6. Mr. SEIFU (Ethiopia): Mr. President, allow me, at the
outset, to congratulate you upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. It is indeed most
fitting that you, a representative of an African country,
should be presiding over this very crucial debate. We are all
confident that your diplomatic skill and experience in the
struggle for freedom, independence and human dignity will
ensure that a satisfactory result will emanate from the current deliberations on the question of Southern Rhodesia.

The agenda was adopted.

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 28 February 1979 from ffie Permanent
Representative of Equatorial Guinea to tbe United
Nations addressed to tbe President of the Security
CamciI~ (Wl3121)
2. The PRESIDENT:
1,wish to inform members of the
Council,that I have received letters from the representatives
of Angola, Benin, Botswana, Cuba, Ethiopia and Ghana in
which they request to’be invited to participate in the discussion of the question on the agenda. In accordance with the
usuai’practice, I propose, with the consent.of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

7. Permit me also to express my gratitude to you and the
other members of the Council for having acceded promptly
to the request submitted to you by the representative of
Equatorial Guinea, as Chairman of the African Group at
the United Nations during the previous month, that the
Council should consider the recent grave developments in
Southern Rhodesia.
8. The situation in the British colony of Southern Rhodesia has been, for far too long, a situation of war. The recent
developments in that Territory are merely new levels of
escalation of the war by the rebel racist minority regime of

At the invitation -of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. Modisi (Botswana),

1

Ian Smith. It is because the situation in Southern Rhodesia
has now reached its final explosive stage, seriously jeopardizing international peace and security, that I have the high
honour today to address the Council on behalf of the
African Group.

the Patriotic Front, in response to the Anglo-American
proposals, made it clear that the problem in Zimbabwe was
not the election of a black Prime Minister, but rather the
destruction of colonialism and its institutions, the attainment of genuine independence and the democratization not
only of the voting process but of the very way of life in
Rhodesia-in
short, the destruction of racist Rhodesia and
the emergence of a sovereign Zimbabwe.

9. During the past few weeks, the illegal racist regime in
Southern Rhodesia has intensified its desperate acts of
aggression against the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the People’s Republic of Mozambique, the People’s
Republic of Angola and the Republic of Zambia, thereby
killing helpless Zimbabwean refugees and civilian nationals
of the front-line States. Through such provocations, the
illegal regime is seeking to plunge the whole region into war,
with the hope that such a situation will prolong that
tigime’s existence by drawing into the conflict its racist and
imperialist mentors.

14. There is no doubt that the so-called internal settlement
concocted at Salisbury by the rebel Smith and his black
puppets, the whole purpose of which is to guarantee the
supremacy of the white settlers by enabling them to retain
control of the army, the police force and all the other
essential levels of power, does not even meet the standards
set by the Anglo-American plan. This fact did not escape
the international community. Indeed, exactly one year ago
in March, the Security Council categorically rejected and
condemned that so-called internal settlement. In adopting
resolution 423 (1978) the Council reaffied
that the socalled settlement could neither make the rebel regime more
acceptable nor Britain, the colonial administrator, less
responsible.

10. These repeated acts of aggression constitute a-clear
challenge not only to the African community of States,
which have solemnly pledged to go to the assistance of the
front-line States, but also to the international community at
large. It is Africa’s sincere hope that at these meetings the
Security Council will not fail to come to grips with the
disastrous consequences which the continuance of such acts
of unprovoked aggression against sovereign African States
entails.

15. Today the Council is meeting again to discuss what is
essentially an extension of the so-called internal settlement.
I am here referring to the fraudulent elections scheduled for
next month. The Council, which unequivocally rejected and
condemned the sinister manmuvres a year ago, cannot be
expected to take any other action but to condemn the
planned bogus election and declare its results null and void.
In doing so, members of the Council will realize that they
are merely reaffirming the judgement they themselves have
passed and that any action to the contrary would only be an
exercise in gross hypocrisy. Similarly, members of the
Council should realize that any attempt on the part of any
Government, particularly those of Britain and the United
States, to send observer missions of any nature to the
planned bogus election would only serve as an open invitation for the further escalation of war and bloodshed, since
such an act would essentially constitute a contemptuous
denial of the irrefutable fact that there can be no settlement
of the Southern Rhodesian colonial problem without the
participation of the Patriotic Front.

11. The Security Council has, on previous occasions, condemned similar acts of aggression committed by the Smith
regime against the front-line African States. Though we feel
that this is as it should be, it cannot by itself constitute an
adequate course of action. The Rhodesian illegal regime is
not acting alone in its defiance of the international community. The South African racist regime is openly and fully
supporting it. Overt and covert support from the powerful
Western economic and military circles is of no less significance.
12. It is therefore imperative that the Council should not
lose sight of the linkage between the Rhodesian situation,
the aparzheid regime of South Africa and Western strategy
regarding southern Africa. One cannot be viewed in isolation from the other. As a result, the African Group is once
again requesting the revival and reactivation of the Security
Council Committee established in pursuance of resolution
253 (1968) in order to implement the various resolutions of
the General Assembly regarding the strengthening and widening of the scope of sanctions against the Rhodesian racist
regime. And in this connexion, the recommendations of the
Assembly calling for the imposition of mandatory economic sanctions against the apartheid regime should also be
considered with a view to implementing them before the
situation in Southern Rhodesia explodes to engulf the
whole of Africa in armed conflict.

16. Africa is of course fully aware that the moves currently
taking place in Washington and London to send observer
missions to Rhodesia are primarily intended to lend legitimacy to the process and its results, thus creating a pretext
for the lifting of economic sanctions. Legitimacy cannot
emanate from an illegal situation. Therefore, the only sensible course of action left is to put an end to the hitherto
perennial attempts and scenarios which have been designed
to legitimize the racist minority regime of Ian Smith and
which have resulted in a steady and sharp deterioration of
the situation in Southern Rhodesia, gravely endangering
international peace and security.

13. Hardened by almost a century of colonial oppression,
the gallant sons and daughters of Zimbabwe, the African
freedom fighters under the leadership of the Patriotic Front,
rose up in arms in defence of their most sacred and inalienable rights only after all efforts in search of a peaceful transition to majority rule had been frustrated. The various
proposals, including the Anglo-American proposals, and
the series of negotiations at Geneva, Malta, Dar es Salaam
and elsewhere have served only to expose the Smith regime
and the intentions of its colonialist, imperialist mentors in
Britain and the United States. As early as September 1977,

17. The liberation of Zimbabwe is fast approaching. As a
result, the Smith regime is becoming more desperate. The
year 1979 is bound to see an intensification of the armed
struggle within Rhodesia and attacks on the front-line
States! During this crucial year, free Africa will undoubtedly strengthen its solidarity with and increase its support
for the Patriotic Front-the
sole and legitimate representative of the people of Zimbabwe.
2

18. Africa hopefully expects that the United Nations,
especially the Security Council, will take firm and forthright
measures to help eliminate once and for all the illegal racist
r&me in Southern Rhodesia and to emancipate the longtormented people of Zimbabwe, bringing them to freedom
and independence.

blanket exemption from prosecution of membersof an
army or a police force madeup of mercenaries,adventurers
or outlaws explainsthe ever mounting civilian casualtiesin
the war of Ian Smith.
24. The Rhodesianstrategy in the war hasbeen to inflict
as many casualtieson the civilian African population as
possible.The presentpolicy of the regimeisto kill at least30
Africans for every white settler killed. In pursuit of this
genocidalpolicy, which doesnot distinguishbetweencombatants and non-combatants,the regime’sforceshave made
the civilian African population insidethe country and refugeesin the neighbouring countries their chief targets. In
most cases,this has also included unprovoked attacks on
the civilian populations of Botswana, Mozambique and
Zambia, and now Angola. In these mindlessattacks on
civilians, the regime’sforceshave usedincendiary weapons,
particularly napalm bombs.Thesehave beenusedon refugee camps in Mozambique and Zambia. Incendiary weapons have also been usedto destroy villages and crops in
areassuspectedof supporting freedomfighters.The regime’s
forces have alsopoisonedwells, boreholesand other sources of water, thereby creating indiscriminate hazards to
human and animal life alike.

19. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Callistus
Ndlovu, to whom the Council has extended an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
20. Mr. NDLOVU
Mr. President, members of the Security Council, we wish, on behalf of the people of Zimbabwe
and the Patriotic Front, to thank you for giving us this
opportunity to appear before this august body. Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumptionof the presidency
of the Council. Your personal involvement in efforts to
resolvesouthernAfrican problemsand your Government’s
commitment to bringing about majority rule in the region in
generaland in Zimbabwe in particular are well known. We
are happy that this debate on Zimbabwe is taking place
under your guidance.
21. ‘The peopleof Zimbabwe have, in their just struggleto
regain their national independence,recently made giant
strides in the direction of achieving majority rule in their
country. They have inflicted heavy blows on the Smith
r&me. The entire population, the struggling massesof
Zimbabwe have beenmobilized behind the patriotic forces,
which have now carried the war right to the doorstep of
Salisbury, the heartland of racismand “settlerism” in Zimbabwe. Our war of liberation hasdriven the racist minority
regime from most of the country, with the countryside
falling rapidly into the control of the Patriotic Front forces.
The urban centres,which until recently weresafehavensfor
the Rhodesianruling class,have beenheavily infiltrated by
our forces, and recently the Council haswitnessedthe evidence of this in the attack on Salisbury itself.

25. It is important that this augustbody shouldaskhow a
puny army like that of Ian Smith, drawn from an everdwindling white population, can have sucha military capability asto strike even a placeasfar away asAngola. Having
virtually lost the war on the ground, the forcesof the regime
have increasinglyresortedto air raids on villagessuspected
of harbouring freedom fighters and refugeebasesin neighbouring countries. In someof its most savageraids into
neighbouring Zambia, Mozambique and Angola, the
tigime has used French-made Mirage jets. It has been
recently revealed that the South African regimehas been
loaning its French-built Mirage jets and pilots to Rhodesian
forces to conduct raids into neighbouring countries. The
raid into Angola a few days ago was stagedby the South
African air force basedin the Caprivi Strip. The revelation
of the fact that the raid on Luso in Angola wasstagedfrom
the well-known South African air-basein the Caprivi Strip
unmasks the myth that the Rhodesianair force has the
capacity to strike as far asit wants in southernAfrica. The
involvement of South Africa in thesedesperateattempts to
apply artificial respiration to the dead Rhodesianregime
shouldsurpriseno one, given the presenceof South African
forces in the Rhodesianarmy itself.

22. Having lost effective control over 90 per cent of the
country, the regimeof Ian Smith hastaken to desperateand
serious acts of aggressionagainst the defencelesscivilian
African population inside the country and the peoplesof
the neighbouring countries of Angola, Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia. In its war againstpatriotic forces, the
Rhodesianregime has never pretended to respecteven the
elementary rules of international law nor hasit shown any
concern for human life when dealingwith African civilians.
The r&me doesnot accord prisoner-of-war status to cap
tured freedom fighters. Freedom fighters captured in battle
have beeneither summarily executedor tried in cameraand
hanged.The African’civilian population remotely suspected
of either colluding with freedom fighters or failing to report
their presencehave beencollectively subjectedto the same
kangaroo+zourt form of justice, if not wantonly bombed
and massacredindiscriminately.

26. We call upon the international community to condemn South Africa for intervening in the internal affairs of
Zimbabwe.
27. By making South Africa’the key to a negotiatedsettlement on Zimbabwe, the Western Powers, particularly the
United Kingdom and the United States, have extended to
the South African regime a false senseof respectability
which hasencouragedthat regimeto try to influenceevents
in Zimbabwe openly. Although South Africa had been
directly aiding the Smith regime even before the Western
initiative on Zimbabwe, we contend that, once the United
Kingdom and the United Statespredicated any negotiated
solution of the Rhodesianproblem on the co-operation of
the South African regime,and linked sucha solution to the
solution.of the problemsof Namibia, they gave the South
African regimeundue influence over the situation in Zimbabwe. Becauseboth the South African and the Rhodesian

23. To say that the Smith regime hasabandonedall elements of aceptable due processin dealing with freedomtighter suspects!s an understatement.The regime’sIndemnification Act placesmembersof its security forces above
the law, becauseunder the provisions of that notorious law
ho member of the security forces can be prosecutedfor
crimes which he commits on patrol duty-however
callously-against the defencelesscivilian population. This
3

regimes were able to see through the incoherence of the
Anglo-American approach to the problems of both Zimbabwe and Namibia, these regimes took advantage of the
leverage which had been bestowed upon South Africa by
the Western Powers vis-a-vis the Rhodesian problem.
Today both these regimes have concocted internal settlements in both Zimbabwe and Namibia, taking advantage of
Anglo-American indecisiveness.

.accused of racism. This liberal guilt syndrome explains the
confused responses in Washington and London to the 3
March agreement. Mr. Smith is exploiting this state of
affairs to the full.
32. Members of the Council have, I am sure, read about
moves in London and Washington to send observers to
Smith’s sham elections scheduled for 20 April 1979. In
the United States Senate, Republican Senator S.I. Hayakawa from California, and Democratic Senator George
McGovern, from South Dakota, on 28 February announced
their plan to introduce a Senate resolution calling for a team
of observers to monitor the Rhodesian elections to be held
on 20 April. Although both Senators claim that “the proposed dispatch of observers must not be construed to be an
implicit or explicit support of the internal settlement”, there
is no blinking the fact that Senator Hayakawa was one of
the 27 United States Senators who invited Ian Smith and his
blacksmiths into the United States and vigorously campaigned for their admission. At that time he made no secret
about how good he thought the so-called internal settlement was. Senator McGovern may claim that “it should be
clarified that Senator Hayakawa and I continue to hold
very different views of the present Rhodesian situation*‘,
but the fact remains that, by co-sponsoring a Senate resolution to send observers to an election taking place under an
arrangement which has been pronounced “ilIega1 and unacceptable” by the United Nations, he is virtually according
recognition to the 3 March agreement. It does not matter
how he tries to justify or rationalize his actions. The fact
remains that at Salisbury his actions will be interpreted to
mean that he believes there is a chance that fair and democratic elections can be held under the provisions of the 3
March agreement and in circumstances of war.

28. Since the two minority regimes began coordinating
their responses to the conceptually incoherent AngloAmerican approach to the problems of southern Africa,
they have exchanged crucial military information. It is for
that reason that South Africa’s air raid on Kassinga in
Angola was later replicated in the Rhodesian raids into
Zambia in October 1978. The same applies to South Africa’s assistance to the Smith regime on the raid into Angola
this week.
29. The Western countries whose function has been to
sustain both minority regimes, in Southern Rhodesia and
South Africa, must accept responsibility for the wreckless
acts of aggression of the Smith regime. Although some of
these countries have publicly expressed support for United
Nations economic sanctions against the regime at Salisbury,
they have done nothing to stop their citizens from trading
with that regime. The evidence of French, British, American, West German and Israeli manufactured arms and the
participation of such nationals as mercenaries in the RhodeSian army show the extent to which Western countries are
involved in sustaining the racist r+gime at Salisbury. We call
upon the Committee on Sanctions* to consider measures for
tightening up and widening the economic sanctions against
the regime in Southern Rhodesia.

33. The issue is not whether fair and democratic elections
can be conducted but whether the provisions of the socalled settlement are fair and democratic. One does not
expect elections held under an unfair and undemocratic
constitution to be fair and democratic. To expect such an
outcome would be as absurd as to expect to be able to make
fried ice.

30. Those who think that they are helping their kith and
kin by violating sanctions against the Smith regime must
realize that they are contributing to the regime’s intransigence over the issue of a genuine transfer of power to the
majority, and this in the long run will harm the interests
of the white minority which they think they are helping.
An effective application of economic sanctions against
the regime would quickly force the regime to face the
reality that it can no longer live on borrowed time. The
support that the regimeenjoys from certain Western circles
has made Smith think that he can temporize over the future
of the country and probably get away with anything short of
a genuine transfer of power.

34. The provisions of the 3 March agreement reached
between Smith and his blacksmiths were pronounced illegal
and unacceptable by the Security Council, and as such are
null and void. This agreement has been overwhelmingly
rejected by the people of Zimbabwe. This is why the war
against the regime has intensified since the signing of the
so-called agreement. The Council has heard our views on
the so-called internal settlement before-when
Patriotic
Front co-leaders Joshua Nkomo and Robert Mugabe
appeared before the Council. We shall therefore not go over
the terms of the agreement itself once more.

31. His so-called internal settlement of 3 March 1978which he has since mutilated by renegotiating some of its
basic terms-is just an example of how Mr. Smith has been
taking advantage of what he thinks is Western tacit approval of his actions. When the United Kingdom and the
United States failed to come out openly in opposition to his
so-called internal settlement, Mr. Smith was encourged into
drawing more adventurous schemes designed to maintain
and entrench minority rule in Zimbabwe. By coopting
black puppets into his regime, Mr. Smith sought to blunt
the criticism of this regime by liberals in both the United
Kingdom and the United States. In fact, because of the
presence of Abel Muzorewa and Ndabaningi Sithole, who
in no sense are sharing power with Smith, many liberals
now fear to criticize the Rhodesian regime lest they be
253

’ Security
(1968)

Council
concerning

Committee
established
in pursuance
the question
of Southern
Rhodesia.

35. The proposed elections of 20 April 1979 are supposed
to take 10 days. This will enable the over-stretched security
forces of the Rhodesian regime to move from one polling
area to another. It is also an arrangement which enables
polling officers and the security forces to determine how to
deal with low turn-outs as they move from one polling area
to another. This alone makes fair and free elections impossible. Futhermore, there is no list of registered votersThis
means that men will use their local authority registration
certificates and women will use a more dubious form of
identification, that will enable migrant workers, who number
over 250,000, to vote as the Angolan refugees voted in the

of resolution

4

sham elections which South Africa conducted recently in
Namibia. In these circumstances. we do not see how such elections can possibly be fair, free and democratic.
36. We call upon the Security Council to condemn these
elections as being as fraudulent as the Constitution under
which they are being conducted. Western conservative apologists for the Smith regime cannot hide their true intention
of backing racist Ian Smith behind the cassocks of Bishop
Abel Muzorewa and the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole, who
have sold their souls and stilled their consciences for the
sake of self-gratification at the expense of the people of
Zimbabwe. They know, and we also know that they have
been behind Smith since he unilaterally seized power in
1965. They back him now not because of the inclusion of
blacks in his regime but because this enables them to hide
their racist faces behind the clerical gowns of Muzorewa
and Sithole.
37. In case there are those who have not heard this before,
the Patriotic Front wishes to reiterate its objectives in our
struggle to regain our national independence. As our leaders, Presidents Mugabe and Nkomo, have said time and
time again, our war is not against white people as members
of a race but against the system which has been imposed on
us over the years by British settlers. We are not fighting to
install a black face in place of Smith’s white face. No, we are
fighting to eradicate the racist institutions which enslaved
99 per cent of the people of Zimbabwe for nearly a century
now. White people in Zimbabwe who subscribe to genuine
majority rule have nothing to fear because they will become
part of the majority once a genuine transfer of power takes
place. If there are going to be racial problems under our
rule, they will not be of our making but will be caused by
those who stubbornly reject the idea of transferring power
to the majority now, those who continue to bomb defenceless civilians and refugees, and those who support minority
ruli for parochial and ethnic reasons.
38. In conclusion, we wish to appeal to the Security Council to condemn Rhodesian raids into Angola, Mozambique
and Zambia, to warn South Africa against interfering in the
internal affairs of Zimbabwe, to call upon all countries not
to have anything to do with Smith’s elections, and to examme loopholes through which the Smith regime continues to
trade with the outside world. The Smith r&me and its allies
at Pretoria should not be allowed to believe that they can
violate the territorial integrity of neighbouring countries
with impunity. Such a state of affairs would threaten the
peace and security not only of Africa but of the whole
world. For our part, we believe that we have no choice but
to intensify the armed struggle, carrying it to its logical
conclusion, which is a genuine transfer of power in
Zimbabwe.
39. Zimbabwe must.be free. The struggle continues. Victory is certain.
40. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Botswana. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement.
41. Mr. MODISI (Botswana): On behalf of the front-line
countries, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, and the
other members of the Council for allowing me to speak
during this debate on the problems afflicting southern
Africa.

42. I take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on
vour assumntion of the Dresidencv of the Council for this
month, when the problims of southern Africa have once
again made it necessaryfor the Council to convene. We are
all familiar with your own able and determined efforts to
bring about a just settlement of the problems of southern
Africa. With the backing of your own Government, which
has traditionally assumed an active and responsible role in
the affairs of Africa, my delegation is certain that you will
bring the necessary pressures to bear in an effort to satisfy
the aspirations of the African people during this debate.
.

L

43. It is today over a decade since. the Council met and
determined that the situation in Southern Rhodesia was a
threat to international peace and security. The Council has
since met on several occasions only to reaffii its original
finding. At each successivemeeting the Council invariably
observed that the situation in that unhappy British colony
continued to deteriorate.
44. The front-line countries completely share the view
that so long as the minority white r&ime in Southern
Rhodesia continues to survive there will be no end to the
unspeakable suffering of the people in southern Africa, in
general, and of the black people in that region, in particular.
The situation in Southern Rhodesia today poses a serious
threat to international peace and security.
45. The people of Zimbabwe are waging a valiant struggle
to shake off the yoke of colonialism. The front-line countries have always deemed it their responsibility to assist
them, and they are not about to abandon that responsibility. The struggle will continue until final victory. The cost is
now very high and, in the light of the deteriorating situation,
will continue to escalate.
46. In their struggle, the people of Zimbabwe have never
ceased to seek an-amicable and civilized settlement. Unfortunately for them, conferences have been held, under the
auspices of the colonial administration, to define the problem, to devise machinery for ignoring the problem and,
finally, actually to deceive the black people of Zimbabwe in
perpetuity. The leaders of the suffering black Zimbabweans
have attended all those conferences in spite of all the glaring
faults they found in the objectives of those conferences and
their cynical implications for them. Whenever there appeared
to be some measure of accommodation in the proposals
discussed at those conferences that the leaders of the black
people could genuinely accept, the authors of the proposals
found a way to reverse themselves, in a conspiracy to frustrate our leaders further.
47. It was only after its long experience of treachery in the
white settler clique and its powerful Western sympathizers,
in particular the British Government and the Government
of South Africa, that the people of Zimbabwe resolved to
enter into an armed struggle against them. Its resolve to
enter this phase of the struggle was inevitable, given the
circumstances of the time, when the other side engaged in
cruel deceit and continued to enforce a callous and inhumane policy against the people of Zimbabwe. The degree of
repression in the country, the maltreatment of black people,
the abuse of the law and of human rights and, indeed, the
scant disregard for the lives of the black people of Zimbabwe are well documented.
48. Now that it is clear to the illegal white minority r&me
at Salisbury that all its deception, intrigue, cruelty and

callousness towards the black people of Zimbabwe will
never subjugate their will and their aspirations to independence and freedom, the Smith regime has contrived a diabolical scheme to set them one against another. Emboldened by
his successin tricking a few misguided so-called internal
leaders, Mr. Smith is now bent on a course of swindling not
only the black people of Zimbabwe, but the whole intemational community, by installing a puppet regime in that
Territory. The so-called limited majority rule that will, for
the foreseeable future, serve the interests of the privileged
minority of white Rhodesian settlers has now received the
blessing of the all-white electorate, and on 20 April Mr.
Smith plans to force this wish of the whites in Rhodesia
down the throats of the black majority of Zimbabwe
through a sham election. Mr. Smith and his colleagues at
Salisbury have been making elaborate and sinister preparations for this fraud.

countries have been terrorized in an ill-fated effort to cow
them into refusing to accept refugees from Zimbabwe. In
pursuit of this policy, the illegal minority regime in Southern Rhodesia has without any provocation repeatedly in the
past invaded the territories and violated the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia. The invasions were carefully planned and therefore
premeditated. The co-ordinated military invasions of our
countries have resulted in loss of life, destruction of property and untold suffering for our people. Note should be
taken that these invasions are often directed against civilian
populations and refugee camps.
54. Another reason the Council is meeting today is that
the military forces of the illegal white minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia have made successiveunprovoked and
premeditated attacks well within the territories of Angola,
Mozambique and Zambia, from 17 February to 1 March of
this year. Most of these attacks were directed against refugee camps. Over 200 innocent people were killed and over
650 injured, and among the dead and injured are civilian
Angolans, Zambians and Mozambicans.

49. Encouraged, on the one hand, by a visit to the United
States made possible through an invitation by some dangerously ill-informed senators extended in defiance of the decisions of the Security Council and, on the other, by some
ill-conceived and impolitic rumblings of support from the
Conservative Party in the United Kingdom, Mr. Smith now
hopes to have the Governments of those two countriesand, in the case of the United States, once again-defy the
decisions of the Council by unilaterally lifting sanctions
imposed against Southern Rhodesia in 1968.

55. The other front-line countries are outraged by these
dastardly attacks against the sister countries of Angola,
Mozambique and Zambia, and wish to record their strongest condemnation of the acts of naked aggression perpetrated against them by the illegal white minority racist
tigime in Southern Rhodesia. The Security Council should
not give comfort to the illegal r&me concerning these
terrible inhuman acts. It should roundly condemn them for
what they are: barbarous acts of murder.

50. One of the reasons the Council is meeting today is to
appeal to the Governments of the United States and of the
United Kingdom not to be so easily duped by Mr. Smith
and to refuse to submit to the pressures of misguided elements within their Governments to recognize the illegal
regime. The front-line countries earnestly hope that this
appeal will be heeded by both Governments. Mr. Smith in
new clothes is still Mr. Smith. The results of the April 1979
elections are predetermined.

56. The people of all the front-line countries share in the
sorrow caused by the illegal regime to the people of Angola,
Mozambique and Zambia and the black people of Zimbabwe. We stand with them in mourning the dead to whose
relatives we wish to express our heartfelt condolences.
These are very sad and tragic times in the history of southern Africa which will be remembered by all the struggling
and valiant people of that region.

51. On the other hand, Mr. Smith has placed his country
on an unparalleled war footing. The Territory is ruled by
martial law. Repressive measures taken against the black
population in Southern Rhodesia are so severethat they are
deplored even by the very same socalled internal leaders
whom Mr. Smith intends to install as his puppets in a
so-called limited majority rule government. More and more
of the black people of Southern Rhodesia are now fleeing in
fear of their lives. In flight also are young children who have
decided to forgo the love of their parents because of the
intolerable discomforts and suffering inflicted upon them
by the notorious security guards of the Smith regime in
besieged villages, and to join the swelling refugee populations of Zimbabweans in neighbouring countries.

57. In the fast deteriorating situation in southern Africa
there is bound to be more of that sort of sorrow visited upon
the innocent and peace-loving people by the illegal warmongering regime at Salisbury. We have no doubt that our
people have the capacity to withstand it and are prepared to
pay the supreme price, if that is what it will take to rid
themselves of colonialism and racism. We also know that
the days of Mr. Smith and his co-conspirators are numbered.
58. The people of Zimbabwe under the guidance of their
liberation movement, the Patriotic Front, must be congratulated on the valiant tight they are waging against indomitable odds in their determined struggle against British
colonialism and the white settler minority in Southern
Rhodesia. They have already proved their mettle to us, for
which they enjoy our admiration and respect. The front-line
countries pledge their unswerving support to them. We
shall stand with them until they succeed in ridding themselves of the bloodthirsty Smith.

52. Mr. Smith’s appetite for cruelty is apparently insatiable. He has developed a distinctly inhumane policy of tracking these innocent refugees into the neighbouring countries,
where his security forces execute them. These vile acts of
murder of the refugee populations in neighbouring countries are part of the policy of genocide against the black
people of Zimbabwe. Genocide is a crime against humanity
and a violation of all the principles and customs of civilized
nations and States Members of the Organization. The frontline countries wish to record their condemnation of this act
, of genocide by the Smith regime.

59. The front-line countries request the Security Council
to take appropriate measures in support of the people of
Zimbabwe and their liberation movement, the Patriotic
Front. Such measures should be sufficient in scope to
strengthen the hand of liberation and decolonization. That

53. In accordance with the grand scheme of things conceived by the illegal minority regime, the neighbouring
6

is the only decent thing to do, for the principles for which
the liberation movement is lighting are enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. The Council should now
join the tight in defence of those principles. The tight of the
people of Zimbabwe against colonialism and oppression is
the fight of the international community.

ensure that all its resolutions on Southern Rhodesia will
be observed by Member States.
65. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Angola. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
66. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): Mr. President, on
behalf of the Government of the People’s Republic of
Angola and my delegation, please accept our very best
wishes on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. The warm and fraternal relations
that exist between our two countries are reflected in the
ties of co-operation and friendship between our delegations in New York and elsewhere. The people of Angola
have always received the support of the people and leaders of Nigeria, both in our struggle and on the political
and diplomatic fronts. I should like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the memory of our comrade,
Brigadier Murtala Mohammed, who fell victim to an
imperialist-hatched conspiracy. We in Angola revere his
memory as that of one of our most stalwart friends and
one who stood by us and fought for us especially in the
early days of our young People’s Republic. His Excellency President Obasanjo has continued Nigerian support for the People’s Republic of Angola, for which we
thank him and the people of Nigeria.

60. The Smith regime has no right to terror&e its people.
It has no right to defend the position of undeserved privilege
of the white settler community in Southern Rhodesia.
Neither does the Smith tigime have a right to invade neighbouring countries or to remain in a country whose people it
so manifestly hates and abuses. Western countries have no
right to arm Mr. Smith and his colleagues, only for him to
kill innocent civilians in Southern Rhodesia and to embark
upon unprovoked acts of aggression against neighbouring
countries. The Government of the United Kingdom has no
right to continue its shameless irresponsibility and deception.
61. The Security Council must ensure that sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia will be strengthened and that
Member States will strictly observe them. In this connexion
the role of the colonial Government must be re-examined
closely, particularly now that the Council is aware of the
disclosures of the Bingham report.2 From the Bingham
report one thing is now very clear: the British Government
has been writing accusing letters to the Council about others
while it was consciously committing similar crimes.

67. So often have we protested and appealed to the
Security Council that the international community must
surely have got the message that imperialism and racism
are alive and well in southern Africa; in fact, not only
alive and well, but increasing in activity and strength.

62. The latest round of attacks which the Smith regime
is mounting against refugee camps in the front-line countries is aimed at depleting the black population of Zimbabwe. The aim in killing these innocent refugees is to
have fewer people to oppose Mr. Smith in his sham
elections.

68. The racist and Fascist minority regimes at Pretoria
and Salisbury appear to be racing to outdo each other in
perpetrating acts of aggression against the independent
black States of southern Africa. Were it not for the death
and destruction left behind, the corpses of women, children and old men, the charred school buildings and
health clinics and the ruined refugee camps, one might be
tempted to write off these nightmares as a peculiar,
colonial, sadistic form of bush game played by bored
white settlers. Unfortunately for them, we shall not stand
by while our earth turns red with the blood of the
victims-or
do black men not bleed?

63. No State should send observers to elections the
preparations for which included the wholesale murder of
people. We should like to repeat at this juncture that the
outcome of the elections on 20 April 1979 is predetermined. Such elections can be neither democratic nor fair.
The number of people who will participate in such elections is immaterial, as it makes very little difference to the
outcome. Perhaps Senators McGovern and Hayakawa
and Lord Pym should be asked to explain how the April
1979 elections can be democratic and fair when, from the
outset, they exclude the participation of the Patriotic
Front.

69. The Fascist, racist, illegal, minority Smith regime
chose to defy the world in 1965 and, despite sanctimonious
utterances from Whitehall, despite Security Council sanctions against the British colony, despite the mobilization of
world opinion, and despite the co-ordination of action, the
racist regimes at Pretoria and Salisbury continue to flourish.

64. In conclusion, the front-line countries request the
Security Council to adopt a resolution that, first, condemns the unprovoked acts of aggression by Mr. Smith
against their territories, secondly, declares the so-called
elections of 20 April 1979 a sham and therefore null and
void, thirdly, calls upon all States not to send observers to
the elections and not to recognize whatever emerges from
such elections-in this connexion the front-line countries
urge the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom to ensure that no observers will be sent to
Southern Rhodesia by any arm of their Governmentsfourthly, calls upon all States to provide assistance to the
liberation movement of Zimbabwe, the Patriotic Front,
and finally, invites the Council to adopt measures to

70. And now the illegal regime at Salisbury, its lifelines to
the West pulsing with economic interests and multinational
power, feels so secure that it has moved to widen its area of
battle to embrace independent, sovereign countries in
southern Africa, including those far from its borders.
71. The illegal Smith regime has been carrying out’murderous assaults on Mozambique, Zambia and Botswana.
Now the Smith clique has intensified its attacks in preparation for the great farce it is about to stage next month. As
part of its strategy, it has carried out regular bombing raids
in the past two weeks. On 26 February, supposed RhodeSian bombers raided Angolan territory 180 miles inside our
borders and left over 160 dead and more than 500 injured.

2 T. H. Bingham and S. M. Gray, Report on the Suppiy of Petroleum
and Petroleum Products to Rhodesia, London, Her Majesty’s Stationery
Office for the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office, 1978.

7

comrades in Zimbabwe: “Courage; we are with you”. And
if this support entails bombing attacks on our territory, we
will face such threats with the same attitude and fortitude
with which we have faced our enemies for almost four
centuries-with resistance, revolution and an implacable
hatred of all forms of racism and imperialist activity.

That was reported to be the fifth Rhodesian armed invasion
in nine days on neighbouring States.
72. Where does the Smith regime acquire its war mar&ieZ?
It was recently reported-and
I offer this just as an
example-that
a United States federal investigation had
concluded that 11 United States-made Huey helicopters
were illegally smuggled to Rhodesia last autumn while they
were supposed to be en route from Israel to Singapore.
Those helicopters have almost certainly been converted to
military use against the black majority inhabitants of
Zimbabwe.

79. Our condemnation of the illegal Fascist junta that
rules at Salisbury-we choose to ignore the misguided
“Uncle Toms” in Smith’s Cabinet-is not limited only to
protests against the bombing raids on the People’s Republic
of Angola or against the attacks on the People’s Republic of
Mozambique, Zambia and Botswana. Our condemnation
extends to the entire Fascist system in Rhodesia, from the
handful of racist whites who reign at Salisbury to the system
of mass exploitation of the land and majority inhabitants of
Zimbabwe; from the discriminatory laws that enslave our
comrades to the farcical attempts by the Smith regime to
whitewash its illegality by the alleged repeal of certain laws
and their replacement by others virtually the same in effect,
if not in content. These include the Emergency Powers Act of
1979, which permits detention without trial, cohective
arrests, lines and forced resettlement-all applied to blacks
only.

73. The Fascist Foreign Minister of the illegal regime at
Salisbury, Van der Byl, has stated the following in connexion with those armed attacks upon our countries:
“The countries that lend themselves to these activities
must accept the fact that they will suffer, in the same way
as innocent civilians were killed in their tens of thousands
by Anglo-American bombing raids on Germany in the
last war.”
74. Van der Byl’s arrogance in using that analogy is typical of the colonial and imperialist mentality that led white
Europeans in droves to the continents of the third world,
aided by their Governments and their armies, urged on by
an exploitative system hungry for land, goods, raw materials and markets. In most cases these greedy colonialists
encountered either hospitality-which they abused-or resistance with sticks, stones and spears. We Africans have
always opened our arms to people who will live with us and
become one of us. We shall always reject settler colonialism
which merely plunders our land, uses our labour and
oppresses our people on our own territory.

80. Further, our condemnation extends to Smith’s most
valuable ally in southern Africa which is equally guilty of
the crimes of racism, apartheid, minority rule, exploitation,
colonialist links and imperialist ties. This close collaboration between the Fascist junta at Pretoria and the racist
gang in Salisbury is no secret. I shall not attempt to enumerate the overt and covert ways in which each-nourishes the
other and helps it to survive. There is ample proof and
documentation for those who still need or desire it. And,
therefore, every life lost in the noble struggle against oppression and imperialism and every bullet tired in an anticolonialist cause are a part of the struggle against the
systems imposed by the PretoriaSalisbury axis to deny to
the peoples of Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa their
inalienable right to freedom and independence.

75. The People’s Republic of Angola was created out of
the blood and corpses of scores of revolutionary martyrs.
These heroes were the ancestors of our ongoing revolution,
which is by no means over. Each succeeding generation of
Angolans stands ready to defend our hard-won independence, our territorial integrity and our sovereignty.

81. Finally, our condemnation of these attacks against
independent southern African States, our condemnation of
the systems prevailing in the white enclaves in southern
Africa and racist regimes ruling in those enclaves, and the
collaboration between the two--our condemnation of all of
this is equally extended to that vast and complex Western
international imperialist machine that both feeds those
minority racist r&imes and racist systems and feeds on
them as well.

76. The Central Committee of the MPLA-Workers’ Party
and all the revolutionary militants in the People’s Republic
of Angola, under the able leadership and guidance of our
comrade, President Agostinho Neto, pledge to resist all
forms of imperialism, racism and colonialism, and attempts
to resurrect them within our sacred borders or to perpetuate
them outside, whether in southern Africa or elsewhere. It
would be a betrayal of our revolutionary principles if we did
not continue to offer our solidarity and support to all the
genuine liberation forces struggling to bring majority rule
and independence to Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa
itself.

82. I shall refrain from going into. the details of the economic support given by Western countries and transnationals to the regimes at Pretoria and Salisbury. Last year saw
the disclosure of ample evidence that successive British
Governments had known of, and silently acquiesced in,
economic and commercial activities between the United
Kingdom and its renegade colony.. All this was in flagrant
violation of the mandatory sanctions imposed by the Security Council by two States which are permanent members of
the Council and by other Western States which sit or
recently sat on this body. Without these links the racist
r&ime would not be able to survive, and certainly neither
would the system of virulent racist discrimination which is
one of the main reasons that those two .racist r@imes have
been isolated from the rest of Africa.

77. To address myself to a specific situation, on behalf of
Angola, I renew here our pledge of support for the Patriotic
Front, the liberation movement that has been waging an
unceasing struggle to liberate Zimbabwe. Every Angolan
life lost in the defence of revolutionary principles or in an
attack on racism, imperialism and colonialism is a loss we
will bear with dignity and with pride, satisfied in the knowledge that it was for a worthy cause.
78. We are a revolutionary nation; therefore I say to our
comrades in the Patriotic Front and all our revolutionary
8

83. The year 1978 was a good one .for the racist Smith
*me.
Much to the consternation and horror of Africa,
there were moves in the United States Congress to repeal the
laws imposing economic sanctions against Rhodesia, on the
grounds that the conditions that had necessitated the sanctions no longer prevailed. I should like to suggest to those
members of Congress who supported that reactionary
move-which did not come to fruition-that
they should
ask the opinion of the black slave labour in the mines, that
they should see black children in the “concentration
camps”, and that they should consult the victims of the
racial discrimination practised within a constitutional and
institutional frame whether or not those conditions necessitating economic sanctions still prevail.
84. To add insult to injury, Smith was allowed to visit the
United States. And then the West wonders why its credibiiity is so low in our part of the world; why we are equally
ready for armed struggle, much as we ourselves would
prefer a peaceful solution. Because we have yet to come
across a “negotiated” settlement that was not a sell-out, a
“peaceful” settlement ,that granted genuine independence
and put into power a government that reflected the aspirations of the masses and was supported by them.
85. The illegal Smith regime has placed over 75 per cent of
Zimbabwe under martial law in an effort to stem the tide of
revolutionary fervour that is sweeping the masses. Smith
will ultimately fail in Zimbabwe, for victory will ultimately
be ours. Smith has been judged by the people of Zimbabwe
and found guilty. But where he may yet-temporarily be
saved, ironically enough, is in the halls of the United States
Congress, where the Smith r&me and its American friends
have been lobbying heavily among conservative forces to
grant a reprieve to Smith. The latest move is to send an
observer group to monitor the so-called elections which will
be held, not in Zimbabwe but in Rhodesia, next month.
86. The international community is well aware of the
mandatory sanctions against Rhodesia, which include a
travel ban. Will Africa and this world body stand by and
allow this violation of a Security Council decision, one that
has the blessing of the very permanent member of the
Council whose own legislature is now contemplating this
act? Will the American people and Government allow thii
damage to their recent efforts to win friends in the third
world7 Will the international community allow the Fascist
Smith to use this ruse as a means of conferring a semblance
of legitimacy on the “elections” and on his “government”?
87. The People’s Republic of Angola strongly condemns
the socalled elections planned for next month. We appeal
to all States not to violate the mandatory sanctions against
Salisbury, especially not the travel ban. We appeal to them
not to send delegations of any sort, whether official, quasioficial or private, which would be used by the racist gang as
a means to confer on themselves national and international
legitimacy.
88. The People’s Republic of Angola has enjoyed a hardwon independence for just over three years. Since 1975,
under the leadership’of our President, Mr. Agostinho Neto,
and the Central Committee of our vanguard party, the
MPLA-Workers’ Party, we have geared our resources and
our energies to the massive task of national reconstruction,
to the rebuilding of our war-shattered institutions and the
elimination of reactionary, elitist ones. We are applying our

national will. our skills and our mannower to the introduction and/or development of educational and health facilities, agriculture, industries, means of mass communication
and transportation, and national, regional and intemational commerce. We have fought for and won our place in
the international community.
89. However, time and again we are distracted from our
task of nation-building to face the ugly threat from nascent
imperialist activity, armed invasions by Rhodesian bombing raids being just the most recent example of such activity,
but certainly not the only one, or even one of a few. Our
nation stands mobilized to defend our country, and we
stand ready to support our comrades in Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa.
90. Until the final defeat of racism, apartheid, imperialism
and colonialism, until the disappearance from our continent of neo-colonialist activity, whether economic, political
or military, until the achievement of genuine independence
by all the oppressed peoples in southern Africa, until the
total dismantling of the racist-imperialist minority structure
in Pretoria and Salisbury, the struggle continues.
91. Mr. MUTUKWA (Zambia): It is most fitting that this
meeting of the Security Council to discuss the vexing problem of Southern Rhodesia is being presided over by the
representative of Nigeria. Your country, Mr. President,
indeed qualifies as a front-line State in all aspects except
contiguity. It is seriously committed to the liberation of
southern Africa in word and deed. You have also demonstrated your commitment to the cause of freedom and
justice in your capacity as Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid. That Committee, under your able
chairmanship, has been tackling South Africa, which is at
the core of the forces of oppression in the region.
92. The Zambian delegation pledges its fullest cooperation
with you during this month that has inherited problems
from February. We are certain that you will apply your
usual frankness in tackling the world’s problems. I also wish
to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Bishara
of Kuwait, for the tireless and fearless manner in which he
guided our work last month. To be sure, the alphabet or
nature has favoured non-aligned countries in that the Presidents of the Security Council since January have been
representatives of non-aligned countries from Latin America, Asia and Africa.
93. I should like, at the outset, to commend the Council of
Ministers of the Organ&ion
of African Unity for their
initiative in requesting a meeting of the Security Council to
consider the acts of aggression committed by rebel Rhodesia against Zambia, Mozambique and Angola and the
planned so-called elections in Southern Rhodesia scheduled
for next month.
94. The issue of Southern Rhodesia which has been
brought to the Council is not routine. It requires serious
reflection on the part of us all. The Council must handle it
with care, firmness and diligence. To do otherwise would be
to betray the trust which many people and States have
placed in this body and in the community of nations to give
assistance. There are some here, particularly those who
favour the status quo, who would argue otherwise. The
Security Council has been seized of the problem of Southem Rhodesia for over a decade. What we should all be

aware of at this stage is that the situation has changed
immensely and that there has been a high degree of escalation in the conflict. In 1968, the Council, in its resolution
253 (1968), determined that the situation in Southern
Rhodesia constituted a serious threat to international peace
and security. That was 11 years ago. If that was the case
then, how can the situation be described today?

101. On 17 February 1979, Rhodesian tighter-bombers
attacked the two refugee centres of Natebe and Sinde, in the
Livingstone area of the southern province of Zambia. Two
persons were injured. The casualty figures would have been
greater had the refugees been in the settlement.
102. Only last Friday, 23 February, the Smith clique again
sent forces to Nampundwe refugee centre, west of Lusaka.
Rhodesian jets strafed and dropped more than 20 bombs on
a farm belonging to a retired Zambian civil servant, Mr.
Katundu Amukusana, killing two of his daughters and four
other women. In contrast to their previous attacks, when
they bombed only refugee centres on the pretext that they
were freedom-fighter camps, the rebels have now even
resorted to bombing Zambian civilian homes. Altogether,
18 persons-six of them Zambians-were killed and 122
injured. Of the injured, eight were Zambian nationals. The
rest .of the injured were refugees, innocent Zimbabwean
women and children, who had arrived in Zambia two and a
half weeks before from Botswana to seek shelter in our
country.

95. One may venture to ask how much more damage
should occur before definitive measures are adopted by the
international community. Some may regard the present war
situation as a regional or limited conflict. But surely, it
should be logical to conclude that today’s local war could
easily escalate into a generalized conflagration. All the indicators show that the situation in southern Africa shows all
the signs of escalating fast into a catastrophe.
96. It is for considered reasons that Zambia, together with
the other victims of perpetual aggression by the racist white
minority regimes, has kept and continues to keep the international community informed about serious developments
in the area. We do not do so because we want other people
to feel pity for us. That would be totally unnecessary. We
have brought the tragedies of southern Africa to the Council’s attention because, if the prevailing situation there does
not constitute a serious threat to world peace and security,
we wonder what would.

103. In addition to all the aerial attacks I have just outlined, Rhodesian rebels have persisted in other acts of war
such as border raids, the planting of land-mines and violations of our air space, not to mention a series of subversive
activities in Zambia. Late last year 18 foreign nationals were
arrested in Zambia in connexion with spying for rebel
Rhodesia. In‘addition, a Mr. Sutherland, a white resident
farmer in the Mazabuka area, southern Zambia, was found
with large quantities of weapons which were stored on his
farm for use by Rhodesian troops.

97. The escalation in the conflict has been manifested in
the repeated armed attacks by rebel Rhodesians against the
front-line States. That conflict has progressed in stages from
raids along the borders to intensified full-scale armed invasions in which Rhodesians have increasingly resorted to
aerial bombings. At this juncture, I should like to give a few
examples of acts of aggression committed against my country, Zambia, by rebel Rhodesia since the last meeting of the
Council to consider a complaint by Zambia, in March 1978.

104. As the Council is aware, Rhodesian rebels have persisted in their attacks against front-line States. Apart from
the horizontal spread of the conflict, there is a vertical
dimension to the problem. This can be proved from the
types of weaponry used. Experts have concluded that the
Rhodesian rebels have been using incendiary and chemical
weapons, which are excessively injurious against the civilian
populations both inside Rhodesia and in the front-line
States. What is even more surprising is that Rhodesian
forces have. now been using long-range jet bombers in their
crusades of death and destruction. The following is the
composition of the rebel Rhodesian air force, according to
the London-based International Institute for Strategic Studies, in its The Military Balance 19784979: there are 84
combat aircraft; they consist of squadrons of Canberra B2s
and T4s, Hunter FGA9s, Vampire FB9s, Provost T-52s.
Cessna 337s, C-47s, a Baron 55 and Islanders, in addition to
Alouette II/III helicopters.

98. The Council will recall that, in March 1978, following
Rhodesian attacks, Zambia brought a complaint before the
Council [S/I258q. On 6 March forces of the rebel regime
had attacked the Kavalamanja area, in Luangwa district,
using air and ground raids, killing five soldiers and wounding 20 civilians. That was the second attack on Luangwa by
rebel troops, for in September 1977 the same rebels had
bombed the area using napalm bombs., That unprovoked
and indiscriminate attack on Zambia came only three days
after the so-called internal settlement had been concocted at
Salisbury.
99. In the early hours of 19 October 1978, the triggerhappy Rhodesian rebels launched yet another premeditated
aerial attack on Chikumbi refugee centre for Zimbabwean
children and disabled refugees, which is located 20 kilometres north of Lusaka. In the raid, 226 persons were killed
and 629 injured. On the same day Rhodesian forces also
attacked the Mkushi training settlement for girls, killing 100
of them; 92 were missing and 90 injured. Another refugee
centre at Mbororo, east of Lusaka, was also bombed. In
those raids, Zambia lost 36 of its nationals, including four
elections otlicers and 31 members of the Zambia National
Defence Forces who were engaged in mopping-up
operations.

105. It is my delegation’s view that the international community has the right to know from whom and how rebel
Rhodesians obtain weapons. The Rhodesian racists do not
have the capacity to manufacture their own sophisticated
weapons or planes. There is ample evidence to suggest that
Rhodesians are using South African planes painted in
Rhodesian colours. Not even the South Africans, who constitute the backbone of Rhodesia, are-capable of manufacturing sophisticated weapons. It is known, of course, that*
contrary to what propagandists in the West may say, South
Africa can produce primitive weapons.

100. In a five-minute air attack that took place just four
kilometres west of Lusaka on 2 November 1978, six refugees
were killed and a few others injured.

106. It is known why the rebel Rhodesians have persisted
in their war of aggression against us. We are aware that they
want to trigger an international war which would for them
10

114. Moreover, in order to confuse the situation further,
the Salisbury regime is frantically aiding and abetting the
members of the so-called Executive Council in increasing
their private armies. Such private armies are nothing but
trained murder squads which have been set loose in the
frantic struggle for illusory power among the Africans in the
internal settlement. In addition, these armies are a part of
Smith’s plan to foment a civil war in Rhodesia, of which
only white racists would be the beneficiaries.

be suicide. Their short-term objective is to cripple the Zimbabwe liberation lnovemem and its rear base,namely, the
front-line States. The rebel aggressors have also claimed
that they have attacked front-line States because we act as
hosts to the freedom fighters. But, surely, refugees are not
freedom fighters.
107. The fighters of Zimbabwe are operating from inside
occupied Rhodesia. They do not have the fire power to hit
targets in the vicinity of Salisbury from Zambia or Mozambique. Smith and his cohorts must stop using Zambia as a
scapegoat for the problems of their own creation and imagination. By attacking refugee centres or any part of Zambia,
the Salisbury clique is in fact committing premeditated and
naked acts of aggression against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of my country. That is a criminal act.

115. Whilst all this immature politicking persists, the people of Zimbabwe are increasingly subjected to oppression
and even genocide. Not surprisingly, Africans are shepherded into concentration camps, which are euphemistitally termed “protected villages’*. Personal security of either
blacks or whites can no longer be guaranteed in present-day
Rhodesia. Martial law has encompassed virtually the entire
country. That shows that Rhodesia as a whole is a war zone.
Forces of the Patriotic Front can now hit targets inside
Salisbury, the Rhodesian capital. Even the Western media
admit these facts.

.108. In their wanton acts of aggression, the Rhodesians
have slaughtered and maimed hundreds of Zimbabweans as
well as Zambians in Zambia. For that reason I cannot find a
better description of Ian Smith and his “blacksmiths” than
a bunch of bloodthirsty maniacs on the loose without
regard for human life. They are international criminals who
must be punished accordingly for waging war against
humanity.

116. The upsurge of guerrilla warfare both in the countryside and, now, in urban centres means the entire country is
in flames, thanks to the determination and clout of the
fighting forces of Zimbabwe. Even if Smith attempts to find
scapegoats in Zambia and other front-line States, the reality
of the matter is that the fighting is taking place inside
Rhodesia.

109. Let me now turn to the seriously deteriorating situation inside Rhodesia. When the so-called internal settlement
was-concocted at Salisbury on 3 March 1978-about a year
ago-Zambia told the world that the so-called settlement
would not succeed. In fact, the internal settlement has
settled nothing. If anything, it has transformed the situation
in Zimbabwe from bad to worse. The issues are compounded and the situation is now fraught with ominous
consequences, particularly for those living in and bordering
on Rhodesia.

117. The forces of the Patriotic Front continue to score
victories by the hour. Theirs is a just cause. That is why
Zambia supports them fully. If all members of the world
community were to adhere to the resolutions of the United
Nations, then they would feel obliged to support people
who are struggling for self-determination in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV).
118. The situation in Rhodesia is deteriorating faster than
most observers can grasp. Nothing can save the rebel racist
regime from collapse. Phony elections will not help the
situation. It is in fact illogical to pretend that genuine and
free elections can be held in a country at war. It is physically
impossible to do so. We understand that a bogus system of
proportionate representation would be employed. What
that means logically is that even if only 1,000 Africans out of
a total population of over 4 million Africans over 18 years
of age and eligible to vote actually voted, then the so-called
internal political parties would share the spoils. Alternatively, it is being suggested that voters will be escorted to
polling booths at gunpoint, ostensibly for protection.

110. The internal settlement has failed to end the war. It
has failed to end the war situation in Rhodesia because
fundamental objectives have not been realized. The act of
black-washing a white wall does not destroy the colour of
the brick. Rhodesia today is firmly under minority racist
rule as it has been since the unilateral declaration of independence. Africans who have been co-opted by the racist
rulers have lamentably failed to change the infrastructure of
racism. Power is .still in the hands of the racist whites.
111. Attempts by Smith to use co-opted Africans to win
international recognition for his illegal regime have all come
to naught. Rhodesia to&y remains an outcast and a leper in
the international community. Let that be the situation until
genuine majority rule is achieved.

119. Zambia is not opposed to elections per se. My country only three months ago emerged from a heavily contested
general election. We have faith in the democratic system
and genuine elections. Our objection to the so-called elections planned for Rhodesia stems from the fact that, first,
they will not be free, because of the prevailing war situation,
secondly, their aim is not to bring genuine independence
and majority rule to that country but to entrench the racist
and minority domination, and, thirdly, they are arranged
under the auspices of a by-product of an illegal r+gime and
are therefore considered illegal.

112. The Zambian Government has repeatedly stated that
it accords no significance to Smith’s manoeuvres. The internal settlement wasjust a trick by Smith to prolong the life of
his illegal rule now that he has been cornered by the Patriotic Front forces and world opinion.
113. Concurrent with this development has been the militarization of Rhodesia. Smith is to all intents and purposes
a hostage of General Peter Walls and his military machine.
If Smith were not a dependent of Walls in decision-making,
how could one expect a puppet African Prime Minister to
control the Rhodesian forces? That would be to think the
unthinkable.

120. Zambia therefore calls on the Security Council to
declare these so-called elections null and void and not to
recognize any institution that may emerge therefrom.
11

”

.. .

-_

,,,

121. We have recently heard some disquieting noises,
especially in the United States and the United Kingdom,
suggesting the sending of missions to monitor the so-called
elections to be held by the illegal regime at Salisbury, in
order to determine whether or not they are fair and free. We
are told that the persons going to monitor these false elections will be private citizens, without the blessing of their
Governments. We have been treated to the argument that
their Governments cannot under the law stop them, as
private citizens, from undertaking such adventures.

in Rhodesia rather than giving undue credibility to manaeuvres intended to perpetuate the suffering of the black masses
of Zimbabwe.
127. The time has come for the Western countries to take
full responsibility for the problem of Rhodesia. As far as we
know, the United Kingdom is still the administering Power
in Rhodesia. It has a responsibility to decolonize that colony. Zambia is aware that the West is not powerless. They
could deal with Smith ifthey had the necessarypolitical will
Their actions are deliberate. We shall continue to hold them
responsible both for the tragedies inside Rhodesia and for
the aggression against the front-line States.

122. While we are aware of the different systems of
government in the world and their relationship with private
institutions, especially in the West, we are not convinced
that private institutions or individuals are free to do things
that could bring the name of their country into disrepute.
History has shown that institutions in any country-and
the West is no exception-are obliged to conform scrupulously to the policies of the Governments. When, for example, the people of the Republic of Cuba were subjected to an
economic embargo in 1962 by the United States, no private
United States companies or persons went to that country.
This argument that is advanced is therefore a hollow one.

128. There are many ways in which the United Nations
and individual States can assist in improving the situation.
Member States should ensure that oil will not flow to the
rebels to oil their war machine. The findings of the Bingham
report in Britain must be followed up vigorously in order to
plug all the loop-holes. The Security Council Committee on
Sanctions has a vital role in this regard. The supply of arms
to Rhodesia as well as all other activities intended to violate
sanctions should not find anyone wanting or equivocating
in moments when decisive action can save humanity from
the scourge of war.

123. Moreover, when Ian Smith visited the United States,
the world was told that he had been invited by some very
conservative Senators in the United States Senate. Smith
came to this country and ended up meeting with some very
top government offtcials, including the United States Secretary of State-ostensibly to convince Smith of the need to
attend an all-party conference. Whether this was by default
or design is not for us to judge. My delegation would appeal
to these Governments to ensure that, in the interest of
justice, their nationals or organizations will not go to
Rhodesia.

129. Mr. ADMINA (Gabon) (interpretationfrom French):
Mr. President, it is a special pleasure for my delegation to
address you on this occasion and to convey to you cordial
greetings. It is a pleasure for us to take this opportunity once
again to recall the fraternal relations and the bonds of close
friendship and co-operation at all levels that are continuously developing between Nigeria and Gabon. The occupancy of the presidency of the Council by an eminent
African diplomat, Ambassador Leslie 0. Harriman, is a
source of true satisfaction for all the sons of our continent,
and it encourages us in our hope that this year will be
fruitful in terms of constructive negotiations likely to strengthen the role and active contribution of the United Nations
to the liberation ofsouthem Africa. I wish you every success
in your important task, Mr. President, and assure you of the
full co-operation of the delegation of Gabon.

124. It is because the whole election ploy scheduled for
April 1979 is illogical, to say the least, that we wonder how
respectable legislators in the West could fall for this scheme.
How on earth could people who believe in the Emancipation Proclamation and the Magna Carta ever support a
mockery of elections anywhere?
125. In 1977, the Security Council considered the AngloAmerican proposals on Southern Rhodesia /S/12393] and
adopted resolution 415 (1977), by which a special representative of the Secretary-General, General Prem Chand, was
appointed to work in conjunction with Lord Carver, the
Resident Commissioner designate, during Rhodesia’s transition to majority rule. One wonders what has become of
these two respectable gentlemen. Could the interest now
shown in the false elections to be held in Rhodesia be
interpreted to mean the abandonment of the AngloAmerican plan? My delegation believes that the AngloAmerican plan, as originally proposed, formed a fair basis
for negotiations on Rhodesia, but now it is clear that there is
no political will on the part of the initiators of the plan.
Furthermore, it is clear that a settlement which accepts the
active participation of Ian Smith and his continuing in some
way to be an integral part of the solution of the Rhodesian
crisis is no solution. My delegation believes that no attempt
to resolve the Rhodesian crisis which is not founded on a
clear rejection and removal of Smith has any chance of
succeeding.

130. Before proceeding to consider the agenda item, I
wish to express the appreciation and satisfaction of the
delegation of Gabon to your predecessor, Ambassador
Bishara of Kuwait, for the manner in which he presided
over the work of the Council last month and for the efforts
he undertook throughout that month to reconcile the views
of Council members on the question of South-East Asia.
Although that matter is still pending, his initiatives and
suggestions aimed at finding a peaceful solution testify to
his high qualities as an experienced politician.
131. We all know that at present the world is engaged in
an irreversible march towards the freedom of peoples, their
self-determination and their accession to independence.
This process has been interrupted in Rhodesia, where, in
order to preserve its interests, a white minority of approximately 200,000 persons decided to usurp power from the
colonial Power and to impose its law on a majority of
6 million blacks. Those blacks, because of the established
political and socio-economic system, cannot take part in the
life of their country, given the blind obstinacy of the white
settlers, who are bent on going against the flow of history by
disregarding contemporary developments.

126. Those concerned would do better to continue their
efforts at bridging the gap between the parties to the conflict
12

132. Why should we continue to tolerate the arrogance of
Ian Smith’s illegal minority regime, a regime that has been
decried, a r&ime that continues to defy all goodwill despite
the efforts of the liberation movements and our international Organization
on behalf of the blacks of
Zimbabwe?
133. Why should we continue to tolerate the threats of
that handful of whites who continue to violate the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of free and independent
countries Members of the Organization? I refer to Angola,
Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia.
134. Why should we not condemn all violations and manceuvres by that handful of whites and their lackeys, as well
as their so-called elections, which are aimed at extending
their minority rule, hoodwinking world public opinion and
preventing Zimbabwe’s accession to independence?
135. What alternative solution could we, then, recommend today to the apostles of non-violence, when all the
efforts of the administering Power are doomed to failure in
view of the intransigence shown by Ian Smith, supported by
Vorster’s discredited regime?
136. The Lusaka Manifesto states that: “We believe that
all men have the right and the duty to participate, as equal
members of the society, in their own Government.“’
Ian
Smith’s regime continues for unworthy reasons to deny that
right to the people of Zimbabwe. The international community should not accept Ian Smith’s attempts to prepare
his fraudulent elections, which are aimed only at legitimizing his illegal r&me.
137. The facts and figures now before the Council gives us
a picture of the over-all situation in southern Africa. This is
not the first time that the Council has met in order to
consider complaints by Member States concerning brutal
and vile acts of aggresssion committed against their sovereignty and territorial integrity by the racist minority regimes
at Pretoria and Salisbury. The acts of those tigimes against
independent neighbouring States as well as the escalation of
violence, repression and terror against the national liberation struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe are well known to
members of the Council and to the international community as a whole. Such flagrant violations of international law
and morality further highlight’the fact that the perpetuation
of the vestiges of colonialism and racist policy is a source of
constant tension, of aggression and of conflict, and
seriously endangers peace and security on the African continent and throughout the world. At the same time, this
indicates the desperate state in which the racists find themselves, faced with the courageous struggle for national liberation at a time when the will for freedom of the peoples of
southern Africa is strengthened with every passing day.
Those savage acts are part and parcel of their abortive
attempts aimed at ending the national liberation struggle in
that territory and at reducing the legitimate support and
assistance given by Africans to the national liberation struggle of the people of Zimbabwe.
138. It is on the basis of its commitment to equality and
human dignity that free and independent Africa has always
been against such inhuman acts. It is on that same basis and
because they are faithful to universal principles that the
’ OJicial
Annexes.

Records
agenda

item

of the General

Assembl

106, document

A/77

Twent
!?4, para.

-fourth
F

Session.

African leaders have resolutely supported the national liberation movements in Zimbabwe. As stated in the Lusaka
Manifesto, “the principle of human equality, and all that
flows from it, is either universal or it does not exist’*.4
139. Today, the African peoples, standing behind their
leaders, are beginning to fight against all the evils of the
major Powers. They are deeply convinced that the populations of southern Africa, whose courage and gallantry
have been tempered in a drawn-out struggle, will step up
their vigilance, strengthen their unity, persevere in the
struggle and not cease to unmask the designs and plots of
racism, colonialism, neo-colonialism and hegemonism
until final victory.
140. It is for these reasons that the delegation of Gabon
formally appeals to certain Member States that continue
to maintain economic, military and other relations with
the illegal Rhodesian regime which has betrayed the African cause, thus negating the efforts made by the United
Nations.
141. It is for those same reasons and bearing in mind the
recent invasions into front-line countries and the socalled elections next April in Zimbabwe that my delegation would like to see our work culminate in a document
in which the Council, first, called for the unconditional
condemnation of the recent invasions by the illegal racist
regime of that handful of whites in southern Africa and,
secondly, considered as null and void the results of the
elections to be held next April.
142. Mr. FUTSCHER
PEREIRA (Portugal): Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you on your accession
to the presidency of the Security Council. While being the
representative of a great African nation with which my
country maintains very close and friendly relations, you are
also a diplomat of great skill. With these qualities and your
knowledge and experience, we are sure of the competence
with which you will preside over our work during the
present month.
143. I should also like to express to Mr. Bishara of Kuwait
the deepest appreciation of my de!egation for the most
remarkable way in which he carried out his functions as
President last month, bearing in mind the particularly diflicult task facing him.
144. I shall at this stage be very brief as we reserve the right
to return at a later date to the substance of the problems
before us today. If I am speaking at the outset of this debate,
it is because this is the first time since my country’s election
to the Security Council that a question concerning southern
Africa-a
region particularly close to our hearts-has been
brought to our attention. Beyond its gravity and wide political repercussions, this question brings to us a more immediate sense of concern: we mourn for the victims of the
murderous attacks of the Rhodesian armed forces in
Angola, Mozambique, Zambia and Botswana. We wish to
honour the memory of the victims of those attacks, and we
want to express our full solidarity with the peoples and
Governments of those friendly States.
145. It is with indignation that we associate ourselves with
all those who condemn the open aggressions of the Salisbury regime. This new and brutal intensification of the
’ Ibid.,

para.

6.

._

struggle in southern Africa brings us an even greater consciousness of our responsibilities as members of the Council
to put an end to this untenable situation.
146. For this reason, we vigorously express our repulsion
with regard to those crimes. The danger that this escalation
of the war represents for the whole of southern Africa and
the sombre prospects for that area created by the situation
justify the immediate condemnation of those acts by the
Council.
147. I therefore wish to reiterate once again the fraternal
solidarity of my Government and people for the peoples
and Governments of the front-line States so severely affected
in the past few days and to tell them that we deeply share
their suffering and their anger.

.

148. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
149. Mr. ROA KOURI (Cuba) (inrerpretufionfiom Spun&/z): Mr. President, I would first of all extend to you the
warmest congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I am convinced that with your acknowledged skill and diplomatic
experience you will be able successfully to conduct the
discussions which the Council is now beginning. Cuba,
which maintains excellent and historical ties of friendship
with Nigeria, is pleased that its representative is presiding
over the meetings of this exalted forum at precisely this
time.

.

countries. To its criminal incursions into Zambia and
Mozambique, which began some time ago, it has now
added invasions more than 2,000 kilometres from its
borders into the People’s Republic of Angola. On 26
February, military aircraft of the Rhodesian racists
bombed a refugee camp in Zimbabwe near Luso, some
300 kilometres inside Angolan borders, causing a great
number of deaths and wounding almost 500. On I7 February, bombers, which presumably belonged to Ian
Smith, attacked another camp close to the Zambian city
of Livingstone and, just a few days later, on 23 February,
the racists stepped up their aggression and reached a
point some 40 kilometres from Lusaka itself. On 19 February, the illegal Rhodesian regime announced that its
planes had bombed Chimoio, in Mozambique.
153. During the past two years the Salisbury criminals
have acknowledged responsibility for approximately 20
major raids against Zimbabwean refugee camps in Zambia and Mozambique. In one of those alone, in October
1978, it was stated that approximately 1,500 refugees and
Zimbabwe fighters had been massacred near Lusaka.
Today the press informs us that the Rhodesian air force
launched its fifth attack in under two weeks against a
camp some 260 kilometres inside the territory of the
People’s Republic of Mozambique. The Associated Press
correspondent informs us from Salisbury that this is
“the second attack against a base in Mozambique since
another guerrilla movement, led by Joshua Nkomo,
brought down a Rhodesian airline plane on 12 February, killing the 59 passengers. . . . These air attacks are
considered to be an attempt to prevent any planned
sabotage against the Rhodesian elections on 20 April
rather than reprisals for the destruction of the plane.”

150. One month ago at Maputo, the beautiful and heroic
capital of that sister country Mozambique, was host to the
special session, at the ministerial level, of the Coordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries. Its sole objective was the
consideration of the situation in southern Africa and the
reaflirmation of the militant solidarity of our movement
with the national liberation movements that are struggling
against racist oppression and for true independence in
Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa, and with the frontline countries which form their rear-guard security and
principal support. It is relevant at this time to quote a few
paragraphs from the final communique of that important
session.
/The speaker readoutparagraphs
document S/13185.]

154. It is revealing that the press and the spokesmen of
the imperialist Governments have remained unmoved in
the face of the crimes which, throughout the past years,
have been and are still being committed by their ally and
protege Ian Smith, within and outside Rhodesia. Not a
single word of condemnation has been pronounced by
those persons, when the lives of African men, women,
children and old people are in jeopardy. But we should
note how they hasten to express their “horror”
when the
white oppressors are killed. In the case of the former, the
mass media laconically inform us of the death of “guerrillas” or “black extremists”; but in the case of the latter
they make full use of the vocabulary of invective to
condemn the death of “innocent white civilians*‘. The
culture of imperialism is brutal, racist and oppressive.
Nor did we hear a single word of concern or condemnation when, in 1976, agents trained by the United States
Central Intelligence Agency planted a bomb and assassinated 73 civilian passengers and the crew of a Cuban plane
over Barbados. This is a clear, unadulterated demonstration of the brazen hypocrisy of the defenders of “Western
civilization”.
.’ .
155. When in 1965 the white minority racists of Rhodesia
imposed the first “internal solution?‘, in rebellion against
the United Kingdom decision to.grant independence to that
colony and give power to the nationalist leaders, the
Government of the United Kingdom, for the first time in
history, refused to intervene militarily in one of its rebel
colonies and-in the words of President Samora Machel“organized a great diplomatic farce, with the support of
international imperialism”.

19 to 25 of the annex to

151. That accurate analysis of the situation prevailing
in southern Africa is strengthened by the assertion-also
included in the Maputo final communique-that

-_

6‘. . . the imperialist and colonialist forces were resolutely opposed to real independence in the region for
they considered it a direct threat to their design of
perpetuating their unbridled economic plunder and
military domination of the subcontinent. Hence the
freedom struggle, including the armed struggle,’ which
has been raging in Namibia and Zimbabwe and which
is gaining momentum in South Africa itself, is being
subverted in order to rob the people of these countries
of their inevitable victory.” [Para. 28.1
152. Of course, it is not the first time that the illegal
regime of Ian Smith has militarily attacked the front-line
14

156. When economic sanctions were imposed against the
illegal Smith regime, the international community pledged
to implement them. None the less, imperialism did not even
consider the possibility of isolating the regime. While the
majority of the States Members of the United Nations were
preparing measures to isolate the racist regime, the imperialist countries in league with the colonial Power were studying
how to combat and neutralize the effect of the sanctions.
“Actually’*the revolutionary leader and head of State of
Mozambique stated-“ international capitalism has never
broken its economic ties with Smith.”

to all the manmuvres which they have attempted in Zimbabwe and southern Africa. And this is not the first timethat we have condemned them in this and other international forums; but today we must repeat our condemnay
tion with particular emphasis. As Jacques Prevert would
say, what it boils down to is really “the delicate question of
money”.
162. The non-aligned countries declared unanimously at
Maputo that breaking the vicious circle created by imperialism and the racist regimes depended on the armed liberation
struggle, guided by the Patriotic Front in Zimbabwe and by
SWAP0 in Namibia. It has been this struggle which has
progressively reduced the effectiveness of the enemy manceuvres and has discredited and revealed their puppets. The
Coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries has also
recognized that “the Anglo-American proposals on Rhodesia have been overtaken by the progress of the armed liberation struggle being waged by the Patriotic Front and that
they have lost their relevance’* and that the present struggle
of the Patriotic Front, supported by the sanctions decreed
by the international community, is a decisive factor in the
liquidation of colonialism. Therefore, the Bureau appealed
“to all members of the non-aligned movement and to all
peace-loving, freedom-loving and democratic countries and
forces throughout the world to increase their political,
diplomatic, military and financial support for the liberation
struggle of the Zimbabwean people, thus contributing to
the independence of the Territory and the establishment of
a just and lasting peace’/para. 471.

157. The vicissitudes of recent years demonstrate that the
plans of imperialism, while allegedly aimed at promoting a
peaceful and negotiated solution for Zimbabwe’s accession
to independence and majority rule, have on the contrary
been geared to buttressing the racist illegal Ian Smith
regime. Whenever the internal situation of their proteges
becomes untenable because of the military activities of the
people’s forces united in the Patriotic Front, the imperialists
invent a new alternative, they promise a new and infallible
solution, this time one supported by Smith himself. As was
aptly stated by the representative of a front-line State at the
meeting of the non-aligned countries at Maputo, “whenever
the rainy season approaches, imperialist plans for a peaceful
settlement begin to sprout.”
158. Today, as in the past, imperialism is persisting in its
strategy, a strategy which it has been using especially from
1974 on. Today, as in the past, imperialism’s basic concern
is to divide the countries which support the liberation of
Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa in order to root out
the national liberation movement.

163. Cuba, which has always supported with great determination the liberation movements of southern Africa, feels
that the time has come for the international community to
give determined moral, political, financial and tnaterial support to the Zimbabwe patriots in order to accelerate the
inevitable defeat of the illegal racist regime of Ian Smith.
The Security Council must support the legitimate struggle
of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe; it must once again
condemn the racist regime of Rhodesia and those who
support and encourage it, and strengthen the already existing sanctions; in sum, it should unequivocally support the
liberation movements of southern Africa and the front-line
countries which are valiantly and resolutely facing up to the
acts of aggression of the Salisbury criminals, without wavering in their defence of and solidarity with the patriots of
Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa.

159. At the international level the objective of imperialism
is to promote contradictions among the front-line States
and sow confusion in the Organization of African Unity in
order to eliminate that important instrument of the cause of
the liberation of Africa. They also attempt to divide the
national liberation movement and try to make the liberation struggle look like a civil war among factions of the
liberation movement, thus confusing the international community and fragmenting its support. In this way they
attempt to create conditions in which the lifting of the
sanctions against Smith could be proposed in the United
Nations.
160. Imperialism is no doubt preparing a large-scale intervention in southern Africa: first of all, because it cannot
resign itself to losing the vast economic and strategic resources of the region-the so-called Cape Route and the great
mineral deposits in the area which are vital in maintaining
imperialist hegemony; secondly, because the maintenance
of the racist regime in Zimbabwe is a highly important
factor in guaranteeing the internal stability of the South
African regime, a bastion of imperialist interests in southern
Africa.

164. Those who intend to send observers to the bogus
elections, cooked up by the Rhodesian racists and their
“Uncle Toms” for hire-the traitors Sithole, Chirau and
Muzorewa in order to confuse the world-and
planned for
20 April, are doing so with the full knowledge that that is a
miserable farce. What is even more serious, they know that
that is a shameful betrayal of the legitimate interests of the
people of Zimbabwe, who are supported by the intemational community, that it is a blatant attempt to prevent
their accession to full and genuine independence, and that it
is an explicit violation of resolution 423 (1978).

161. So long as there is no neo-colonialist leader of suffi-’
cient stature in Rhodesia, imperialists feel obliged to maintain the discredited Ian-Smith in power. Of course, they are
not counting on the victory of the people, which they are
attempting to prevent at all costs. All their attempts-the
so-called plans for a peaceful solution-are
endeavours to
defend and maintain the present power structure, in other
words the privileged social structure. Imperialism is actually
attempting to prevent political and social change in a truly
independent Zimbabwe from causing the collapse of the
colonial capitalist economy. This, and this alone, is the key

165. In the view of my’delegation, the draft resolution
which will be submitted by the non-aligned members of the
Council must be inspired by the recommendations unanimously adopted by our Ministers for Foreign Affairs at the
special session of the Co-ordinating
Bureau held at
Maputo, because they faithfully reflect the genuine interests
of the people of Zimbabwe.
The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.
15

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite
1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may
your

LES

PUBLICATIONS
be obtained
bookstore

or

PUBLlCATlONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

and
distributors
Nations,
Sales

DES

UNIES

NATIONS

L.es publications
des Nations
Unies
sent en vente
dans
les librairies
d&ositaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aup&
de votre libraire
B : Nations
Unies.
Section
dee ventes.
New York ou Genbve.
ZCAIC

COMO

IIOJlY’IUTb

CONSEGUIR

H3,qAHHfi

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
pa&es
Unidas.
Secci6n
de Ventas,

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

OPI-AHW3AUWW

DE

OB-bEAnHEHHhIX

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
estin
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Price:

$U.S.

NACIONES

HAUHFi

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerias
a su librero
o dirfjase

1.50

et les agences
ou adrassez-vous

y casas distria: Naciones

79-70002-December

1981-2.250
