UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/11
7 May 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3997th meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 May 1999, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Georgia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, of 21 April 1999
(S/1999/460).
"The Security Council reiterates its demand that both sides widen
their commitment to the United Nations-led peace process, continue to seek
and engage in dialogue, expand their bilateral contacts and display without
delay the necessary will to achieve substantial results on the key issues
of the negotiations, and underlines the necessity for the parties to
achieve an early and comprehensive political settlement, which includes a
settlement on the political status of Abkhazia within the State of Georgia,
which fully respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia
within its internationally recognized borders.
"The Security Council reaffirms the unacceptability of the demographic
changes resulting from the conflict and the imprescriptible right of all
refugees and displaced persons affected by the conflict to return to their
homes in secure conditions and calls upon the parties to address this issue
urgently by agreeing and implementing effective measures to guarantee the
security of those who exercise their unconditional right to return.
"The Security Council welcomes in this context the decision of the
Council of Heads of State of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
of 2 April 1999 on further measures to settle the conflict in Abkhazia,
Georgia (S/1999/392). The Council notes the conclusions of the eighth
session of the Coordinating Council of the Georgian and Abkhaz sides held
on 29 April 1999.
"The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the failure of the
parties to reach an agreement on the terms for the return of refugees and
displaced persons to the Gali region and measures for economic
rehabilitation. The Council stresses the need for them to conclude
99-13409 (E)

070599

/...

S/PRST/1999/11
English
Page 2

urgently such an agreement, which would make it possible for the
international community to participate in this effort, as well as an
agreement on peace and guarantees for the prevention of armed
confrontation.
"The Security Council welcomes the improvements in the security
situation but notes that the general situation in the conflict zone still
remains tense and unstable.
"The Security Council urges the parties to exercise great restraint in
their responses to any incidents arising on the ground and to take concrete
steps to improve their cooperation in this field. The Council demands that
both sides take immediate and determined measures to put a stop to the
activities by armed groups, including the continued laying of mines, and to
establish a climate of confidence allowing refugees and displaced persons
to return. The Council further demands that both sides ensure a full
separation of forces from the ceasefire line, in accordance with the
ceasefire protocol signed on 25 May 1998, and establish a joint
investigation mechanism without further delay.
"The Security Council welcomes the continued contribution that the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) and the Collective
Peacekeeping Forces of the CIS (CIS Peacekeeping Force) have made to
stabilizing the situation in the zone of conflict and notes that the
working relationship between UNOMIG and the CIS Peacekeeping Force has
remained good.
"The Security Council reaffirms the importance it attaches to the
security of UNOMIG and of all international personnel and recalls the
obligations of both sides in this regard. The Council welcomes the steps
taken to enhance the operations and security of UNOMIG.
"The Security Council strongly supports the sustained efforts made by
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative with the assistance of
the Russian Federation in its capacity as facilitator as well as of the
Group of Friends of the Secretary-General and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe to prevent hostilities, to protect human rights,
and to advance a settlement."

-----
