1043rd

United Nations

GENERAL

PLENARY MEmNG

ASSEMBLY
SlXTEENTH SESSION

Official Records

•

CONTENTS
Page
Agenda item 24:
Report of the United Nations Scientific Com:rnittee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation
Report of the Special Politioal Committee..

505

statement by the President • •••••• ~ • • • • ••

507

Agenda item 92:
Admission of new Members to the United

Nations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . ..
Admission of the Mongolian People's RepUb1ioto the Unired Nations. • • • • • • • ••
Admission cf the 'ofsls.mic· Reptiblic of
Mauritania to the United Natibns. • • • • ••
Agenda items 73 and '12:
Continuation of suspension cf nuclear and
thermo-nu.clear tests and obligations of
States to retrain from their renewal • • • ••
The urgent need for a treaty to 'ban nu.clear
weapons tests under effective international
control
Report of the First Committee. • • • • • • ••

50'!
507
509

524

524

President: Mr. Mongi SLIM (Tunisia).
AGENDA ITEM 24
Report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on thll
Effects of Atomic Radiation

REPORT OF THE SPECIAL POllTICAL
COMMITTEE (A/4937)

Pursuan't 'to rule 68 Of: t1Je rules of ~ . it
was decided not ·to discuss the report of the Special

Friday,J..7 October 1961,
at3p.m.

NEW YORK
closest attention must be given to this danger which
is threatening mankind and that it is in the interests
of all countries that the World Meteorological Organization and the other specialized agencies should
receive practical and moral support to enable them
to accomplish the task entrusted to them. Through
detailed studies and active international vigilance, we
must be kept constantly informed of data relating to
radio-active fall-out. We will be. able to remedy the
evil, by appropriate measures, only if we have a full
knowledge of its causes.
3. I should like to inform the Assembly that, according to information which I have received from my
country, the level of radio-activity, which at the begin-.
ning of September was 0.11 micro-microcuries per
cubic metre in some areas of Greece, rose to 45
micro-microcuries in the same areas towards the
end of September. This does not, admittedly,- represent a dangerous increase, but the source of tilis
radio-activity is revealed by· the fact that itwas caused
by atmospheric currents orIginating in the Arctic
regions.
4. While considering that the draft resolution submitted by the Czechoslovak delegation has much
merit, the Greek delegation abstained in the vote in
order to lend greater weight to the Canadian proposal,
which is more in line with our views on the. extent of
the danger of radio-active fall-out and on the need to
intensify scientific studies.
5. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The
Assembly will now proceed to vote on draft resolutions A and B contained in the report of the Special
Political Committee [A/4937]. I shall put draft resolution A to the vote first.
Draft resolution A was adopted by '14 votes to none.
with 1'1 abstentions.

Political CollUltittee.

6. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I now
put draft resolution B to the vote.

Mr. Fukus1tima (JapanJ. Rappomrtr of t1Je Special
Political Co~. r;resented tile report of tIJat

The reSult of the vote was 3~ in favour' and' ~O
against. with 27 abstentions.

C~e (A/493'1).

.

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call
on those representatives who wish to explain. their
vote on the draft resalutions contained in the report
of the Special Political Comnlittee [A/4937].I now
give the floor to the representative .of Greece•.
2. Mr. PAPAGQS (Greece) (translated from-French):
I th~nk the President for giving me this opportunity
to explain my vote. The Greek delegation voted in
favour of the draft resolution submitted by Canada
and twenty-four other countries on the report of the
United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of
Atomic Radiation. We voted in this way because of our
conc,~ at thein~asing'amountof radio-active fall'"
out in many parts of the world. We conSider that the

Draft resolution B was n.ot adopted. having failed to
'
obtt'lin ,the required two-thirds majority.

7. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call
on the reptesentative of Czechoslovakia on a point
of order.'
.8. Mr.PUDLA~ (Czechoslovakja) (translated from
Itussian): Mr. President, the Czechoslovak delegation
cannot but voice· its surprise at your ruling that the
vote on the resolution tabled by the Czechoslovak
delegation [see A/4937] should be regarded as a vote:
on an important political question, under Article 18
of the United Nations Charter, and that the decision
would thus have to be made by a two-thirds majority.
The Czechoslovak delegation considers that it must
protest against such a,ruling.

506

General Assembly - Sixteenth Session - Plenary Meetin~s

9. When this question was discussed in the Committee, some delegations which took an unfavourable
view of the Czechoslovak draft resolution criticized
it on the specific ground that it was a routine and
formal resolution. At the same time, the Canadian
delegation, which was one of the sponsors of the
second resolution [see A/4937], safeguarded itself in
advance against the possibility of attempts being made
to describe its resolution as political, and in the
course of the whole discussion stressed its noo.political character.

ship, the expulsion of Members, questions relating
to the operation of the Trusteeship System, and
budgetary questions".
15. As you are aware, the question now under discussion does not fall under any of these categories.
Rule 87 of the rules of procedure reads as follows:
"Decisions of the General Assembly on questions
other than those prOVided for in rule 85, inclUding
the determination of additional categories of questions to be decided by a two-thirds majority, shall
be made by a majority of the Members of the Members present and voting".

10. In point of fact, the item we are now discussing
is not the general item dealing with atomic radiation.
The title under which it was included in the agenda
of the present session of the General Assembly reads:
"Report of the United Nations Scientific Committee
on the Effects of At·omic Radiation n. The report of the
United Nations Scientific Committee presented to the
General Assembly this year. [A/4881 and Corr.1.] is
merely a progress report on the work of the Committee, without any proposals or conclusions. Our
business is to take note or not to take note of this
report, or to comment on it. It is not for us, however,
to decide basic politil;:al questions connected with
atomic radiation, atomic tests, etc.

16. I would call your attention to the fact that, before
the vote was taken, the President did not put to the
vote the issue whether this question should be discussed and voted on as an important question-one,
that is, requiring a two-thirds majority for its decision. Consequently, with all due respect to you,
Mr. President, I consider that your ruling for a twothirds majority vote is not based on the rules ot
procedure of the General Assembly, and I would ask
you to reconsider this ruling.

11. This is obviously an crdinary procedural question, especially if there ·are no reservations or critical comments to be made on the report under discussion. The decision to apply Article 18 of the Charter
to the Czechoslovak resolution can only be regarded
as an attempt to use procedure in order to prevent
the adoption of the Czechoslovak resolution. We had
already witnessed a similar attempt in the Committee, when the Canadian delegation, seeking to prevent
the adoption of the Czechoslovak draft resolution,
claimed priority for its own draft, in spite of the fact
that the Czechoslovak draft was tabled earlier intime
and, uLder rule 132, should have been put to the vote
before tbp, Canadian draft resolution. But even this
trick faLed to prevent the Czechoslovak resolution
from being adopted.

18. Mr. TREMBLAY (Canada) (translated from
French): There can be no doubt whatever that the
problem of radio-active fall-out is a source of concern and apprehension to all our peoples. This is
borne out by the fact that not a single vote was cast
against draft resolution A, contained in the report of
the Special Political Committee (A/4937). Therefore,
to submit, as the representative of Czechoslovakia
has done, that this question is not sufficiently important to require a two-thirds majority vote is completely unrealistic. My delegation accordingly considers that the decision taken by the President was
the'right one and I request that a vote should be taken
on the question of whether a two-thirds majority vote
is required.

17. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): Icall
on the representative of Canada on a point of order.

19. Mr. CHOBANOV (Bulgaria) (translated from
French): I do not intend to repeat what the representative of the Soviet Union has said concerning the
interpretation to be piaced on rule 85 of the rules of
procedure. I do, however, wish to make this further
point. The list given in this rule of questions to be
decided
by a two-thirds majority is exhaustive, not
13. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call
illustrative. The rule does not end with any such exon the representative of the Soviet Union on a point
pression as "etc." or "and so forth". Therefore as
of order.
the representative of the Soviet Union has said, this
14. Mr. ZO.RIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
voting procedure is applicable only to the questions
(translated from Russian): In connexion with what the , listed in this rule, which every representative has
Czechoslovak representative has just said, I wish to
before him. Since, I repeat, this list is definitely exdraw the attention of Members of the GeneralAssemhaustive, no other question can be added to it.
bly and of yourself, Mr. President, to rule 85 of the
20. Moreover, as the representative of the Soviet
General Assembly's rules of procedure. Rule 85 reads
Union has also pointed out, rule 87 states that:
as follows:
"Decisions of the General Assembly on questions
"Decisions of the General Assembly on important
other than those provided for in rule 85, including
questions shall be made by a two-thirds majority
the determination of additional categories of quesof the Members present and voting. These questions
tions to be decided by a two-thirds majority, shall
shall include: recommendations with respect to the
be made by a majority of the Members present and
maintenance of international peace and security, the
voting."
election of the non-permanent members of the Security Council, the election of the members of the
For these reasons, I would request the President to
Economic and Social Council, the election of memreverse the decision he took in announcing that draft
bers of the Trusteeship Council in accordance with
resolution B has not been adopted.
paragraph 1 c of Article 86 of the Charter, the ad21. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In
mission of new Members to the United Nations, the
suspension of the rights and privileges of memberview of the observations that have just been made, the
12. The Czechoslovak delegation hopes, Mr. President, that you will recon.sider the ruling which you
have just announced and that the Czechoslovak draft
resolution will be adopted, in accordance with the
Charter and the rules of procedure.

uncertainty
request ma
pose to as
draft resol
requiring
question m
22. Before
I call on t
order cone
23. Mr.
French): I
the questiOl
87 of the
tioned, doe
a two-thir
categories
sembly is e
will be tak
rule does n
This is the
to accede
for a vote
draft resol
two-thirds
24. The P
a vote has
speed up 0
sembly in t
of consulti
siders this
a two-third
'"

25. I wou!
of the rules
tion of addi
by a two-t
jority. Tho
a vote by
those who
roll-eaU vo
The Neth
President.
In favour:

Niger, Nor,
Philippines,
Spain, Swe
Kingdom of
States of A
gium, Boli
Colombia,
El Salvado
Greece, G
Ireland, Isr
Against:

Syria, Ukr
Soviet Soc
Yemen, Yu
Burma, B
Ceylon:, Co
.Guinea,
Morocco, N

AbstaitJin

Yolta, Vene
can Repub
Cyprus, D
Haiti, Ivor
.Madagasca

-

1043rd meeting - 17 October 1961
uncertainty concerning this question and the express
request made by the representative of Canada, I propose to ask the General Assembly to decide whether
draft resolution B constitutes an important question
requirin~ a two-thirds majority vote or, rather, a
question merely requiring a simple majority vote.

lting
and
dis~ies.

s:

22. Before submitting the question to the Assembly,
I call on the representative of Bulgaria on a point of
order concerning the voting procedure.

:ions
ding
~es-

23. Mr. CHOBANOV (Bulgaria) (translated from
French): I believe that there is no need for a vote on
the question which the President has just put. Rule
87 of the rules of procedure which has been mentioned, does not relate to specific questions on which
a two-thirds majority vote should be taken, but to
categories of questions with respect to which the Assembly is empowered to determine whether a decision
will be taken by a two-thirds majority. However, the
rule does not refer to specific or particular questions.
This is the reason why I believe that there is no need
to accede to the Canadian representative's request
for a vote on the questic.n of whether the decision on
draft resolution B must be taken by a simple or by a
two-thirds majority.

ihall
em-

fore
,the
disone,
sci-

fOu,

wos of
ask

call
r.

24. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): Since
a vote has been requested, I believe it would help to
speed up our work-and I make an appeal to the Assembly in this connexion-if I adhered to my intention
of consulting the Assembly on whether or not it considers this question to be an important one requiring
a two-thir~s majority.

:om
the
onl is
last
t of
Ire,
kia
or,monvas
ken
ote

om
3nthe
of
ler
be

~ot
lX-

as
lis
Ins
las

,x-

let

ns

ng

s-

liI

ad
to

1ft

25. I would remind the Assembly that, under rule 87
of the rules of procedure, decisions onthe determination of additional categories of questions to be decided
by a two-thirds majority are taken by a simple majority. Those who consider that the question requ.ires
a vote by a two-thirds majority will vote "yes lt and
those who hold the contrary view will vote "no". A
roll-call vote has been requested. "'$>
A vote was taken by roll-call.
The Netherlands. having been drawn by lot by the
President. was called upon to vote firs t.

ili

In favour: Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Portugal, Sierra Leone, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Australia, J.\ustria, Belgium, BoliVia, Brazil, Cameroun, Canada, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominican Republic ,
El Salvador, Federation of Malaya, France, Gabon,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Liberia, Luxembourg. '
Against: Nigeria, Poland, Romania, Saudi Arabia,
Syria, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic,
Yernen, ¥ugoslavili, Afghanil3tan, Albania, Bulgaria,
Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Ceylon, Congo (Leopoldville), Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
.GUinea,
Hungary, India; Indonesia, Iraq, Mali,
Morocco, Nepal.
.'
AbstaitJing: Senegal, Somalia, Sudan, Togo, Upper
Yolta, Venezuela, Argentina, Cambodia, CentralAfrican Republic, Chad, Chile, Congo (Brazzaville),
Cyprus, Dahomey, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Finland,Ghana,
Haiti, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Laos, Lebanon, Libya,
Madagascar, Mexico.

507

The General Assembly decided by 48 votes to 4'1.
with 46 abstentions. that the two-thirds majority rule
should be applied to the vote on draft resolution B.

Statf/ment by the President

26. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
would remind the Members of the Assembly that the
next two items which we have to consider today are
the election of non-permanent members of the Security Council and the election of six members of the
Economic and Social Council. However, in view of the
wishes expressed by several delegations, I propose to
take up first two other items entitled n Admission o~
iIlew Members to the United Nations" and "Continuation, of suspension of nuclear andthermo-nuclear tests
and obligations of states to refrain from their renewal;
the urgent need for a treaty to ban nuclear weapons
tests under effective international control n. When we
have concluded our consideration of these two items,
we can either take up the elections to the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, or defer
them until l:x. later meeting.

AGENDA ITEM 92
Admission of new Members to ~he United Nations

27. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): We
shall therefore proceed to consider agenda item 92
entitled I!Admission of new Members to the United
Nations". In this connexion, the Assembly has before
it the recommendation of the SecurityCouncilrelating
to the admission of the Mongolian People's Republic
[A/4940] and that relating to the admission of the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania [A/4941]. The Assembly also has before it a draft resolution on each
of these two questions which we shall consider
separately.
ADMISSION OF THE MONGOLIAN PEOPLE'S
REPLJ13LIC TO MEMBERSffiP IN THE UNITED
NATIONS
28. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I invite the Assembly to consider first the question of
the admission of the Mongolian People's Republic, on
which it has before it a draft resolution [A/L.359 and
Add.1 and 2] sponsored by twenty-three Powers.
29. Mr. ZORlN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): On 25 October the Security
Council, at its 97lst meeting, adopted a positive decision on the question of admitting the .Mongolian People's Republic to membership of the United Nations,
and recommended the General Assembly, in accordance,. with Article 4, paragraph 2 of the United Nations
Charter, to adopt the appropriate decision. .
30. As you know, over the past year the number of
Members of the United Nations has considerably increased, especially through the admission to the Or';'
ganization of former African colonies which, as a
resuU, of a stubborn struggle against colonialism,
have finally succeeded in attaining their independence•
31. Today all delegations have before them arecommendation by the Security Council concerning th~
admission to the United Nations of the Mongolian
People's Republic ,!J and the draft resolution [A/L.359

!/ Official Records of the .Security Council. Sixteenth year. Supplement for October. November and December 1961, document 5/4968,

..

'.

.
-

508

'

.'"'.' . . . .. . .
,

~

\.

.-

. ..
',"

:' - . . -"

.,

. ' .: ~

~

Genera l Assem bly - Sixteen th Sessio n - Plenar y Meetin gs

and, Add.1 and 2], tabled by twen~r-three states, confirmin g this recomm endatio n by the Counci l.
32. The Mongo lian nation, as we all know, is one of
the oldest nations in the wOllld. Its nationa l history
began in the thir,d century before our era and Mongolia mainta ined its indepe ndence untihh e sevente enth
centur y, when it was conque red by foreign ers. Two
hundre d years later, as a result of the Victory of the
people 's revolut ion in 1921, the Mongo lian people
achiev ed the restora tion of the Monp;olian State on a
popula I democ ratic basis. Since then, in a relativ ely
short space of time, the econom ic and cultura l backwardne ss of the country has been Qverco me. A nationa l
industr y has been created , agricu lture recons tructed
and a cultura l revolut ion achieve d. The Mongo lian
People 's Republ ic has now been transfo rmed from a
cattle- raising countr y into an agricu ltural and industrial State; it has by-pas sed the capital ist road to
develo pment and set foot firmly on the road to
sociali sm.
33. From the very beginn ing of its existen ce, the
Mongo lian People 's Republ ic has.be en firmly and consistent ly followi ng a peacef ul policy conson ant with
the aim s and princip les of the United Nation s Charte r;
it has invaria bly advoca ted the relaxat ion of internationa l tension , and peacef ul coexist ence. It maintains diplom atic relatio ns with twenty -one states in ~
all contine nts of the world.
34. The Mongo lian People 's Republ ic. as already
determ ined at the fifteen th .sessio n of the Genera l
Assem bly in resolut ion 1602 of 19 April 1961, is a
, peace- loving state within the meanin g of Article 4 of
the United Nation s Charte r and, as stated in that
resolut ion, is able and willing to carry outthe obligations of the Charte r. That is why the Securi ty Counci l
drew the correc t inferen ce and recomm ended the admissio n of the Mongo lian People 's Republ ic to membershi p in the United Nation s.
35. The delega tion of the Soviet Union andthe delega tions of twenty -two other countr ies, namely : Albani a,
Mghan istan, Bulgar ia. Burma , Byelor ussian Soviet
Sociali st Republ ic, Cambo dia, Ceylon , Cupa, Czecho slovak ia, Ghana, Guinea , Hungar y, India, Indone sia.
Iraq, Mali,N epal, Poland , Roman ia, the Ukrain ian
Soviet Sociali st Republ ic, the United Arab Republ ic
and Yugosl aVia have submit ted draft resolut ion AI
L.359, readin g aB follows :
"The Genera l Assem bly,
"HaVing receive d the- recomm endatio n of the Security Counci l of 25 Octobe r 1961 that the Mongo lian
People 's Republ ic should be admitt ed to memb ership in the United Nation s,
"HaVing consid ered the applica tion for memb ership of the Mongo lian People 's Republ ic,
"Decid es to admit the Mongo lian People 's Republic to membe rship in the· United Nation s."
We are confide nt that this resolut ion will be ll.dopted
unanim ously by the Genera l Assem bly.
36. Mr. LID (China): On the questio n of Outer Mongolia the positio n of the Chines e delega tion has been
made known on numero us occasio ns, and again two
days ago, when the Securit y Counci l consid ered the
matter for the thirtee nth time. We remain convin ced
that Outer Mongo lia is utterly unqual ified for mem"
bershi p of this Organi zation under the provisi ons of
the' Charte r. Since its applica tion for membe rship.

was first submit ted in 1946Y it has been increas ingly
brough t under Soviet domina tion, and by its actions
it has demon strated itself to be a willing tool of
armed aggres sion agains t the neighb ouring regions .
In short, its claim to indepe ndence is nothing but a
cloak for the perpetu ation of Soviet coloniz ation.
37. My delegat ion, howev~r, is not unmind ful of
Genera l Assem bly resolut ion 1602 (XV) on the question of Onter Mongo lia, and in the circum stance s with
whi.ch the Securi ty Counci l was confron ted the Chinese
delega tion relucta htly came to the decisio n that its
opposi tion to Outer Mongo lia's entry should not be
~ade a pretex t, howev er meagr e and unjustif
iable,
for the non-ad missio n of a new state which my delegation particu larly desire s to see within the .ranks of
this Organi zation. My delegat ion, howev er, will not
partici pate in the voting if a vote is taken in the
Assem bly.
38. The PRESID ENT (transl ated from French ): I invite the Assem bly to take a decisio n on the twentythree Power draft resolut ion (A/L.3 59 and Add.l and
2), which recomm ends that the Mongo lian People' s
RC 1ublic should be admitt ed 'to membe rship in the
"TIiJ.j,.ed Nation s. Since there has been no reques t for
a vote, may I consid er that the Genera l Assembly
approv es the admiss ion of the Mongo lian People' s
Repub lic?
.

The draft resolut ion was adopted byaaol{Ullation.
39. The PRESID ENT (transl ated from French ): Since
the resolut ion was adopte d by acclam ation and I have
heard' no objecti on, I declar e the Mongo lian People' s
Republ ic admitte d to membe rship in the United
Nation s.
The delegation of the Mongo lian People 's Republic
was esoort ed ro its place in the General Assembly

H2!1~

40. The PRESID ENT (transl ated from French ): rcall
on the Minist er for Foreig n Mfairs of the Mongolian
People 's Republ ic.
41. Mr. TSEVEGMID (Mongo lian People 's Republic):..2I I am extrem ely glad to expres s on behalf of
the Govern ment and the people . of the Mongolian
People 's Republ ic our gratitu tde to all those states
whose repres entativ es backed the candid ature of the
Mongo lian People 's Republ ic for membe rship of the
United Nation s, partiCU larly to the Soviet Union and
other countr ies for their constan t and consist ent
suppor t of our state's legitim ate right.
42. As a result of the Victory of the nation alliber a,tion movem ent of 1921 agains t foreign coloniz ers, the
Mongo lian people created the Mongo lian People 's Republic as a sovere ign, indepen dent state ofthe people' s
democ racy on the Asian contine nt, comme ncing thereby its reviva l as a nation and a state.
43. Now the Mongo lian People 's Republ ic, former ly
one of the econom ically most backw ard countri es of
the East, as a result of the succes sful <ievelopment of
its nationa l industr y, agricu lture, science and culture ,
has turned into an advanc ed agraria n and industr ial
countr y which is confide ntly marchi ng alongth e way
of the constru ction of sociali sm.
44. More than fifteen years have passed since our
Govern ment 'first submit ted its applica tion for ady Ibid., First Year, Second Series, Supplement No. 4, document 5/95.
El Mr. Tsevegmid spoke in Mongolian. The English and French versions of his statemen t were supplied by tile delegation.

mission
goUan P
positive
People 's
neatly s
nations .
45. In t
vance al
Mongoli
it will c
based 0
servati o
friendly

46. I c
declare
sembly ,
Uan Peo
arising
country
of world
47. The
thank th
lian Peo
dent, I s
tion and
Membe r
expres s
in our
which m
48. I w
heavy ag
to offer
State an
request
ing. I s
Genera l
to the Se

ADMISSI
'MAURI
NATIO
49. The
shall no
Islamic
ommend
which a
by fourle

50. Mr.
public) (t
pleasur e
by the gr
and Mal
the Bra
speak no
Republic
which h
.. the raco
D,ow befo

-

lasingly
actions
tool of

~egions.

19 but a

In.

ldful of
e ques-

lea with

Jhinese
~hat its
not ba
ifiable,
y dele-

anks of

{ill not
1 in the

): I in-

wenty-

:I.l and

90ple's
in the
est for

~embly

lople's

'ion.

: Since
I have
lople's
United
pubJ,ic

embIy

: Icall
golian

:epublalf of
goiian
states
of the
of the
In and
istent
beraS, the

sRelple's
lereIlerly
.es of
mt of
ture,
!trial
I way
lOur

'ad-

509

1043rd meeting - 17 October 1961
mission to United Nations membership, and the Mongolian people already then had grounds to expect a
positive solution of that ,question. since the Mongolian
People' s Republic is a peace-loving state which earnestly seeks to live in peace and friendship with all
nutions.
45. In the course of more than forty years of its ad-,
vance along the path of progress and democracy the
Mongolian People's Republic has always pursued-as
it will continue to pursue-a ~aceful foreign policy
based on the principles of peaceful coexistence, preservation and consolidation of peace and expansion of
friendly relp.tions and a businesslike co-operation.
46. I consider it a great honour and privilege to
declare from this high rostrum of the General AssembJ¥, on behalf of my Government that the Mongolian People's Republic will abide by allthe obligations
arising from the United Nations Charter and that our
country will make its contribution to the consolidation
of world peace and security of peoples.
47. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Mongolian People's Repablic and, in my capacity as President, I should like to welcome him to this Organization and to congratulate him on, having become a
Member of the United Nations.. , I should also like to
express my hope and confidence that his participation
in our work will do much to promote the harmony
which must prevail among all the United Nations.
48. I would remind the Assembly that we have a very

heavy ageooa today. I know that many delegations wish
to offer their congratulations to the new Member
State and welcome it to the Organization, but I would
request them to refrain from doing so at this meeting. I shall call on them at future meetings of the
General Assembly, and they may submit their names
to the Secretariat for this purpose.
ADMISSION OF THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
':MAURITANIA TO MEMBERSHIP IN THE UNITED
NATIONS
49. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
shall now take up the, question of the admission Of the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania, which has been recommended by the Security Council [A/4941] and on
which a draft resolution [A/358 and Add.1] spoIlBored
by fourteen Powers has been submitted.
50. Mr. GALLIN-DOUATHE (Central African Republic) {translated from Fl'enf.lh): It is with particular
pleasure that I discharge today a task assigned to me
by the group of African countries known as the Africad
and Malagasy Union, generally referred to herers
the Brazzaville group. I have the great honour to
speak not as the representative of the Central African
Republic but in the name ofa number of delegations
which have requested me to support on their behalf
,the recommendation of the Seourity Councn [A/4941]
I\OW before us.
51. In order to explain our great satisfaction at seeing this matter once again before the Assembly and,
vIe fervently hope, 'on the verge of a happy solution,
it is perhaps appropriate to recall· the emotion we
experienced during the past year.
52. First of all, as members .0£ the 'I'welve, we were
indignant that one of us should be rejected by an Organization of which the Brazzaville group is one of
,the staunchest supporters. Then~ as represl:lntativea
::' ~ '.

of African states, we could not fail to be distressed
that Mauritania remained, as it were, beyond the pale
of the nations, that it alone was refused the highest
endorsement !)f its independence that a country can
receive at the international level-and this at a time
when, as a result of acceleration of decolonization,
the young African nations have gained fJ,'eedom one
after another and have promptly been admitted totake
their place among us.
53. Lastly, as recent Members of the United Nations,
we were Shocked at the cynical manreuvres and bargaining which took place in connexion with the application for membership of a country which completely
fulfils the requirements for admission. Article 4,
paragraph. 1 of the United Nations Charter states
specifically that:
"Membership in the United Nations is open to all
other peace-loving states which accept the obligations contained in the present Charter and, in the
judgement of the Organization, are able and willing'
to carry out these obligations."
This ability, thiB willingness have already been
acknowledged by a great majority in the General
Assembly. This acknowledgement has not yet led
to any action, because t in consequence of an intrigue
which does not redound to the credit of the Organization, the admission of Mauritania was made contingent upon that of a very remote Republic. At the
same time, an African State attempted to enforce
its alleged rights to the territory administered by
the Governme..nt at Nouakchott and denied the existence of the MauritaJrlan State, in principle. and in
fact.
54. What then is Mauritania"l Speaking today as the
representative of the nations of the BrazzRville group,
I believe that I am qualified to answer this question.
We lived together with Mauritania through the colonial
i~gime. We experienced with Mauritania the first
exhilarating moments of liberation. Today, with
Mauritania" we are assuming the heavy task of accelerating the economic and cultural development of
our peoples. As everyone here knows,the group of
Twelve is prou,d to form, together with a few other
countries :1rom the same continent, a veritable Latin
Africa. Strong ties of friendship link us to the former
colonial Power that led us to independence, thus
recogniZing the legitimate aspirations which its great
traditions ·of liberty and humanism have done somuch
to awa..~en and foster .. It remains the liVing source of
our modern culture. Mauritania is a member of this
Latin community of Black Africa where Africanproblems are discussed in French. It.is Within this community that· Mauritania has beeu pursuing its political
and economic goals since independence,thus. giving
us an uninterrupted opportunity of appreciating its
value as a partner.
55. In one of his beBtbooks,AntoinedeSaint-Exupery .
referred to this desert, the ~id coast that the airline
J>ilots flew over while .carrying the mail to South
America. Forced to land at. Nouakchott thirty-five
years ago, the· writer found there, as the sole inhab..,
itants, one sergea.ntand a handful of Senegalese
riflemen•. Much ground has been covered since then.
The frightening empty spaces of Courrier Sud . have
also become a Terre· des hommes, where economic
and political development are proceeding apace.
56. Thus we see that in May 1957 the Mauritanians
elected the members'of
a territorial Assembly; sub~_
.

.

\-

.

-

...

Genem l Assem bly - Sixteen th Ses,'!ion ~ Plenar y Meetin gs
sequen tly, MauritaniB., with all the other French speakin g colonia l people s of Africa , save one, took
part in the major referen dum held Qn 28 Septem ber
1958, and opted to join the CO)lllllunity by an overwhelm ing majori ty; two months later, the Maurit anian
Assem bly procla imed the Republ ic and adopted a
draft Constit ution. Since that time, Maurit ania has
at all times acted as a free and democ ratic nation.
In .May 1959, it elected its Nation al Assem bly, and
the Govern ment that was form~d the followi ng month
was constit uted in accord ance with the Constit ution.
FinaUy , on 28 Novem ber 1960, the last step was
taken and indepe ndence was proclai med.
57. It is therefo re a State endowe d with a comple te
politic al organi zation, based on democ ratic princi pIes, and posses sing all the attribu tes of soverei gnty;
the separa tion of powers and the accoun tability of
the Govern ment to the Assem bly are its essent ial
charac teristic s.
58. Togeth er with this politic al develo pment, we
have witnes sed alBo the evalua tion and develo pment
of the natura l resour ces of the Maurit anian territo ry.
The exploit ation of the copper deposi ts of Akjouj t and
especia lly of the iron from Fort-G ouraud will in the
very near future swell Maurit ania's budget ary receip ts
and speed up its econom ic and social develo pment.
Mucb, moreo ver, has already been done in this field.
Nouakc hott is a rapidly growin g city, hummi ng with
actiVity ; the 1,500 worke rs who are buildin g its airport, second ary school and radio station and installi ng
the water supply and electri c power system aretra nsformin g Nouakc hott into a hive of. industr y which
recalls the mushro oming cities of the Ameri can
contine nt.
59. In additio n to these specta cular achiev ements ,
the Maurit anian Govern ment has made a seriou s effort
to improv e the living conditi ons of the people and to
raise their cultura l level. High priorit y has been given
to a progra mme design ed to train a health service
compo sed of doctor s, midwiv es, and social worker s;
it provi€i es also for the increa se in the numbe r of
rural dispen saries where a battle is being waged
agains t infant mortal ity. In the field of. educati on,
while not neglec ting the traditio nal Islami c culture ,
the author ities recogn ize the need for a modern culture. Thus, there are no less than 300 elemen tary
classe s where instruc tion is given in French , with an
attenda nce of 9,000 pupils. There are fifteen second ary educati on classe s, with 400 studen ts. In additio n,
a large numbe r 'of Maurit anians are pursuin g their
univer sity studies at Dakar -and in France .
60. ' From 1961 onward s, the resour ces that the State
derive s from mining will.in crease at a rapid rate and
will make it possib le, in a few years, to double and
triple mining operati ons.
61. It would require much time to give a comple te
pi(:ture or presen t-day Maurit ania. It is not my wish,
howev er, to remain too long at this rostrum , and thus
to prolon g a .debate we arG eager to see the end of. I
trust that my eminen t colleag ue frozn the Islami c
Republ ic of Maurit ania will forgive me for not having
spoken of his country with the eloque nce that he alone
, could have brongh t to this subjec~. I trust, howev er,
, that I have suffici ently stresse d the fact that his country's rapid politic al, econom ic and social develo pment
make -it worthy in every way of being admitt ed to
,memb ership in the United Nation s. A great many
: countr ies, includi ng some Arab countr ies, have ac: knowle dged that fact, and have extend ed recogn ition

---- _.:. .-_- -=- ---- ---- --

to this new state. That such a promin ent and important financi al organiz ation as the Interna tional Bank
for Recons tructio n and Develo pment has granted it a
loan of $66 million also gives some indicat ion of the
confide nce that may be placed in this stat~.
62. Before conclud ing, I should like to addres s the
repres entativ e of a country with which my country
has close ties of frien~ship and to tell him that the
argum ents invoke d by his country to suppor titsterr itorial claims do not seem convin cing to the Brazza ville group; the best of them are of some historic al
interes t, but they do not carry much weight when
measu red agains t the right of self-de termin
ation. We
are sadden ed to see Moroc co, a great Africa n natioll
which was recentl y emanc ipated from Europe an tutelage, resort to legal weapon s to defend ambitions
which we had hoped would no longer prevai l in Africa
aft\~r the depart ure of the colonia l Power s.
63. This is why I appeal to the represe ntative of this
counitry, whose friends we are, to recogn ize with good
grace a situatio n it cannot avoid, so that relation s
betwee n his country and this new Africa n state may
be establi shed in auspici ous circum stance s.
64. I would also addres s an appeal to all those delegations whIch have so far abstain ed in this matter or
cast a negativ e vote, so that the Assem bly, by what
I hope will be a quasi-u nanimo us vote may redress
the injusti ce done to Maurit ania when its admiss ion
to the United Nation s was delayed .
65. When Mr. Souley mane, whom we have seen waiting for so long in the ranks of the observ ers, takes
his seat officia lly among us, we hope that the warmth
of the acclam ations Will be such as to wipe out the
bitter memor y of his long wait.
66. Mr. BERARD (Franc e) (transl ated from French) ;
Since this is the first time that I am speakin g before
the 'Assem bly at this session , I should like to extend
my congra tulatio ns and those of my country to the
Presid ent on his electio n to this high office.
67. The Secudt y Counci l decide d on 25 Octobe r 1961
[971 meetin g], by 9 votes to I, with 1 abstent ion, to
recomm end to the Genera l Assem bly that the Islamic
Republ ic of Maurit ania should be admitte d to membershi p in the United Nation s. At a Securi ty Council
meetin g OD 4 Decem ber 1960 [911.~~~ 'l'Ueeting], 8 votes
)lad already been cast in favour of su<;a a recomm endation and it was only the veto C'f one of the permanent membe rs which had prpven ted the submis sion to
the Genera l Assem bly of the text which is before it
today. The injusti ce of which this young State was a
victim is thus redres sed and we are gratifie d at that
fact.
68. I shall not dwell on this point. This is not a time
for recrim ination s, and even less for polemi cs. This
is a time for reconc iliation and unanim ity.
69. Throug h the interm ediary of its Genera l AEsem bly, the Maurit anian people procla imed its indepen dence on 28 Novem ber 1958. On 29 March 1959, the
Consti tuent Assem bly of Nouakc hott unanim ously
adopte d the Constit ution of the new Republ ic. In the
electio ns held on 11 May 1959, 90 per cent of the
elector ate voted for the Parti du regrou pment mauritanien (Mauri tanian Regz"oupment Party) , the champion of an indepen dent and sovere ign Maurit ania. It is
a comple tely .mdepe ndent and sovere ign countr y,endowed with democ ratic inst'·,'r dons and having at its
head a duiy elected Gover,, "u:mt, which comes today

before
join tb
attaine
ried ou
sister
the re
af new
carry 0
70. On
plenary
favour

"..

peace
of th
be a
[Gene
71. I
atmosp
will, t
vote th
in acco
rity C
Maurit
72. Mr
French)
to deci
tion th
forget f
institut i
princip l
rights- t
all our
integri
would h
proclai
bringin
name 0
nowt
enemy
reduce
case wi
tania we

73. In
waged a
manceuv
manceuv
our Or
cause,
very pr
based.
Organiz
torial i
violatio
74. Th
decisio
- try, I a
made in
ence -c
national
ate our
that Ma
Olllmen
take int
France
existed
its natio

1043rd meeting - 17 October 1961

ld imPoronal Bank
anted it a
ion of the

dress the
r country
1 that the
itsterri: Brazzalistorical
ght when
ation. We
an natiou
ean tute,mbitions
in Mrica

re of this

with good
relations
tate may

Ise delelatter or
by what
redress
!mission

en wait's, takes
warmth
~ out the
~rench):

~ before
J extend

r to the
er 1961
Ition, to
Islamic
>memCouncil
8 votes
mmenpermaision to
~fore it
~ was a
at that
atime
~. This

,Esemepend59, the
nously
In the
of the
aaurichamI. It is
y, enat its
today

before the General Assembly. It has come here to
join tbp: twelve Mrican states which, like Mauritania,
attained independence following the referendum carried out three years ago.: Mauritania, like its Mrican
sister states which have preceded it here, fully meets
the requirements of the Charter for the admission
<>f new Members. It has declared that it is willing to
carry out its obligations under the Charter.
70. On 19 April 1961, in this very Assembly [989th
plenary meeting], sixty-three delegations voted in
favour of the follnwing paragraph of a draft resolution:
n••• the Islamic Republic of Mauritania is a
peace-loving state within the meaning of Article 4
of the Charter, and that it should,.in consequence,
be admitted to membership in the United Nations."
[General Assembly resolution 1602 (XV).]

71. I have no doubt that today, in the prevailing
atmosphere of reconciliation the General Assembly
will, this time, be able to confirm by a unanimous
vote the desire it expressed six months ago and that,
in accordance with the recommendation of the Security Council, it will admit the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania to membership in the United Nations.
72. Mr. BENJELLOUN (Morocco) (translated from
French): Today the General Assembly is called upon
to decide on a grave matter, one that ca.lls into question the very foundatioI),s of this Organization. To
forget for a few moments the higher interests of our
institutions, to turn our backs on the fundamental
principles of the Charter find the sacred and inviolable
rights 'that they guarantee, in short, to sanction with
all our authority a flagrant violation of the territorial
integrity of a Member State-this is what colonialism
would have us do, that colonialism whose abolition we
proclaimed last year and which, having succeeded in
bringing our most cherished ideals into play in the
name of a false freedom, of a false referendum, is
now trying to people this Ol·ganization-its implacable
enemy-with false members, in an endeavour to
reduce it to silence and inaction. Such would be the
case with the so-called Islamic Republic of Mauritania were it admitted to the United Nations.

.

73. In order to preserv.e its unity, Morocco '.has

waged a merciless battle against these Machiavellian
manceuvres. Today we are here to denounce these
manceuvres once again before the supreme organ of
our Organization and to expound before it our just
cause, a cause which finds its justification in the
very principles upon which the United Nations is
based. Who, indeed, would dare to affirm that this
Organization would continue to exist were the territorial integrity of States not beyond the reach of any
violation?
74. The General Assembly is called upon to take a
decision which is of the utmost concern to my country. I am referring to'the application for admission
made in favour of a so-called State whose very exis,tence 'confronts Morocco with· a serioUs problem of
national sovereignty and international law. We reiterate our vigorous protest against the recommendation
that Mauritania should be admitted [A/4941], a recommendation adopted on the basis of criteria which
take into account only the arguments put forward by
France in this particularly grave dispute which has
existed between us ever since our country recovered
its national independence.
75. We do ::lot think that the position w.kenby the
Security Council can in the final analysis, re the ex-

511

pression of a negative finding with regard to my
country's legitimate rights, which are, moreover,
recognized as 8uch by a number of the Stateo represented here.
76. It ifl deplorable that the question of the representation of the People's Republic of China should, in
i~s turn, have become a subject of this barga.ining. In
this connexion, the statement made in the Security
Council [1,971st meeting] on 25 October 1961 by the
representative of Nationalist China is particularly
edifying.
77. We have already had occasion, during the fifteenth
session of the General Assembly, to produce evidence
showing that the Mauritanian problem is the direct
result of a foreign occupation which lasted more than
forty years and of which Morocco was the victim.
Only the interests of the imperialist Powers prevailed
:luring that dark period with the result that our national soil became subject to arbitrary mutilations
which, more'over, were incompatible with the international instruments that were to guarantee the integrity of. our kingdom and thus prevent imperialist
aims from jeopardizing the tet"ritorial sovereignty
of Morocco.
78. We ~aid then that French colonialism, in detaching a large part of our cou.ntry and giving it the name
of Mauritania, simply took advantage of its military
superiority in order to commit this unpardonable
crime: the division of a nation and a people.
79. Throughout the period during which France exercised its domination over Morocco, the French authorities, while declaring that they were assuming the
responsibility of defending our country's integrity,
presumed, at convenient moments, to adopt so-called
d.dministrative measures which were in fact designed
to remove certain of 011Y' Saharan territories from
the jurisdiction of the central Moroccan authority.
These measures were spaced out over a period of
some fifty years, the latest one being that of 1952
which concerned the territory of Fort-Trinquet. They
ultimately made it possible for various parts of our
national territory to be arbitrarily detached in order
to create artifigally what French colonialism now
calls the Islamic Republic of Mauritania.
80. Before the First Committee [l109th meeting], as
also before the Security Council [911th and 9718t
meetings] last year and again this year, we showed
how French aggression undertaken against different
parts of our country, including Mauritania, in the
years from 1905 to 1912-aggression. which in fact
continued until 1934-was simply the execution of a
plan prepared beforehand for the purpose of dominating an African nation by force' in order to divide it
subsequently into a protectorate zone and a so-called
zone of sovereignty.
81. We also reported the testimony of highly placed
French civil and military figures, such as Governor
Coppolani and Marshal Lyautey himself. I shall
mention, in particular, the letter sent by Governor
Coppolani to the French Minister for Colonies in
1905: If I hopell,he said, "that you have not forgotten
that Mauritania is a natural extension of Morocco".
He also advised him to "make use of the religious
leaders of Adrar, who are active in the principal
Cherifian centres". In a letter sent to· the French
Minister for Foreign Affairs U11911 Marshall Lyautey
said: "The' history of tpe Moroccan dynasties is sufficient to demonstrate fhat the Snltanshave always

512
l Assem bly - Sixteenth Session - Plenar y Meetinga
---.- --- ---Ge.'lera
-'

exerci sed a spiritu al action and an effective an~ unpatriot s in th!=l north by imposing upon them an
contest ed authori ty over this part of the continent";
artific ial State created for a purely imperialistic
purpos e and designed to serve as a buffer zone
82. We further produced irrerJt able evidEmce that,
between West Africa and North Africa .
in order to contend with this aggres sion in Mauritanian territo ry. our Government adopted a series of
87. Nor have the Maurit anians lost sight of the fact
measu res of a diplomatic and militar y nature for the
that their countr y's minera l resour ces are coveted
pUi"{)ose of defending our country , which was being
by a coalitio n of capital ist and colonia list interests
attacke d from Senegal. The efforts in this directi on
whose sole object is to establi sh its political and
underta ken by our Government continued up to the
economic domination over this region of Morocco for
time when the French protec torate was impose d upon
all time. The liberat ion movem ents and the men who
our cliuntry. We submit ted further testimo ny and
lead them have therefo re united with the Moroccan
further evidence that from time immem orial and up
Government in protest ing vigoro usly agains t the conto the period of the French occupation, Mr-oc coexer ditions un-del' which, with the guaran tee of the French
cised perman ent, constan t and effectivE: .Jovereignty
Government, a capital ist and colonia list enterprise
over the southe rn region s of its territo ry, among
obtained a loan from the Interna tional Bank for Rethem the Maurit anian region. Our chiefs, our judges
constru ction and Development for the exploitation of
and our govern ors hav~ always exerci sed an indispu Maurit ania's iron deposi ts.
table authori ty on behalf of the centra l power and of
88. The Maurit anians have not been indifferent to
our sovere ign.
the perman ent danger to which they are exposed as
83. Today there are still Maurit anians occupying
a result of the presen ce of powerful militar y bases
positio ns of respon sibility in our Government, in
establi shfld in that t61'ritory. This aspect of France's
the diplom atic service , the army, the courts and at
policy in its former posses sions is confirm ed by the
all l~vels of the Moroc can Admin istratio n. Since the
.fact that a numbe r of Africa n countr ies united to
most remc-te times in history , the inhabitants of this
France by the bonds of the French Community have
region have always been proud to belong to the
just propos ed an amendment [A/C.l /L.293 and Add.I]
Moroc can nation, not only through their culture and
Which would delete an import ant part of a draft resoorigin but also through the existen ce of a common
lution [A/C.l /L.291 and Add.l] submit ted to the First
nationa l heritag e an.d a community of sentim "nts and
Committ&e by ten independent countr ies of Africa
interes ts. Throughout the centllr ies and the common
and would preven t the United Nations from declaring
civiliz ations, this region has given Morocco statesits opposition to the existen ce ol. militar y and nUClear
men, men of letters and scienti sts, thus making its
bases in Africa . I have before me the draft resolution
contribution to the differe nt fields of national activity .
submit ted by the Congo (Leopoldville), EthiopiO>., Ghana,
GUinea, Mali, Morocco. Nigeri a, Sierra Leone, the
M. We have also pointed out how anxious Morocco
Sudan and the United Arab Republic, reques ting all
has been since 1956, when we becom e independent, tu
States to abstain from carryin g· out or continuing to
obtain a settlem ent of the dispute that rema~l1ed uncarry out nuclea r or ballist ics weapons tests in Africa,
resolv ed bei-ween our two countr ies, France and
and to elimin ate, and refrain from establi shing, bases
Morocco, in particu lar the frontie r problem , which
of any kind or launching sites intended for use in testwas the· subjec t of an agreem ent on the creatio n of
ing, storing or transpo rting such weapons.
a joint Franco -Moro ccan Comm ission. At that time
we were determ ined that there should be no doubt
89. The amendment propos ed to this r!rclt resolution
left intne minds of our Fr6nch colleag ues about the
would insert the world "e'lpec ially" before the words
true meaning to be given to the missio n of the joint
"in Africa " in paragr aph W. This amendment [A/C.I /
Comm ission for the settlem ent of this grave terriL.293 and Add.l] was submit ted by Senegal and several
torial proble m. We proved that Moroc co's border s
other Africa n countr ies, Cameroun, the Centra l Afriare guaran teed by interna tional agreem ents, all of
can Repub lic-wh ose represe ntative we have just
which we cited, among them :.J6ing the Declar ation of
heard- Chad, the Congo'· (Brazz aville) , Dahomey,
8 April 1904 concer ning Egypt and Moroc co by Great
Gabon, Ivory Coast, Madag ascar. Niger and Uppar
Britain and France ; the Convention on the subjec t of
:Volta. Nor 'are' these countr ies indiffe rent to the reMoroc co concludtld on 3 Octobe r 1904 between France
tention of vast stretch es of land under the effective
and Spain; the Genera l Act of the Interna tional Concontro l of a foreign merce nary army and of ultraferenc e o' Algeci ras of 19'16; and the Convention recolonia lists from Algeri a and the former French
garding Morocco signed by France and Germa ny on
bases evacua ted from independent Morocco.
4 November 1911.
90. The Maurit anians still remem ber the difficult
85. Moreo ver, as we have already pointed out more
years of 1956, 1957 and 1958, when th()usands of parathan once in this Assem bly, the proble m ofterri torial
Chutists suppor ted by aircraf t and tanks waged a
sovere ignty which exists for us in Maurit ania has also
savage war agains t innocent civilian s, massacring
arisen with regard to the tel'rito ry of our "Spanish
them by hundre ds and by thousa n$, simply because
Sahara " st111 illegall y oC;1Upied. by anothe r colonial
it was necess ary for French" colonia lism that this
POwer, Spain.
part of Morocco should remain tmder its domination..
It could not allow the inhabit ants of this region peace'"
86. These juridic ial and histori cal ,;lrguments, howfully to expres s their feeling s in favour of the return
ever; have not caused us to lose sigh: of anothe r, no
of their ·laild to the nation to which they have always'
less import ant, aspect pf this proble m, namely . the
belonged.
will of the Maurit anian population itse~f. Since
Moroc co's independence, the Maurit anians havene ver
91. Today. despite the consid erable efforts made by .
ceased to expres s,· through their true leader s, upheld
the French colonia list agents . by corrup tion and by
by the action. of the masse s of the people . their unconstl'aj..4-, the 600.000 Mauri tanian sstill desire indeshakab le desire for reunificatiQu. ,They have alw~ys
r'lnden ce within the Moroc can national community.
denounced tbenea -colon ialist policy that aims at
They catego rically reject that other independence so
separa ting them once and for all from their comgene:rously offered by the suppor ters of neo-oolo--

nialism, l\n indepe
able and whidl, i
aspirations and ri
designed to thwart
rights.
92. Thus French c
tania-I repeat. its
all costs to act ag
will of the people
series of drastic
situation and to "
techniques of ne
that they may Mce
they like it or not.
the French army.
executions. the se
lead~rs establi shed
of campai gners, ec
the acf:ive populati
strictil:>ns on the
the impriso nment 0
paigners. the poiso
and false propag an
reunor cemen ts, the
nr rivalri es among
measur es whose a
the French colonia
adopt in order to
had to use every po
movement which w
country and which
population.
93. These are no 0
of a plot direcw d
determination. a P
nialism under a ne
traditional method
African friends kn
and divisions exten
alas, in the Africa n
United Nation s. It
so-call ed policy 0
drawn up accor .
whole of the Aftic
fluence, a plan ap
powerful movement
of large groups w
most import ant an
.policy. especially i
liberation and unity:
94. In Maurit ania
strong meailS, whi
pseudo-independen
of the Maurit anian
permaneDt-eo-oper
the French · Govern
95. At the interna ti
to draw attention t
Frellch Government
artifici al chara(}tet"
of independence, ex
the opinion of States
....6. Is it just. is it
accomplished fact
placed should plac
situation, in that y
inviting a so-call ed
of our national ter
nization? We do n

1043rd meeting - 17 October 1961
1 an

tslle
ZOIV)

fact

'eled
:ests
and
ofor

who
lonan
oon·

1

'8nch

Irise
'Reonof

Dtto
3d as

lases
oee's
ythe
3d to

have
dd.ll

~so­

Flrst
!rlca
arlng
clear
lutioa
hana,
l, the
Ig ail
lng ta

trics,

lases
test-

ution
lords

'e.!/

veral
MrlJust

Imey,

Jpp.ll'

era-

clive

.ltrareneh

fleult
lara-

ad a

:rlng

lause

thls
.t1cn,

lacelturn
ways

le by

ct by

ndenJty.

)8 sa
:010"

nialism, an independence which is obviously unworkable and which, instead of serving the legitimate
aspirations and rights of a people, is on the contrary
designed to thwart these legitimate aspirations and
rights.
92. Thus French colonialism and its agents in Mauritania-I repeat, its agents in Mauritania-resolved at
aIl costs to act against the trend of history and the
will of the people, have finally had recourse to a
series of drastic measures designed to change the
situation and to "conditioIi"-according to the new
techniques of neo-colonialism-the Maurftanians so
that they may accept this new independence whether
they like it or not. The blind repression direcOOd by
the French army, collective sentences, summary
executions, the sentencing to death in absentia of"the
leaders established in Rabat, the expulsion ofhundreds
of campaigners, economic blockades reducing part of
the active population to poverty, curfews, severe restrictions on the movement of persons and property'
the imprisonment or house arrest of nationalist campaigners, the poisoning of the population by concerted
and false propaganda, the establishment of new troop
reinforcements, the abus ive and dishonest exploitation
or rivalries among local personalities-such are the
measures whose authenticity is incontestable, which
the French colonialists have thought it their duty to
adopt in order to deal with the situation. They have
had to use every possible means to stifle a liberation
movement which was On the increase throughout the
country and which had won over every section of the
population.
93. These are no other than the concerted manœuvres
of a plot direcwd against a peoplels right to selfdetermination, a plot designed to perpetuate colonialism under a new form yet retaining some of its
traditional methods, namely, paternalism-and our
African friends know what 1 mean by that-intrigues
and divisions extending beyond Mauritania to operate,
alas, in the African continent itselfandevenwithin the
United Nations. It is the deliberate application of the
so-called policy of "Balkanization", conceived and
drawn up according ta a general plan covering the
whole of the African regions subject to French influence, a plan apparently designed to combat the
powerful movement towards unity and the formation
of large groups which today constitute one of the
most important and most dynamic aspects of world
.policy, especially in Aftica in its progœss,toW8.1'f18
Uberation and unity.
94. In Mauritania itself the status imposed by such
strong means, which, as we know, has led to the
pseudo-independence of Mauritania against the wishes
of the Mauritanians, is condemned to require the
permanent co-operation and the constant support of
the French Government and the French army.
95. At the internationallevel, there is no needfor me
to draw attention to the efforts of every kind that the
French Government is making in order to conceal the
artificial charactet of this status beneath the concept
of independence, exploiting to the utmost its effects on
the opinion of States Members of the United Nations.
96. Is it just, Is it honest, is ft even logical, that the
accomplished fact before which my country has been
placed should place you, in turn, in so equivocal a
situation, in that you are asked to adopt a resolution
inviting a so-called State, illegaUy set up on a part
of our national terrftory, to take a seat in our Organization? We do not think that the General Assembly

513

can agree to lend itself to this particularly dangerous
game. We, for our part, consider that the admission
of a Member State must be hedged about with aU the
necessary safeguards with respect to its representative character as well as to its ability to fulfil, in a
sovereign capacity, the obligations devolving upon
every Member State. We also consider that good
understanding and a spirit of co-operation must guide
the Assembly in its decisions regarding problems of
this type. Indeed, it would be truly deplorable and
prejudicial to the effectiveness of this international
organization to try to impose by a majority the admission of an alleged State which is still the subject
of a serious dispute. We should have preferred no
application for membership to be submitted ta us
unless it was assured in advance of a unanimous vote.
This, at least, is what has happened up to now, with
only one exception.
97. As a Mauritanian personality, whose words 1
shaU quote, said a few months ago:
"The colonial régime, in its declining years, has
finally discovered the existence of Mauritania. It
has promptly found for ft a new vocation, that of a
connecting link between North Africa and West
Africa. This slogan arose from the French 'loicadre'. 1t is, to aU appearances, an alluring formula, the more sa as the new republic dons the
mantle of Islam as though to prote ct itself from
prying eyes. But beyond appearances, behind this
veil of modesty, the most orthodox imperialism is
hastily, and even precipitately, working to establish
a channel for the exploitation of the mineraIs and to
install large military forces to safeguard the inOOgrity of the land, a traditional method that entirely
dis regards the historical evolution of peoples.
"If the so-called Republic of Mauritania had been
a factor of union between Morocco and West Africa,
it would undoubtedly have deserved its new epithet
1 connecting link'. But in the absence of any usefuI
relay in the circuit of relations, One cannot but
think that, within the framework of the new strategy,
Mauritania is both to serve as an outlet to the sea
for the Sahara and to prevent the territorial joining
of these two large parts of the African continent.
This buffer State must keep asunder these two
regions which, however, are called upon by the
force of events to come together and to understand
each other because of their community of interests.
ln order to maintain this role, despite the mystique
of African unity, the French armies in Mauritania
must act the policeman. In order to succeed in this
Machiavellian plan, the tactics adopOOd a:iln at 1solating Mauritania. France, for its part, i8 free to
associate with whomever it wishes in Europe, according to its own interests. As for Mauritania, it
must not enjoy this type of freedom but must live
solely under the protection of the colonizer. It must
completely ignore the juridioal. histo1'ical, religious, linguistic, geographical and e conomic factors
that link it with Moroecoj it must simply say 'no' to.
the latter and Iyes' to the FrenobcolonizinK Pow~r. ~
98. It is therefore clearly apparent thatthe colonizer
intends to turn this territory into a stronghold for its
military ba~es in Africa, designed to keep the independent States in the neighbourhood of this areaunder
a permanent threat, to prevent access to this part of
the African continent and to prevent the sister States
of Africa from coming together along their natural
and historie borders andestablishinggoodneighbourly
relations among themselves.

514

General Assembly - Sixteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

99. In granting Mauritania a purely nominal independence the French Government is aiming at a specUic goal: that of preventing the Mauritanian people
from aohieving their desire for reintegration into the
Moroccan homeland. Yet this Mauritania which is
now being foisted upon us as a so-called independent
State, without prior and valid consultation of its inhabitants, has never, for the past thousand years,
been anything but Moroccan land.
100. It is well to point out, in addition to what I have
just said, that even before regaining national independence Morocco always affirmed, through its nationalist organizations, its legitimate rights over
Mauritania and called unequivocally for the restoration of this territory. From the first moment of our
independence these same rights, further confirmedby
the oft-expressed wish of the Mauritanians themselves, have always been regarded as the foremost of
the national objecth'es to be attained. As it proved
impossible to settle the question ofMorocco's borders,
the creation of a joint Franco-Moroccan commission
was, as we have said, decided upon by mutual agreement immediately after independence, in order to seek
a negotiated solution to the problem. Morocco considered that this commission should, in the first place,
strive to demonstrate the Moroccan character of the
southern territory, taking its legitimate rights into
account. But France ~cted in a unilateral manner, 'lS
though the problem of this region had been settled
once and for all.
101. My delegation cannot over-emphasize the gravity
of this situation resulting from the dismemberment
of our country and you are not unaware of the dangers
to peace and stability in Africa which such a policy
entails.
102'. The latest events in the Congo, and the case of
Katanga in particular, are sad evidence to that effect.
Can the nations which love peace and justice remain
indifferent in the face of the gravity of such dangerous
situations as those brought about by the dismantling
of African territories and the creation of artificial
States such as Katanga and Mauritania? By such action the colonialist Powers are trying to ensure a
privileged position in Africa for their sordid interests. At the same time, they are determine(j to maintain the division imposed upon certain nations b".
force and to oppose national and regional regroupings
.that follow the direction of history.
103. We do not think that the Assembly wants
Morocco in turn to be divided as Germany, Korea,
Laos, Viet-Nam are at present, with the recent addition of the Congo. The tragic and violent events to
Which these divisions have led, menacing the world
with a war of extermination, are still fresh in our
memorielS. Must we add Morocco to the list and
increase· the threat of war already hanging over the
world? Must we wait until the tragedy which has
been enacted in the Congo starts in our territory
before we intervene and try to find belated solutions?
We are convinced that the United Nations has not
given the situation in Mauritania sufficient study
since this matter was first brought before it. As
against our irrefutable arguments, drawn from history, geography and international agreements, this
dossier contains only statements made by certain
ill-informed Governments .and by agents of French
colonialism who claim to represent Mauritania. Be,·
fore it. is too late, before you adopt a decision which
. may tear our country asunder and perhaps even

plunge it into bloodshed, spare the world and the
Morocoan people the sufferings and the tragio consequences of another Katanga.
104. The decision that the Assembly will adopt may
cause our country unquestionable harm. Do not wait
until this comes about before trying to find a remedy.
That remedy can only consist in the restitution of
Morocco's legitimate rights and the preservation of
my country's unity, sovereignty and integrity. We are
not, we cannot be, against the admission of new Membel' States to the United Nations. Our recent history
bears testimony to the solidarity and support that we
have always extended to peoples struggling for thE:lir
liberation and independence. I drew attention to this
two days ago, before the Security Council [9'ilst
meeting], and I cited examples in support of it. Many
a time, from this very rostrum, have we acclaimed
and welcomed with joy the admission ofAfrican States
that have recently attained independence. We have
just proved it once again by supporting the admission
of the Mongolian People's Republic. The reason we
are today opposing the admission of the so-called
Republic of Mauritania is that this is a puppet State
artificially created by colonialism to the detriment
of part of our national territory. Mauritania is a
province of Morocco and its inhabitants are of their
own will already represented in the United Nations
by the Moroccan delegation present here.
105. That is why, anxious to defend its inalienable
and sacred rights, which coincide with the oft-expl'essed will of the people concerned, and anxious
also to seek, in justice and peace, a solution to this
dispute, the Government of His Majesty the King of
Morocco, acting on behalf of a people torn asunder
and deeply affected by this grave injustice committed
against it, is asking you, through me, not to adopt the
draft resolution submitted to you [A/L.358 and Add.!]
concerning the admission of the so-called Republic of
Mauritania as a Member of the United Nations, because this candidacy does not meet the conditions of
our Charter, the candidate is not a State as defined
by international law but is a territory which is part
of Morocco, and, lastly, because its population has
expressed the desire to remain united with the mother
country.
106. Mr. BA (Mali) (translated from French): The
question of the admission of Mauritania to the United
Nations confronts us with one of the exasperating
problems of decolonization. Historically and ethnically, Moroccans and Mauritanians ~re brothers. Yet
today colonialism, still living up to its reputation,
sets them against each other by involving them in a
legal imbroglio which was apparently brought to a
close at the last Security Council meeting.
107. French colonialism has accustomed us to these
artificial divisions, prompted by the necessities of
the direct administration it practised in the territories
under its domination.
108. In the Security Council, the reprGsentative of
the Ivory Coast cited the example of Upper Volta,
which was carved UP more than once among the Ivory
Coast, Niger and the French Sudan (now Mali).
.
109. We know that it was only. in 1948 that Upper
Volta, our sister country, regained its territorial
unity.
.
110. We could cite several examples of partitioning,
not only in· the former colonies but within them, by
divisions carried out at the level of "cercles" an

cantons, for the s
in the way of the
African inhabitant.
liberation movemen
111. 1 do not wis
historical aspects
so brUliantly expou
from Morooco. We
pages from the wO]
historians and fro
d'Afrique noire (1·
thesis. We could ha
by Morocco in this
designation of cadi
court, missions sel
inhabitants of the
invader, etc. This
by the course of t
Mauritania, for th
the French milita
revolt of the Mau
inspiration and ad
these warrior tribe
the Shereefian Sulta
112. We shall not
torical consideratio
cry raised last yea
of French imperiali
undel'stand the ste'
Morocco, the suppo
an Arab' State .
113. To this argu
racists, that we fir
above ethnic barrie
selves within tribal
virus with which the
Iated Africa; and las
horse for some, doe
nothing to fear fro

114. We take this
.perialist myth whic
North Africa and Afr
partisans of African
be able to dispel th
worn-out watchwords
tion. The fact that M
and we were kindly
Council on 25 Octo
with Morocco, with
Charter that have co
in opposition to im
colonialism. But ova
charter, Mali is at 0
or not affiliated to
struggle pgainst the
and to practice, with
real decolonization.
need to "blush" at
alliance with so res
has gained repute in
can peoples for the
yoke, although our s
prompt our defence 0

115. But there a.re
sUbjectivA nature, alt
thele are better thi
oblem, than the j

1043rd meeting - 17 October 1961
cantons, for the sole purpose of plaoing obstacles
in the way of the regional or nationa~ unity of the
Afl'ican inhabitants and the unity of the national
liberation movement in Afrioa.
111. I do not wish to enlarge on the juridical and
Mstorioal aspects of this question, whioh have been
so brUliantly expounded by my colleague and friend
from Morooco. We could have quoted unequivooal
pages from the works of Arab, and above all French
historians and from the files of the Institut francais
d'Afrique noire (IFAN) iri support of the Morocl}~n
thesis. We could have referred tCJ acts of sovereignty
by Morocco in this region: appointment of offioials,
designation of cadis, deputations to the Shereefian
court, missions sent by the central authority to the
inhabitants of the region, resistance against the
invader, etc. This is also eloquently demonstrated
by the course of the French military occupation of
Mauritania, for throughout the military campaigns
the French military leaders recognized that the
revolt of the Mauritanian tribes was of Moroccan
inspiration and admitted that most of the chiefs of
these warrior tribes proclaimed their allegiance to
the Shereefian Sultan of Morocco.
112. We shall not dwell on these juridical and historical considerations. We have Ilot forgotten the outcry raised last year by the States ranged on the side
of French imperialism, which said that they failed to
undel'stand the steadfast support Mali was giving
Morocco, the support of a State of Black Africa for
an Arab' State.
113. To this argument we reply that we are not

racists, that we firmly believe in the unity of Africa
above ethnic barriers, that we refuse to confine ourselves within tribalism, which is the most harmful
virus with which the various colonialisms have inoculated Africa; and lastly, that pan-Arabism, a stalkinghorse for some, does not frighten us becaul3e we have
nothing to fear from its anti-imperialistic action.
114. We take this opportunity to denounce the imperialist myth which consif:s ill splitting Africa mto
North Africa and Africa south of the Sahara. The true
partisans of African unity will by their united action
be able to dispel the mystification created by these
worn-out watchwords and slogans of colonialist reaction. The fact that Mali is participating in this debateand we were kindly reminded of this in the Seclirity
Council on 25 October 1961-is due to its solidarity
with Morocco, with all the States of the Casablanca
Charter that have come together on a single platform
in opposition to imperialism, colonialism and neocol\>nialism. But over and above any written or tacit
charter, Mali is at onewithallAfricanStates, whether
or not affiliated to a group, that have resolved to
struggle f1gainst the vestiges of the colonial system
and to practioe, without bargaining or compromise, a
real decolonization. We a:re among those who do not
need to "blush" at their alliances, particularly an
alliance with so respectable a State as Morocco, which
has gained repute in the general struggle of the African peoples for tbeir libe;ration. from the colonial
yol(e, although our solidarity alone would suffice to
prompt our defence of the Moroccan casEl.
115. .But there are better arguments than those of a,
subjective nature, although we have not employed themj
thele are better things, in. the face of this thorny
oblem, than the juridicial exposition that might

515

have been made before the Security Council took its
grave decisions of 25 October. The decisive, irrefutable arguments are however, inherent in the
de facto situation before which we have been placed
by the French colonialists, who, by successive military, political and legal manreuvres during the period
from 1904 to the present, by-passing the Act of
AIgeciras, have ended by diViding two regions which,
geographically and historically. are but one, setting
them against each other and finally crystallizing them
in the form of States which appear to be foreign to
each other.
116. Colonization has accustomed us to transformations and disfigurements of this type. III other words,
it did not hesitate to present to us King Mohamed V,
the Moroccan national hero, as an agitator, a troubleJX.aker whose royal origins went back only as far as
Lyautey-only to recognize him with a great deal of
stir, after his exile, the descendant of a l'oyalline
whose beginnings w~:.."~ lost in the mists of time.
117. For those who uphold, as a point of law in matters of de colonization, the maintenance of the frontiers
artificially established by the last of the colonizers,
we would draw attention to the scope and the Machiavellian nature of the latest manoouvre, namely the
idea of a partition plan for Algeria put forward by the
French Governmant in order to calm the war-mongering frenzy of the ultra-colonialists. Are these sanctimonious persons prepared, after the Victory of the
Algerian revolution, to support the legitimacy of a
partition carried out before our eyes on the basis of
arguments that have not even the mel'it of being
military or political alld that stem from pure
aberration?
118. Mali, as is well known, has bonds of all sorts,
historical, geographical and emotional, with its neighbour Mauritania, to which, scarcely twenty years ago,
a good piece of the former French Sudan, now the
Republic of Mali, was arbitrarily attached by decree
of the Governor-General of formal' French West
Africa. It comprised the "cercles" Nlima, Oualata
and Timbedraj existing maps bear this out.
119. This does not mean that Mali is contemplating
a crusade to recover these pieces C\fMalian territory.
Mali even recognized Mauritania last November and
it might surprise some people to see us giving our
full support to Morocco today. The solidarity inherent
in the Casablanca Charter is not the only reason for
this. The other reason is a fundamental one: namely
that for the past few months the inhabitants of the
frontier regions and the Government of Mali have
found Mauritania to be a war!i1(e country. The Mauritanians have carried out various incurSions, especially
in the ragions of Nara and Nioro, and have made
murderous raids on a number of Malian villages;
these raids, which recall the unhappy period of anarchy
that followed the colonial conqu~st have left many
dead and wounded, with children taken off as hostages, .
foodstuffs stolen and livestock seized. A single one of
these raids caused some sixteen deaths in a small
Village of Mali, attacked by surprise while its inhabitantssls.pt.
120. The Malian authorities of these regions report
that the· bandits who were responsible for these outrages werearttled with improved weapons and with
heavily armed cross-country vehicles in which were
leaders whose Moorish' disguise and desert veils
m-concealed their European features.

516

General Assembly - Sixteenth session - Plenary Meetings

121. We have thus learn.ad to our cost that Mauritania
is not a peace-loving State, that it iE> still armed and
. offic~red by foreign troops, that this mUital'y establishment has been considerably increased since the
signing of agreements between Mauritania and its
fOt'mer metropolitan Power and that Mauritania is a
potential base for aggression against the Republic of
Mali and perhaps against other African States.
122. This is the language of facts. It is more eloquent
than all the pseudo-juridical quibbles advanced to
justify the admission of Mauritania to the United
Nations.
123. For our part, basing ourselves on the facts that
we have touched upon and that are known to the Mauritanian authorities-which have had occasion to discuss
them wit.h the Government of Mali-it is our contention
that Mauritania does not meet at least one of the fundamental criteria set forth in Article 4 ofthe Charter,
namely that it is not a peace-loving State.
124. This is why my delegation will finditseJfoblig;ed
not to give its support to Mauritania for its admission
to the United Nations.
Mr. Ros$ides (Cyprus). Vice-President. took the
Chair,

Mt". Slim (Tunisia) resumed the Chair.

125. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): My delegation stated its
position on this question during the fifteenth ses~ion
of tho General Assembly, and we do not intend to
reiterate in any detail the views which we then expressed in the First Committee p.1l5th and 1118th]
as well as in the Assembly [1028th meeting]. It will
suffice here to emphasize once again fuat what is at
issue is not the independence of Mauritania. 'There
can be no difference o~ opinion about the right of the
Mauritanian people to free themselves from the
shackles of foreign domination. Iraq has always supported LIte liberation movements in,A:ri9a and Asia,
and ou;r record in this respect is well known in the
United Nations. The problem is not whether Mauritania is entitled to independence but how this independence should be achieved. Will the people of
Mauritania attain independence through the partiti"ln
and mutilation of the homeland of which they have
always formed an integral rart, or will they achieve
independence and enjoy the blessings of liberty by
reunification with their fellow compatriots in the
independent State of Morocco?
126. The admission of Mauritania to membership in
the United Nations would in effect constitute international endorsement for the illegalpartitionofMQrocco\
and the violation of its territorial integrity. It is 01.l1'
view that the admission of Mauritania to the United
Nations would bestow upon this partition a shadow of
legality and perpetuate the fait accompli brought about
by imperialism when it imposed its alien rule on the
Moroccan people more than half a century ago.
127. In the larger ()ontext of world affairs, the question of Mauritania provides yet another example of
the pattern which has Mcome all too clear and which
has been repeated in :v.lany parts of the world. The
imperialist Powers se'Jk to mainw.in their influence
and consolidate their rule over co lonial territories
under a new guise and a new formula, that of shadowy
and ficCtious independence.
128. This ia especially apparent in areas which are
endowed with rich natural resources. This method of
of a country and g:ranting it
a rich

false independence has been followed in Katanga with
the disastrous results of which we are all aware, and
also in Kuwait, where independence was proclaimed
in order to maintain colonial influence and protect
foreign economic and financial interests. If it is oil
in Kuwait and cooper in Katanga, it is iron ore in
Maut'itania. What possible reason is thel.'etoproclailn
this large desert area, with its sparse popUlation,
the majority of whom are nomadic tribes, except the
desire to protect French vested economic interests?
The exploitation of these rich iron ore depo<"its is of
considerable ecollomic value for French and other
foreign financial interests-as is the case, though to
a much greater degree, with the vast British oil
interests in Kuwait and the Belgian mining interests
in Katanga. The case of Mauritania gives further
proof of a tendency which is becoming increasingly
prevalent, that of the refusal of the imperialist
Powers to :relinquish their EJconomic interests even
after they have relinquished or pretended to relinquish their direct politiosl control.
129. It is against this baokground that we oppose the
application . of Mauri~nia for membership in the
United Nations.
130. For the Mauritanian people, who are CUlturally
and histol'J:cally a part of the Arab nation, we have
nothing but brotherly love, ann we hope that they will
realize where their true interests lie. Their destiny
is with us, with the Arab world, whose language they
speak, whose spiritual values they share and whose
culture they themselves have enriched by their great
contributions in the fields of theology and literature.
The sch<:>lars and theologians of Shainquit-the Arab
name for Mauritania-have a reputation for excellence
and devotion to principle, known through the Al'ab
nation.
131. Is it not in the intere~ts of the people of MauritaDia that they should rejoin their brethren in Morocco
instead of maintaining a separate and uncertain existence which will always be subjeot to the whims of a
colonial Power which only recently committed aggression against the people of Tunisia and for seven long
years has desparately tried to stem the tide of
Algerian freedom? Can the Mauritanian people have
confidence in a future in which they will always be
at the mercy of a colonial P,)wer with such a disastrous record, at whose hands the peoples ofAlgeria,
Tunisia and Morocoo, who together with the inhabitants
of Mauritania make up the grand Arab Maghreb, have
suffered so much and for sa long?
132. It is for all these reasons that 'lly Government
has instructed me to state before the Assembly that
Iraq will be unable to support the admission of Mauritania to the United Nations.
Mr. Slim (Tunisi.a) resw:ned the Cbair.

133. Mr. WIRJOPRANOTO (Indonesia): I wish to explain briefly the vote which will be cast by my delegation on this item concerning the admission of the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania to the United Nations.
134. As the Assembly is well aware, we who have
fought for our own natiOlllal independence have always
welcomed whole-heartedly the admission to the United
Nations of newly independent nations. We have done
so with a feeling of great joy in the wave of liberation
sweeping across Asia and Africa and with satisfaction
because of the greater l!ltrength and effectiveness
which this int.arnational Or,ganization gains with every
new Membe~', as it moves closer to the full realization of the principle of universality.

135. However,
Mauritania, ther
dispute which w
United Nations 1
constructive reo
the General Ass
dispute. Regrett
steps been take
remove the disp
why my delegati
136. Permit m
to express our
present fissure
speedily and pe
of Africa, which
suffering from
worse, of coloni
to offer to pea
Nations itself w
a spirit of mutua
137. It is in the
delegation welco
tania as a new M
convinced that 0
ending of imper
manifestations w
138. Mr. ZABA
wishes to expre
mission of Maur
Nr.tions.
I

139. The opinio

on the principle
ernments-of no
of national unity,
inject hate and
nation by taking
them. The Yem
controversy over
imperialism, wo
national unity.
Yemen, deeply:l:'
. prevented a selu
see no differenoe
from Morooco
from the Congo.
140. We fully s
legitimate desire
two parts of one
141. Mr. LOU'r
from French):
menta, particular
Committee [1116t
General Assembl
25 October 1961
ing], made perfec
the problem of M
United Nations.
142. I do not bel
arguments that w
explain to you th
about to cast.
143. The proble
nialism and its p
countries over w
are not unaware
with France conc
overnment raise

-

.1043rd meeting - 17 October 1961

135. However, in case of the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania, there still looms over it the cloud of a
dispute which was a matter of consideration by the
United Nations last year. At that time we urged that
oonstructive :recommendations should be adopted by
the General Assembly for a peaceful solution to this
dispute. Regrettably, this was not done, nor have
steps been taken in the past year to find the way to
remove the dispute which continues to exist. Tllat is
why my delegation will abstain from the vote.
136. Permit me, however, to take this opportunity
to express our sincere and urgent hope that the
present fissure between African brothers will be
speedily and peacefully closed, both in the interest
of Africa, which already has suffered and indeed is
suffering from the lagacies and vestiges, and even
worse, of colonialism-an African which has so much
to offer to peace-and in the interest of the United
Nations itself which, as perhaps never before, needs
a spirit of mutual understanding and co-operation.
137. It is in the light of this hope that the Indonesian
delegation welcomes the Islamic Republic of Mauritania as a new Member of the United Nations. We are
oonvinced that our common struggle for the speedy
ending of imperialism and colonia~ism in all of its
manifestations will be successful.
138. Mr. ZABARAH (Yemen): The Yemen delegation
wishes to express its view on the question of the admission of Mauritania to membership in the United
Nctions.
I

139. The opinion of the Yemen Government is based
on the principle-shared by all Asian and African Governments-of non-partition of states, on the support
of national unity, and on opposition to any attempts to
inject hate and disturbance among the people of one
nation by taking measures to divide and separate
them. The Yemen (iovernment is hopeful that the
controversy over Mauritania, which was created by
imperialism, would have been solved by establishing
national unity. His Majesty the Imam, the King of
Yemen, deeply regrets that imperialist methods have
. prevented a sclution to this question internally. We
see no differenoe between the separation of Mauritania
from Morocco and the attempt to separate Katanga
from the Congo.
140. We fUlly support the rights of Morocco and its
legitimate desire to achieve complete unity between
two parts of one nation.
141. Mr. LOU'rFI (United Arab Republic) (translated
from French): My delegation, in its various statements, particularly on 25 November 1960 in the'First
Committee [1116th meeting], on 19 April 1961 in the
General Assembly 1989th plenary meeting] and on
25 October 1961 in the Security Council [971st meet-ing], made perfectly clflar its position with regall'd to
the problem of Mauritania and its admission to the
United Nations.
142. I do not believe it useful to recall in detail the:
arguments that we advanced,. but I may be aliowerI to
. explain to you the reasons for the vote which we are
about to cast.
.'
143.'rhe problem of Mauritania results from colo..
nialism and its policy of. dividing and partitioning the
Countries over which it exercised its authority. You
are not unaware that, as soon as negotiations opened
with Franoe concerning independence, the Moroccan
overnment raised in the olearest terms the problem

517

of Morocco's borders. The two parties agreed to
come together in a joint commission in order to find
a solution to this problem. However, the F!'ench Government rejected the Moroccan claims, stating, in a
note dated 20 November 1960, that it i~tended to exclude from the discussion those territories under the
administration of France and of the states Members
of the community.
144. Morocco protested to France each time the
French Government took any action tending to impair
the integrity of Moroccan territory or committing the
future of Mauritanian territory. Morocco could not
accept a partitioning of its national territory, nor
could it accept being deprived of having its say on the
future of Mauritania.
145. Moreover, the population of Mauritania was not
able to take a clear and specific decision as to its
future. In the referendum of 28 September 1958 where~
by the Mauritanians were consulted regl\rding their
future, the question of determining whether or not
they intended to be united with Morocco was avoided.
146. I do not wish to dwell on these questions, which
were raised by the representative of Morocco in his
briHiant interventions in the Security Council and,
today in the Assembly.
147. My delegation supports the Moroccan point of
view, so eloquently expressed. Moreover, the Arab
States that met at Chtaura in 1960 adopted the same
position and supported the point of view of Morocco.
The same positic.n was taken by the countries which
met at Casablanca.
148. For all these reasons, and as we stated in the
Security Council, we cannot support the request for
admission submitted today to the Assembly.
149. Mr. NINCIC (yugoslavia): As this Assembly is
no doubt aware, my country has consistently striven
for the universality of the United Nations. We have,
as is also known, supported the efforts of the peoples
of the former French Union towards their independence and have welcomed with gen\.line gratification
their entry into this Organization. However, for reasons which we stated at the time when the question of
Mauritania was' being discussed at our last session
and which give the request for admission now being
considered certain quite particular features, we are
unable to lend our support to the draft resolution
[A/L.358 and Add.1].
150. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I come to this :r.ostrum to make a few observations on the question of
the admission of Mauritania to the United Nations.
Ever since the admission of Jordan to this Organization my country has always been in favour of the
universality of membership of the United Nations.
We shall continue to work for and to, support that
principle. It is our view, however. that the United
Nations, by considering the admission to full membership of part of another legally constituted Member
State, exceeds its !'luthority ~
151. M~uritania is an integral part of Morocco.
Throughout its history Morocco has always been a
national entity based on a common linguistic, religious and cultural heritage, and With common ideals,
values and aspirations. We need not at this sta~
dwell on an explanation of these facts, for they were
discussed and presented by the Moroccan and other
delegations, inclUding our own, during the last session
of the General Assembly. They were also very ably,

-_ ............. ,""........................ -- ...
518

General Assembly - Sixteenth Session _. PlenaJ:Y Meetings

-:.._--~-_._-------

brilliantly and convincingly presented this afternoon
a great deal of affection a.'1d admiration. Their liberty
by the leader of the Morocca."1 delegation. Jordan enis our liberty. Their freedom is a continuation of our
dorses the views of Morocco on this matter, and so
freedom. But the question here raises two major
did the Foreign Ministers of the Arab States who met
aspects. First, there is the question of the territorial
at Chtaura, in Lebanon, in August 1960.
integrity of a Member State of the United Nations. We
know that Mauritania is part and parcel of Morocco.
152. Jordan, a country which has deep brotherly ties
Its people are part and parcel of Morocco. Even the
with the rest of the Arab homeland, deplores any disname "Mauritania" has been coined by the French; it
memberment, partition or division of Arab soil. We
is
a French coinage. Mauritania is a name that has
shall continue to work for the complete unity of the
never been known in history or in geography; it was
Arab homeland, and we shall always support the
simply manufactured by France.
sovereignty, national unity and territorial integ!'ity
of the sister Arab State of Morocco. We are guided
157. Therefore, we are not against the cause of
in all our endeavours by the firm belief that the uni'ty
liberty in its very rudiments. But we cannot accept,
of Morocoo serves the purposes of the United Nations
under the guise of membership of the United Nations,
Charter, is conducive to peace and is in the interests
under the banner of independence and liberty, the
of the Arab nation. The principle of political indeadmission of a Member in order to attack the terripendence and territorial integrity of a Member State
torial integrity of a State Member of this Organization.
is one which we are all pledged to respect and safe158. The second dangerous aspect is the 1- 'sence of
guard. Since Mauritania is -in reality part of an6ther
France in Mauritania. Had France not bee. present
Member State my delegation cannot support the rein
Mauritania and had there been a free plebiscite for
quest for its admission to the United Nations.
the people of Mauritania, we would have accepted the
153. Mr. SHUKAIRY (Saudi Arabia): I rise not to
will of the people of Mauritania either for unity with
state a case, nor to substantiate it. Our friend, the
Morocco or for separation from Morocco and indeleader of the Moroccan delegation, has stated and
pendence as a sovereign State entitled to become a
substantiated the case with a great deal of elucidaMember of the United Nations. But the presence of
tion and forceful argumentation, with ability, with
France has not allowed a free plebiscite for the population of Mauritania.
eloquence and with conviction. There is little to
say. I rise simply to dispel misinterpretations or
159. There is not only a political presence; there is
misunderstandings.
also a military presence-military bases, French
154. Here in the United Nations we are not against
barre.cks, French soldiers, French administrators,
liberty or freedom. We, the Arab peoples, exist in the
and what not. This has not afforded a free expression
United Nations through our status as Members of this
on the part of ~he population of Mauritania. It is beOrganization, on the strength of liberty and freedom.
cause of these two d'lngerous aspects that the Arab
We cannot be against ourselves, nor can we standin
League, the supreme organ for the co-ordination of
any manner against liberty and freedom. Our modern
Arab policies, has decided that Mauritania is not a
history is only a record of the fight in support of
distinct and separate entity and that it forms part
liberty and freedom.
and,parcel of the State of Morocco. Secondly, the Arab
League decides every case on its merits.
155. Morocco, the complainant in this case, sits with
a great deal of honour and admiration here in this
160. For the question of Mauritania the Arab League
Organization in fruition of its struggle against France
decided against distinctness of entity. For Kuwait it
for libeJ;'ty. Tunisia too, in its struggle against France,
decided on full independence and Kuwait has become a
has achieved its independence, and one ~f its great
full-fledged member of the Arab League. Following
sons now has become an international figure to prethis line of reasoning, the Arab League has de'1ided
side over our deliberations. Libya also, another Arab
in favour of the reunion, I would say the restoration
state represented here in this Organization, fought
of unity, between Mauritania and Morocco. We do not
Italy for its independence. Egypt, now the United Arab
vote against independence; rather our vote is cast for
Republic, fought the British for its independence.
unity.
Y~men fought the ottoman Empire for its independ161. Mr. IQBAL (Pakistan): This great Organization
ence. Syria and Lebanon gallantly and bravely fought
was designed to become truly representative of all
the French for their independence. Iraq, also, fought
mankind. How else could it hope to achieve the ends
for its independence, and so there are many movements of liberation in the Arab world to liquidate all '\ and purposes for which it was cr.eated and become a
centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the
vestiges of imperialism and colonialism in the Arab
attainment of those common ends. We are happy to
homeland. We cannot stand against liberty and indefind that it is steadily advancing toward!3 universality,
pendencebecause we exist through liiJerty and indethough we are also troubled by the feeling that large
pendence, and that is our record. Not only for oursegments of mankind still remain unrepreselltedhere.
selves, but for the people of the whole world, wherever the cause of liberty and independence has
162. However, my delegation will abstain from ()ast~
arisen-in Africa or anywhere-we have stood in
ing an affirmative vote in support of the admission of
support of that cause, even in the case of those terriMauritania
to membership in the United Nations. It is
tories which did not. fire one single bullet for their
not
because
we ourselves are in any doubt regarding
freedom and liberty. And we are not. against the
1.1I)th the right and responsibility ofpeace-loving States
population of Mauritani~.
to assume the obligations contained in the United Nations Charter, but because,unfortunately, there ap156. The population of Mauritania are our brethren;
they are our kith and kin. W.e hold them in a great
pears to be ,some difference among the Arab States
deal of admiration and affection. Mauritania was a
regarding the admission of Mauritania to membership
in the United Nati()ns. Consistent with the policy of
centre of Arab culture and Islamic civilization. They
our Government that with regard to matters of interare part and parcel of the Arab world inasmuch as
Arab differences we would not take sides, we have to
they are part and parcel of Morocco. We hold them in

refrain from
tania's admi
16~. Mr. H
gat lon, when
the United N
tions of any
dom. We did
have suppor
time laid cl
Having faile
see that Mol'
all the pain
obstruct the
on the ground
164. In the
no rights tha
spect. There
nor were th
tribe or one
disregard of
sisters were
posed to m
powers. Mu
those bounda
time and fo
states of Afri
165. What c
be engendere
against each
changed or
the African
situation. A
the case of t
We know that
unilaterally t
have expecte
force of arm
such example
President Na
attitude he ad
therefore, fo
the example 0
166. The Ge
lution calling

1514 (XV)]. A

. ously for this
have France
the granting 0
part of its co
the motives 0
question its
territories, b
mouth. On th
Morocco, whi
for an end to
i )lementatio
pendence to
claims. We c
right for Syr~
must also be
pendent of Mo
167. Some ha
somecountrie
it is unjust fo
another State
ties of· friend
nomically by
it lllUst be th
Q\vn security,

:f

1'

r

1

e

,

e

t

s

3

1043rd meeting - 17 October 1961
refrain from casting our vote in support of Mauritania I s admission.
16~. Mr. Henry Ford COOPER (Liberia): My delegat lon, when there were only a few African states in
the United Nations, supported vigorously the aspirations of any colonial people to independence and freedom. We did this in the case of Morocco and would
have supported it vigorously had Morocco at that
time laid claim to the country known as Mauritania.
Having failed to do this, it therefore grieves us to
see that Morocco, an African State which has known
all the pains of colonial occupation, now seeks to
obstruct the independence of another African State
on the ground of territorial claims.
164. In the rape and partition of Africa there were
no rights that the colonial Powers felt bound to respect. Therefore, the tribal rights were not observed,
nor were the boundaries that separated them; one
tribe or one people were separated from another in
disregard of their wishes. We know that brothers and
sisters were separated mutually by boundaries imposed to meet the requirements of the colonial
powers. Much as we deplore those arbitrary acts,
those boundaries have become fixed after a period of
time and form all boundaries of the independent
states of Africa.
165. What chaos, what confusion, what hatred could
be engendered by each of the new African countries
against each other were those boundaries to be
changed or readjusted. Happily for the majority of
the African States, they have, come to realize the
situation. A better example could not be found than
the case of the voluntary union of Egypt and Syria.
We know that scarcely after a period of a year Syria
unilaterally terminated such a union. Many would
have expected the Egyptian Government to resort to
force of arms to restore the union; history has many
such examples. But we must congratulate and admire
President Nasser for the broad and statesman-like
attitude he adopted in this situation. It would be wise,
therefore, for many other A,fricanStates to follow
the example of President Nasser.
166. The General Assembly recently adopted a resolution calling for the end of colonialism [resolution
1514 (XV)]. All the African States campaigned vigor. ously for this resolution and supported it. Here we
have France today complying with that resolution by
the granting of independence to Mauritania which wa&
part of its colonial possessions. Some may question
the motives of France in this regard. We might also
question its motives with regard to other African
territories, but one does not look a gift horse in the
mouth. On the other hand we have a State, such as
Morocco, which has supported the resolution calling
for an end to dependent territories, objecting to the
i )lementation of this resolution which grants independence to Mauritania on the grounds of territorial
claims. We cannot have double standards. If it was
right for Syr~a to asJ,t to be separated from Egypt, it
must also be right for Mauritltnia to ask to be independent of Morocco.
167. Some have contended tHat the independence of
some countries is fictitious. It is an assumption, and
it is unjust for any state to query the ind(~endence of
another state on the ground that that State has certain
ties of' friendship With another State or is bound eco~omically, by that State. Each State has its rights and
it must be the sole jUdge of its own independence, its
mv:n security, and its own happiness.
I

319

168. The Conference of the Heads of Independent
African and Malagasy States, meeting in Monrovia
from 8 to 12 May 1961, fully supported the independence of Mauritania. May I be permitted to read an
extract from the records of that Conferenoe~
"The Conference is convinced that the Republic
of Mauritania possesses all the qualifications for
membership, and looks with concern upon any
attempt to prohibit the Republic from association
into that body by the exercise of a vote, or to link
its admittance to other issues.
"This Conference feels that the GeneralAssembly
truly represents all the Members of this interRational body, and as SUCh, its wishes should be
resp.ected.
"In the name of the leaders of twenty Independent
African States representing about 120 million African people, I therefore in the name and by ,the directive of the Conference call upon the Security
Council at its present sitting to approve the meD:l:bership of this Independsnt African Republic. lI
My advice to my fellow Africans, especially those
that live in African States, is to let sleeping dogs lie,
especially if we want to ltave in Africa peace and
happiness. Otherwi.se Africa will become another
Europe whose soil has been drenched by the blood of
its sons owing to the aspirations and ambitions of
over-zealous leaders.
169. Mr. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated. from Russian): The Soviet delegation con~
siders it necessary to state its position on the question of the admission of Mauritania to membership in
the United Nations.
170. Having succeeded, with the support of other
peoples, in abolishing French colonial administration
on its territory, the people of Mauritania has made
what contribution it could to the beneral stru."o-gle
against the colonizers and taken the first step towards
liberating itself from the colonial yok,e.
171. We consider however that, even in those cases
where the national independence offered to colonies
is by no means complete, it still releases national
forces and brings the former colonies nearer, to
genuine .independence. This proc,ess is undoubtedly
taking place in Mauritani~, ,although it is far from
its termination.
172. At the same time, in discussing the question of
MauritaniaI s admission to membership in the United
Nations! we cannot fail to take into acoount a number
of complicating factors, more especially the fact that
the proclamation of Mauritania's independence has
met with objections on the part of the State of Morocco,
which has declared that historically, economically
and juridically Mauritania is-· an integral part, of
Moroccan territory. It is well known that thE.'i~ew
thus taken by Morocco was supported by ~ whole
a,eries qf other States, including African Stateswhich,
during the discussion of the Moroccanproble:m at the
fifteenth session of the United Nations General Assembly, .' described' the granting of independence to
Mauritania as a political manreuvre on the part of
colonial forces in, France, undertaken by them for the
obvious, purpose of retaining their position in Mauritania, dismembering the territories of the, African
States and setting certain African States against
others.
-

•~-c~~~~~,.~,~~~

_

.....

....:..4::.~:'=:.A:ii":.~';.....;·~.-lii,ill'.'''''.-·aiiil·iiii!iiiiiiiiii_iiiiiiiii--ii_iii-ii_ _..

520

--.IIlII••

....
iiiii~iii'·;,,;;.'·- . .

Genera l Assem bly - Sixteenth Sessio n - Plenar y Meetings
173. The Soviet Union, which pays close attentio n to
whatev er the decisio n of the Genera l Assem bly may
the voice of the people s and States born in the strugg le
be, the future developments will be only-a nd we rewith colonia lism, cannot overlo okal1t hesesta tement s,
peat: only-i n the interes ts of the people of Mauritania.
which have been confirm ed by mauy delega tions atthe
Assem bly's presen t meeting.
183. Mr. MAKA (Guinea) (transl ated from French).
174. In view of all this, the Soviet delegation will be
In Januar y 1961. at Casabl anca, some Africa n heads
une.ble to vote for Maurit ania's admiss ion to memof State, whose nationa lism and indefatigable efforts
bershi p in the United Nations and wili, in the vote,
to bring about the total emancipation of the African
abstain .
continent are univer sally recogn ized, consid ered the
Maurit anian proble m, and, at the close of their delib175. The PRESIDENT (transl ated from French ): I
eration s, adopted an import ant resolut ion providing
give the floor to the represe ntative of Upper Volta,
among other things, as follows:
who wishes to exerci se his right of reply.
'
"Consi
dering
the colonia list intrigu es aimed at
176. Mr. BALIMA (Upper Volta) (transl ated from
dividing the territo ries of the Africa n States in
French ): The rep!'es entativ e of Morocco, in the stateorder to weaken them,
ment which he made earlier commi tted some seriou s
errors which I should like to point out. He implied,
"C onSiderinff that, in genera l, the increa se in the
in fact, that my countr y was a puppet becaus e it was
numbe r of artVic ial Sta.tes in Africa is a permanent
a memb er of the French Community, and that it even
threat to the securit y of the Africa n Continent, and,
favour ed the establi shmen t .of bases on its territo ry.
at the same time, a strengt hening of the forces of
I wish to state before all the delega tions here assem imperi alism,
bled that this is comple tely false.
"Consi dering that the objecti ve aimed at by
177. First of all, my country , united behind its
France in MaUJ'itania is the economic exploitation
Presid ent, has very clea:dy stated that there will be, •
and strateg ic use of this area, particu larly against
in the Upper Volta, neithe r Russia n militar y bases,
the Africa n countr ies, as well as the maintenance
hor French militar y bases, nor Ameri can militar y
of artific ial barrie rs in Africa ,
bases, nor British militar y bases, nor any other
"Consi dering that the defence of the unity and
militar y bases. I think that some referen ce was made
territo rial integri ty of all Africa n States is, at the
here to the draft amend ment [A/C.1 /L.293 /Add.1 ], in
samf:l time, the defence of the freedo m of Africa,
which the name of Upper VoUa appear s. But this is
an error which has alread y been the SUbject of a
"Solem nly d€!nounces and condemns all forms of
corrige ndum and it might be very useful for you to
econom ic, politic al and militar y exploitation in
consul t that document [A/C.1 /L.293 /Add.1 /Corr.l ].
Africa ;
178. The represe ntative of Morocco also saidtha twe
"Decla res its determ ination to oppose, by all
were a membe r countr y of the French Community. I
possib le means , every attemp t to partitio n and
wish to declar e, honest ly and clearly , that we are .no
create satelli te states in certain parts of the. Afrienemie s of France . We had to choose between being
can Continent;
,
false brothe rs of the French or true friends of France ,
"Appro ves any action taken by Morocco onMau riand my country did not hesitat e. We have very friendl y
tania for the restitu tion of its legitim ate rights. "
ties with France , but we are absolu tely not membe rs
of the French Community. We ceased to be membe rs
184. These are the consid eration s underlying the
of the French Community before coming here, and
solidar ity which the Government of the Republic of
even before we procla imed our independence.
Guinea desired to expres s to the Moroc can Government in this grave dispute which, since independence,
179. I have come to this rostrum simply in order to
has set it agains t French colonia lism alone, and which
expres s our contention that every truly independent
continues to do so. These are the reason s that will
state should be one of us here, and that this is why
determ ine our delega tion's negative vote on the draft
we believe that Maurit ania should join us.
resolut ion' submit ted for consid eration by the General
180. Mr. PAZHWAK (Afghanistan): At the fifteenth
Assem bly.
session the delegat~"on of Morocco reques ted the in185. The PRESIDENT (transl ated from French): I
clusion of an item regard ing Maurit ania in the agenda
give the floor to the represe ntative of the Ivory Coast,
[A/4445 and Add.1]. The Genera l Assem bly recogn ized
the existen ce of a dispute and allowed the item to be , in exerci se of his right of reply.
discus sed. However, the questio n of the admiss ion of
186. Mr. USHER (Ivory Coast) (transl ated from
Maurit ania is now before the Genera l Assem bly beFrench ): I am interve ning now in this debate because
fore the United Nations took any of the norma l action
my countr y has been mentioned twice. I must say
in interna tional cases like this dispute .
that the two quotations made were taken out of context from the statem ent I made yesterd ay in the Se181. The existen ce of a dispute has once again been
curity Council. I actuall y said, and I say again, that
proved , not only becaus e of'the statem ents made by
if Maurit ania has not yet been admitte d tothe Organithe delega tion of Morocco, but also becaus e of the
zation, it is not due to the circum stance that a mattlany. statem ents made by other delega tions-a nd more
jority or even a Significant minori ty believe s in the
will probab ly be made- in favour of the admiss ion of
Moroc can claims . The reason for there having been:
Maurit ania. As I have said, this proves that a dispute
no resolut ion in the First Comm ittee was that
exists and that it has been before the t.Tnited Nations
Moroc co's friends withdrew the motion so that there
on previo us occasi ons, too.
could be no vote. In the Genera l Assem bly, the para-'
182. We can only regard this as a case with specia l
graph of resolut ion 1602 (XV') Which recommended
cMrac teristi cs which cannot be ignored . My delega - . that
the Securi ty Council should recons ider the
tion is therefo re' compe lled to abstain from the vote
Maurit anian proble m was approved by 63 countri es.
on this issue.a t this stage. We do so in the hope that,
In the Securi ty Council [911th meeting], when the

Mauritania
by a major
of Mauri
was cast;
opposition ,
believed so
wished ther
galla having
it intended
injustice ha
187. It wa
Volta and
called Uppe
Lower Ivo
my words ,
I simply wi
you have w
Ber-liD C onf
colonization
their names
retained the
188. Moreo
Mali, who
admission
by the Mo
siders that
the victim 0
189. We be
will come a
however. Hi
in Africa. It
190. In Eur
ties. These
and it is 0
to create e
Africa too
in a positio
hasty unity
passed thro
determine w
.191. In the
peoples to
present stat
claim Mauri
Celle-Saint
independence
not, I say, c
r6gime or p
different fro

192. It has b
Possibly it
Mauritania v
of the refere
secession, th
whioh chose
were; but Ma
the same ci
choice, and i
Organization
followed by
and elected i
cessive elect"
tion, and it i
mand for M
Algeria.
193. We me

s taken by

-

may

relia.

h)·
ads
>rts
can

the
ibng,

at
in

the
ent

nd,
of
by

ion
nst
Ice

ll1d

;he

of
in
~11

nd
'i'1-

ne
of
~­

e,

)h

:11
it
al
I

t,
n

e
y
I.t

e
Ii

t
3

.'

1043rd meeting - 17 October 1961
Mauritanian problem was first raised, the Council.
by a majority of eight votes, recommended approval
of Mauritania's application. Only one negative vote
was cast; the offici:l.l. explanation given us for this
opposition was not that the country imposing its veto
believed so much in the Moroccan claims, but that it
wished thereby to make it absolutely clear that, Mongolia having until then been the victim of an injustice,
it intended that the injustice should be rectified. The
injustice has in fact been rectified.
187. It was stated that I had spoken of the Upper
Volta and the Ivory Coast. Which at one time were
called Upper Ivory Coast and Lower Ivory Coast, or
Lower Ivory Coast and Upper Volta. I again say that
my words were taken out of their context. By this,
I simply wished to say that all the countries Which
you have welcomed here result from actions of the
Be:t<lin Conference and their limits are the result of
colonization. m the case of Ghana and Mali, only
their names have been changed but the others hava
retained the names gives to them by colonization.
188. Moreover, I have noted that my collea~e from
Mali, who quoted me, is not so much opposed to the
admission of MaurUania because he Is persuaded
by the Moroccan thesis. It is rat.'ler because he considers that Mali. with its 4 million inhabitants, is
the victim of a warlike state of 635,000 inhabitants.
189. We bel::.eve in African unity. We believe that it
will come about. We cannot now precipitate events,
however. History is the same, whether in Europe or
in Africa. It can only be oriented.
190. In Europe, revolutions have created nationalities. These nationalities have asserted themselves,
and it is only.little by little that they have merged
to create either federated states' or single States.
Africa too will undergo the same process. I am not
in a position to know what the consequences of a
hasty unity may be. I believe that others, wh'o have
passed through this, are more competent than I to
determine whether it is advisable.
.191. m the name of the principle of the right of
. peoples to self-determination, we c:annot, in, the
present state of things-due to Morocco's failure to
claim Mauritania in the conventions signed at La
Celle-8aint-cloud at the time of its acoession to
independence, whereas it did claim Talllgier-we cannot, I say, compel the Mauritanians to live under a
r~gime or political and institutional system entirely
different from those they have selected.
192. It has been said that the referendumwas forced.
Possibly it was, but that does not aUer the fact that
Mauritania voted several times. m 1958, at the thrl.e
of the referendum, Mauritania had '1;0 choose among
secession, the Community and the sua-tus quo. Guin.ea,
Which choee secession, was admitt€Jd here before we
were; but Mauritania, like any of the other States in
the same circumstances, could have made the same
choice. and it too, would have bef.m admitted to the
Organization at that time. It chose the Co~unity
followed by independence, and ha.s just voted again
and elected its President•.m our opinion, these successive elections have been acts of self-determination,and it is this self-d.eter:minlation which we detnand for' Mauritania, as well as for Kuwait and
Algeria.
193. We mentioned yesterday s.nother position that
s taken by Latin America. xt has been qualified

521

here as na':ive. According to this thesis, at the time
independence was attained, in order to avoid internal
wars and not to jeopardize a sorely won independence, the territorial limits existing on the date of
independence had been tacitly accepted. m our view,
it is self-contradictory to invoke this argument in
the case of the Algerian Sahara, to assert it justly
for Kuwait and not to admit it for Mauritania. Our
colleague from Iraq is consistent with himself) this
we recognize. We also note that the representative of
Saudi Arabia has realized that there was this contradiction; he said that the League of Arab States had
accepted the granting of independence to Kuwait. while
allOWing it to identify itself little by little with Iraq.
but that it refused Mauritania its independence. Why
are there two weights and two measures? This has
not been explained to us. But our brHliant colleague
from Saudi Arabia foresaw that we would reproach
him with this contradiction, and he wished to speak
of it first.
194. The Assembly however. cannot contradict itself.
It was the Assembly that" asked the Security Council,
by a majority of 63 votes, to reconsider the question
of Mauritania. It went even further; it requested the
Security Council to take note of its decision in regard
to the candidature of Mauritania, I would refer you,
in this connexion, to the terms of resolution 1602
(XV). My delegation recalled them to the Security·
Council in seeking its co-operation with the Generlll
Assembly in order to prevent this resolution from
being flouted. We do not believe that the General Assembly can reverse itself, when the Security CounCil
has. simply complied with its resolution.
195. The PRESIDENT (translated ~rom French):.
There are no more speakers on my list. I shall put
the 14-Power draft resolution [A/L.358 and Add.l]
to the vote.

A vote was taken by roll-ea1l.
Uruguay. hS.ving been drawn by lot by the Presidentwas called upon to vote first~
In favour: Uruguay, Venezuela. Argentina, Australia, Austria. Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil. Burma.
Cameroun, Canada, Central African Republic,Ceylon,
Chad, Chile, China. Colombia, Congo (Brazzaville),
Costa Rica, Dahomey. Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador. El Salvador, Ethiopia i FederationofMalayR.
Finland, France, Gabon. Greece. Haiti, Honduras.
Iceland, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast.
Japan. Laos. Liberia, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Mexico. Netherlands, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
South Africa. Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Toga, Tunisia,
Turkey. United Kingdom of Great Britain IUld Northern
Ireland. United States of America. Uppe... Volta.
Against: Yemen, Cuba, Guinea, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Mali. Morocco, Saudi Arabia. Sudan,
Syria, United Arab Republic.

Abstaining: Yugoslavia, Afghanistan. Albania, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic. Cambodia, Congo (Leopoldville). Czechoslovakia. Ghana,
Guatemala,'Hungary, lttdia. Indooesia, Mongoliaft
People's Republic. Nepal, Pa.1dstan, Poland,Romanm. '
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet'
Socialist Republics.
The draft resolution was adopted 'by "

votes to U,

witb 20ab$tentiOlAS.

~~!!·~.1<~":'.'!"h;!"?'·j'·":·':~:~~:'~'::'31E'~~';"~~~~E1]~~\fg.iIl!").~_~~~.9,,'I!II.lI';.1J:."IJlJl!_L;t.

·*'w'J

522

General Assembly - Sixteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

196. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In
view of the results of the vote. I declare the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania adIrlitted to membership in
.the United Nations.

The delegation of the Islamic Republic of Mau:dtania
was escorted to its place in the General Assembly
Hall.

197. Mr. BENJELLOUN (Morocco) (translated from
French): The General Assembly had just spoken its
final word on the dispute between us and France over
an authentically Moroccan territory: Mauritania. The
decision it has just taken has deeply shocked and disappointed us. and the least we can do in this painful
circumstance is to raise our country's protest to the
last against those primarily responsible for this
grave injustioe.
198. The Assembly has not seen fit to ~ake into consideration the legitimacy of our cause and the i:r.refutable evidence that we have advanced. which clearly
demonstrates that Mauritania is an integral part of
Morocco. We proclaim that this decision will not
Change the situation in any way. It cannot go against
the course of history. It cannot go against the destiny
,of an. entire people. Accordingly, Mauritania will
: never cease to belong, by right and in fact, to the
Moroccan community. We also declare that the
Moroccan people as a whole, both the inhabitants of
the south and those of the north, vvillnever understand
this decision which is so unjust to them. This. decision
was taken ill complete ignorance of the real facts of
the problem nd its various domestic aspects. We
believe that in the circumstances, it cannot be anything but a decision imposed upon tho~e concerned
as well as upon the will of the entire Moroccan
people.
199. The Mauritanian problem is, above all, a national problem, and as such it is one which must be
solved, in the first place, by the Moroccan people.
Morocco' knows that in order to solve it, it must rely
primarily on the efforts and determination of the
.Moroccan people itself, including the population of
Mauritania. The Moroccan people. in ~ struggle it
has waged to bring about· its independence and in the
one it is still waging for the liberation of all its territory, has never allowf~ itself to be inf1uen9~d or
nerved by declarations or decisions hostile to ltS
cause,regardless of their origin. Its Wishakable ~aith
in the justice of its cause has always enabled l.t to
triumph over the obstacles which have been placed in
its path. Despite a blind repression and the. harsh
measures taken by the colonialist system, which pre-\
vent all freedom of communication, or dissemination
of news, and' bar journalists from Mauritania, our
brothers in the south have for many years been waging an lleroic struggle against the occupation forces
that seek to separate them from.their brothers in the
nOrth solely to serve the aims of foreign interests.
Every day, Mauritania is the scene of sanguinary
incidents; its. prisons are packed with patriots arrested for having sought to liberate their. territory
from colonialistrule in order to reunite it, as it was
for~erlywiththe common homeland.
200. No one can deny the unstable, explosive situationc;reated in this Moroccan region by the many
different provocations committed by the French army.
A climate of terror, despair and irritation is spreadingamong our population. at the idea' of s~eingo~
'oountry mutilated and deprived of~apart of ltS terrltory. Without Mauritania, our independence remains

u.n-

incomplete. It will be thr~atened so long as Mauritania is occupied by French troops that have set up
n-:>t only military bases. bu~ also nuclear bases. This
independence. dearly won by the blood of our compatriots. shall not have been in vain. We will know
how to ll).obilize it and we shall mobilize our people's
WlBhakable will to recover our southern territories
and- thus complete our territQrial unity.
201. The decision taken today by this Assembly cannot sway the inhabitants of Mauritania from their
firm resolve to be reunited with the rest of Morocco.
The situation in Mauritania clearly cannot remain
what it is today. We are surG-we are convinced that
the will of the people will ultimately prevail and that
the unity and integrity of the entire national territory
will be achieved. This decision. founded on a colonial
injustice. jeopardizes the very foundations of this
Organization and its essential goal. which is to defend
small States against oppression and aggression. Indeed. what use is it their coming here to set foith
their grievances. if aggressions against thembylarge
States not only are not thwarted in this Assembly. but
are Willingly tolerated?
202. Morocco disclaims. all responsibility for the
particularly grave consequences to which the decision
just taken may lead, a decision which is sure to have
a serious effect on international security and peace.
Morocco, you may rest assured, will always remain
fa'thful to the traditions of honour, pride, the spir.it
of liberty, independence and the defence of its sovereignty, and of the integrity of its national soil which
its ancestors bequeathed to it, and which were personified by the heroic struggle of its late king,
Mohammed V. His son, King Hassan IT, and the
Moroccan people will never fail to maintain those
traditions.
203. Mr. SOULEYMANE (Mauritania): It is withdeep
emotion that we appear today before your august
Assembl~?.
204. r.t justifiable emotion, intense though it may
be, shall not prevent us from appreciating fully and
in its proper context the decision whereby you have
kindly welcomed us to this hall which is the symbol
of friendship and brotherhood among peoples.
205. We wish to thank from the bottom of our hearts
the delegations of France. and Liberia, which agreed
to sponsor, in the Security Council, with so much tact
and kindness, our request for admission.
206. May we be permitted to express our gratitude,
on behalf of our country and our Government, to all
the States which, since our accession to independence
on 28 November 1960,have tirelessly lent us their
disinterested support. Our gratitude goes to the p;reat
majority of African States and,in particUlar, to the
States members of the Brazzavillegroup, which have
taken up our cause in the. daily struggle. that we are
waging for the COnsolidation of. our sovereignty and
the permanence of our :right iu existence. This does
not in any w~y mean that we nourish any enmity or .
hostility whatever. towards those who have seen fit to
challenge the existence of our State. To them, whe~~r
they be from Africa or elsewhere, we say that lt la
in the spirit of our people to extend the hand of friendship, even when we are right and are unjustly opposed.
We therefore proclaim our firm resolve to co-operate
with all peoples without any exception. Our co-operation with other States will, of course, be .subject to
fulfilment oUhe requiretn~nti> of intern&tionallawand'
order•
l

•••rii••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••'i!l1\~.;.£~..".-~~~;A ~~.,.""
__o<-...

207. T

re~emb

in frien
nizer.
France
south of
paths of
internat'
the pri
others a
less, for
are not
This we
larly in
however
208. Yo
a peace
have a
This Bta
of its pe
209. Al
our ance
forces 0
constitut
democra
210. 0
the Unite
respect
idle wor
soil in pe
are uMo
any sacr'
our nati
brought
fully con
play in
Africa.

211. Owi
populatio
as aconn
theSahar
In this, it
United N
among pe

212. We
unfailing
immortal'
Paris by t
We are,
sacred tr
Charter
Our attac
greatest
are convi
fluence th
and Gover
relations
frank disc
and attitud

-

Mauriset up
. This
comn know
eople's
itories

y cantheir
>rocco.
remain
ed that.
nd that
rritory
olonial
of this
defend
on. Init forth
ylarge
,ly, but

Cl

'or the
lOision
o have
peace.

~emain

spirit

~over­

which
e perking,

ld the
those
hdeep
august
ltmay
lyand
lhave
ymbol
ilearts
,greed
ih taot
~itude,

to all
ldenoe
their
~reat

to the
1 have
re are
yand
I does
ity or
fit to

lether

tllia
'iendlosed.
lerate
peraect to
.wand·

1043rd meeting - 17 October 1961
207. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania will always
re~ember that it has achieved national independence
in friendship and understanding with its former colonizer. Thus, in its proven desire for decolonization,
France has spared us, like all the states of Africa
south of the Sahara which it administered, the perilous
,paths of violence and bloodshed in the recovery of our
international liberty and integrity. This is, indeed.
the prime source of active friendship, sincerity with
others and consistency towards ourselvAS. Nevertheless, for us Mauritanians, friendship and co-operation
are not combined with submission and dependence.
This we ~:v.e proved on many occasions, and particularly in connexion with the Bizerte affair, without,
however, seeking any improper political notoriety.
208. You are admitting today into your Organization
a peaceful state which has no pretensions but does
have a great willingness to serve th.e cause of peace.
This state is and shall remain respectful of the will
of its people, its on~y source of power.
209. Although we are proud of our glorious p:zst an.d
our ancestral values, we have now gone beyond the
forces of traditionalism to endow our state with a
constitutional and political life fully consistent with
democratic principles.
210. Our country reflects the principles that govern
the United Nations. Furtherance of human rights and
respect for fundamental freedoms are, in fact, not
idle words to us. Several races live together on our
soil in perfect harmony. Negroes, Berbers, andArabs
are undoubtedly animated by the same desire: to make
any sacrifice in order to succeed in the building of
our nation. In this, our country is prOUd to have
brought about unity in diversity. We are therefore
fully conscious of the important role our country crm
play in relations between the north and south of
Africa.
211. OWing to its geographical position and its varied
population, Mauritania is specially qualified to serve
as a connecting link between two worlds separated by
the Sahara which should understand each other better•
In this, it will satisfy one of the essential aims of the
United Nations, the development of friendly relations
among peoples.
.
212. We have not waited until today to proclaim our
unfailing attachment to the fundamental rights of man,
immortalized in the Universal Declaration adopted in
Paris by the General Assembly on 10 Deoember 1948.
We are, also, resolutely determined to fulfil, as a
sacred trust,. the obligations of the United Nat,ions
Charter which our country supports unreservedly.
Our attachment to this irrternational Organization. the
greatest history has known. is all the deeper as we
are convinced of the primacy of its role and the influence that it exercises over the opinions of peoples
and Governments. It is here above all that friendly
relations ca."1. develop among nations as a result of
frank discussion and the free confrontation of ideas
and attitUdes.
213. This truth can triumph only on· conditi~n that
some bear in mind their natural and technical weak~ess, and suppress all tendencies to demagogy, relymg upon their moral strength alone,
214. FaitbfuI to our ideals and our alliances, we
shall· always strive to bring about the African unity
in Which we believe, whatever perils may threaten it.
's unity. eagerly sought by all Africi1J.?;;;. was fcre,..

523

shadowed by the African and Malagasy Union, itself
a part of the broader Monrovia grouping. Because of
this pan-African vocation we shall contribute faithf.uIly and eagerly to tightening the bon<;is of solidarity
and co-operation that make the strengthandcohesiveness of our African and Malagasy Unien.
215. This is why we .are present. and always shall
be present at the major inter-AfriGan gatherings
where, in all serenity, the future and the welfare of
Africans is peacefully discussed. We sincerely desire
an end to the race for African leadership and the disappearance of personal jealousies, intrigues and
rivalries, in order that, hand in hand. we may at last
wage the decisive struggle against hunger, diseaae
and iglI.orance.
216. Colonized only yesterday, we know today that we
have an obligation to help, with all our means, our
brothers struggling for their dignity and emancipation.
This is in keeping with our real hostility to all forms
of imperialism, colonialism and racism. Without
Wishing to anticipate future discussions, our delegation reserves the opportunity to define and defend its
viewpoint with regard to all the burning problems of
det:lolonization that most closely concern us.
21 '1. In· so doing, we are most conscious of the painful tragedy of Angola and the policy of apartheid. At
the same time, the Palestinian question causes us
constant concern. We shall have ample opportunity
to dwell upon them in d-.<e course.
218. On this historic day for our country, WG shall
not conceal that all our thoughts go out to our
brothers, the people of Algeria. From this rostrum,
we call upon the French Government immediately to
resume negotiations with the Provisional Government
of the Algerian Republic, with a view to defining conditions and su.pervisory procedures for self·-determination to ensure Algeria's independence and respect for its territorial integrity.
219•. Note must be taken of the anguish and moral
pain feIt by all those who wish to see an end to the
suffering of the Algerian people, and to the shedding
of the blood of innocent vickims.
220. We beg your indul{~ence and forgiveness for
having· desired to make 0\.\1' preoccupation/3 known to
you. You will readily undersfuz.d that after' havmg so
long sought the privilege of .add:-essing your august
Assembly, we might thus impose ..pan yOUl' time.
221. Before ·)oncluding we xnust express on behalf
of our60vernment and our delegation,. our sincere
congratulations to Mr. Mongi SHm.on his election to
the high post which he occupies so competently and
with such dedication.. President. Slim,. fer us,symbolizes the presence of Africa·· at· the rendezvous of
history. And if our pride is great, it is because
Tunisia occupies a special place in our hearts and
in our history.
222. The man whose great honour it wasto be the
first Secretary-General )f the United Nations,
Mr. Trygve Lie, once said that the failure of the
United Nations would be the failure of peace, and the
triumph of destruction. At this grave' time for the
future. of this Organization, we simply wish that it.
may live. and prosper for peace and brotherholXl
..
among peoples.
223. The PRESIDENT: I sincerely thank the head of
the delegation of the Islamic Re;,Ju'hlic of,Mauritanis..,·
and I wish, as President of the Genel'al Assembly,

General Assembly - Sixteentn Session - Plenary Meetings
to express to him my most sincere welcome and
congratulations.
224. As was d~,.i with regard to the Mougolian
'people's Republic" 1 ask all delegations wiohing ·to
congratulRte and welcom~ the new Member state,
the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, to abstain from
. taking the floor at this meeting. They may ~egistel.'
with the Secretariat, and I will give them the floor
successively during the forthcoming plenary meetings.

AGENDA ITEMS 73.AND 72
Continuation of suspen",ion of nucJear and thenno-nuclear
tests and obligations of States. to refrain frGm their renewal
The urgf1nt need for 1Il treaty to ban nuclear ;"eapol1s tests
under effective intemational control

REPORT OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE
(PART I) [A/4942]
In accordance with article 68 of the rules of proceli'ttre. it was decided not to discuss the report of the

First Committee.
225. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
ask representativee to confine their statements to
explanations of votes.
It was so decided.
226. Mr. ENCKELL (Finland), Rapporteur of the
First Committee: I have the honour to submit to the
General Assembly for its consideration t~e first part
of the First Committee's report on the it\lSto which
the Committee decided to give priority, namely, items
73 and 72 entitled respectively "Continuation of suspension of nuclear and thermo-nuclear tests and obligatioDB f.>f States to refrain from their renewalli and
"The urgent need for a treaty to ban nuclear weapons
test;;; under effective international control" .
227. In enumerating the substantive draft.t'esolutiona
submitted to the First Committee in connexion with
these two items, this report deals specifically with
one draft resolution, the adoption of which the First
Committee recommends to the General.Assembly.
Considering that this draft resolution concerns itself
with an event which, On the strength of an official
annO~;lcer nt, is expected to take place bl;lfore the
end of tti..... present month, the sponsors asked for its
Ul'gent consideration, a request which was gra..."lted'
by the First,J)ommittee on 25 October. A numb~r Ol
delegations fe!t, however. that this draft resolution
ought not to ta given priority over another one of
more comprehensive scope and, in addition, different
legal ~ll!l"poiitical argu.....'"'\ents· were advanced against
'. th6 approval. of this request. A motion for closure of
the debate on this draft rf'·golution having been approved by a majority of the members of the Committee, the draft resolution was put to the vote on
25' OQtober. In explaining their votes, a. number of
delegations expressed the. view that the concern manifested :tu voting in favour of the draft resolution was
a hutnaDitarian One oue to the hazards to world health
robe expected frOnt especially powerful nuclear test
explosions. At the :::ame time it wa,s stressed that the
attitude of· several delegations. was to be considered
as an expression of their stand against test explosions
in general.

228. I have the honour to reco:Qmlend for adoption by
the G~neral Assembly the draft resolution contained
in paragraph 10 of the Committee's report.
22f. Mr. Samir ARMED (United Arab Republic): I
shall be very brief in explaining my delegation'svcte.
The Government and people of the United Arab Republic have on many occasions made their stand on
the question of the f:!,uspension of nuclear weapons
tests very clear. We are against any type of nuclear
testing by any Power whatever. Much as we wouldhave
preferred tllat the General Assembly reflect in a unanimous vote humanity's abhorrence and condemnation
of all lOnds and measures of nucJ.ear tests, appealing
to one and all not to engage in such grievoulS tests,
we are nOw confronted instead with this draft resolution of limited scope appealing only agaL"lst one
set of nuclear test explosions by one State, leaving
the door open to what may be no less dangerous test
explosions by whoever wishes to conduct them. Therefore, if we support this draft resolution on purely
humanitarian grounds, as we are going tc:- do, we wish
our vote to ba interpreted nevertr~less as reflecting
only our condemll.ation of any type of nuclear test
e21.1>losions no matter what their size or their source.
230. Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): In connexion with
the fort:ncoming vote in the plenary GeneralAssembly
f.>n the drU1: resolution adopted by the First Committee
[A/4942, p(tragraph 101, containing an appeal to the
Soviet Union to refrain from exploding a bomb in the
megaton range, the Soviet delegation has the following
statement to make.
231. This draft resolution was submitted by Canada,
Japan, Iran, Pakistan, Denmark, Norway, Iceland and
Sweden. ID order to discover the purpose of this draft
resolution and correctly to assess its aim or aims,
it is, first of all, necessary to find out who the "parents" of this infant are and what they are really seeking to achieve. It turns out that the ftparents" -that
is, the creators and inspirers of this draft-are thecountries members of the aggressive military blocs
of the western Powers, with one exception onlySweden, which is n;')t a member of the blocs and '4as
obviously to serve as a neutral (lOVer for ti.e clearly
expressed objectives of the WestE:lrn mil:i.tary bloc.
232. The Scviet delegation takes serious objection
to this dI-aft resolution, and will vote against it.
233. During the discussion in t.'le Political Committee, we gave a detailed ~xplanatiol1 of our position
On this draft, but we still consider it necessary to
speak in plenary meeting of the General Assembly on
this matter.
234. Two lirguments have been put forward as formal
pretexts to justify the submission of this draft reso,.
lution. It has been said. first th8.t experimental explosions of nuclear weapons are in themselves a
threat to peace, and secendly that such explosions
generate dangerous atomic radiation; and that for
these reasons it was decided to ask the Soviet Union .
not to explode a 50-megaton bomb.
235. Let us examine the substance of the question

thus raised. The countries of the ~N'esternbloc want

the ~oviet Union not to explode a nuclear weapon of
50-IDegaton strength. But what <l.bout SIIU'Her nuclear
elq)losions-30, 10 or ]. megaton, or less? What about
anuCh;ar we!!,pi)1f that' is' even more powerfui~ ;And
what about th~ Assembly'S attitude to nuclear weapon

tests by France, or
tests in the United S
U»ited Kingdom? Th
use the Assembly fo
in t'le Soviet Union,weapon tests by the
bei.'1g carried out
Nevadll in December
explosions-I mean
atmosphere, the Wes
word. That is quite un
too, keeps silent.
236. The most alar
General Assembly sa'
rac~ nOW unleashed
silence about the int
the western Powers
forthcoming transfer
Germany, which, disr
of the past and smi
tumour, by militaris
new war.
237. Just think, gent
to achieve by this
putting it-',forward. F
throughout the world
isolate it from the c'
from the· causl?s whic
it the Bubject of a
Assembly.
238. To act as the
25 October in· adoptin
means attempting to
out removing the eau
continually recreat'
same thing as trying
a ship without closing
the ship will graduall
ancyand stability and
239. Such a specific
selective approach to
sion by the General
case-is not accidental
, demonstrates the fact
ests of the countries ()
interests alone.
240. The powers of
well that they wm b
Union from completi
for the strengthening
have no illusions on t
clear to everycne tha
the Western Powers at
of adopting the Canadi
resolution has nothing
propa~dist arrow s
Ur.don, The countries
that it is now not quite.
countries, not connec
combinations against
to induce those Clountrl
lution by referring to
this draft allegedly pu
the humanitarianism 0
as Iran or Pakistan
own coun:tries be sub
their own allies, wi
so-called "nuclear c
of vast areas of Iran

pla

•

•
1043rd meeting - 17 October 1961

tests by France, or to the fqrthcoming atmospheric
tests in the United states and possibly, also, in the
united Kingdom? The Western bloc is in a hurry to
use the Assembly for the prevention of an explosion
in hi.e Soviet Union; but as regards the underground
weapon tests by the United states which are now
beillg oarried out and which will be carried out in
Nevadil in December, and as regards. the imminent
explosions-I mean United states, explosions in the
atmosphere, the Western bloc, of course, says not a
word. That is quite understandable; but the Assembly,
too, keeps silent.
236. The most alar~ thing, however, is that the
General Assembly sa:~' 1 ing about the 'crazy arms
rac~ now unleashed
"t.} Western bloc. It keeps
silence about the intensive military preparations of
the western Powers. It remains silent about the
forthcoming transfer of nuclear weapons to western
Germany, which, disregarding the disastrous lessons
of the past and smitten again, as with a maagnant
tumour, by militarism, is feverishly preparing for a
new war.
237. Just think, gentlemen, what it is that they want
to achieve by this reSOlution-the people who are
putting it-·.forward. From all the interrelated events
throughout the world they select. a particular one,
isolate it from the circumstances giVing rise to it,
from the caus~s which gave it birth, andwant to make
it the subject of a special decision of the General
Assembly.
238. To act as the majority of the Committee did on
~5 October in· adopting the Western bloc's resolution
means attempting to eliminate the consequence without removing the cause which gives rise to, and is
continually recreating, that consequence. It is the
same thing as trying to pump water ourt; of the hold of
a ship without closing the hole. However hardyou try,
the ship will gradually fill with water, lose its buoyancy and stability and sink to the bottom.
239. Such a specific, disc~'=minatory and narrowly
selective approach to the cbpice of an issue for deci ~
sion by the General Assembly-as in the p=-esent
case-is not accidental. It is deliberate, and eloquently
demonstrates the fact that it is adopted in the interests of the countries of the Weste:r:n bloc, and in their
interests alone.
240. The powers of the Western bloc realize full
well that they wlU be unable· to prevent the Soviet
Union from completing the m.easures it has planned
for the strengthening of its defensive capacity. They
have no illusions cn that score. It should therefore be
clear to everyene that the manoouvre, thought up by
the Western Powers at this General Assembly session
of adoptingtheCanadian--Japanese-Iranian-~Pakistan
resolution has nothing but propaganda value. It is a
propa~dist arrow shot by NATO against the Soviet
Union, The countries of the Western bloc, realizing
that it is now not quite.so eas~ for them to drag other
countries, not connected with the blocs. into their
combination.s against the Soviet Union, have tried
to induce those countries to support their draft re60iution by referring to the humanitatian aims which
this draft allegedly pursues. But what is the value of
the humanitarianism of such co-sponsors of the draft
ae Iran or Pakistan which have agreed to let their
Qwn countries be subjected to atomic bombing by
their own allies, with a view to the creation of a
so-called "nuclear curtain" through the conversion

52

525

241. The representatives of these countries in the
First Committee tried to deny this, but on this point
there are official, top-secret ~ocuments of the Bagdad
Pact, now known as the CENTO Pact. We can show
them to any delegation which wants to see them. And
no matter how the representatives of Iran and Pakistan
may try to refute these facts and describe these documents as forgeries, the documents are original ones,
and your peoples will undoubtedly, in due course,
pronounce' their own harsh but just verdict on this
matter.

24

th
m
So

pe
en
th
re
of
de
101

an

242. Thus the real motive inspiring the delegations
of the countries which are co-sponsoring this resohltion is not consideration for ethics or humanitariani~, but purely military calculation on the part of
allies in military blocs. The purpose of the draft
resolution under discussion is to secure, for the
Western Powers and their allies in aggressive military blocs, unilateral military advantages at the
expense of the security interests of the Soviet Union
and other socialist States.

mE
rol
Stl
Tb
is
to
pr
\Vh
24
Un
po
po
set
Ge

243. The sponsors of the drf'~t ignore the tensions
created by the western Powers and the acuteness of
the international situation, which .I1a.ve compelled the
Soviet Government to take a number of serious measures to strengthen the security of the Soviet Union,
including the conduct of tests of the most effective
types of nuclear weapons. The peoples of the world
can only welcome these measures, for they understand
that .it is only the overwhelriling might of the Soviet
Union and the other peace-loving States which can
safeguard peace and preserve the peoples from war.

24~

anc
Po
Un'
tre
agI
cir
the
for
lov
cru
unl
aIol
ne"
be
Sta
rigl
mo,
and
250
CaUl
clel
251
whi
sho
tion
mell
soli
of II
disc
252.
mus
quic
arm
acti.
stre
coex
stan

244. We have no doubt that the overwhelming majority of ruankindwill evaluate the Soviet Government's
ineasures correctly. The strengthening of the defensive power of th~ Soviet Union is, at the same time,
a stren,q:J;hening of the forces of peace the world over.
The
:s~r must realize that there is a reliable
fol'9"c...ble ofprotecting the peaceful labour, freedom and l1ldependencti of peoples.
245. The tests by the Soviet Union of new highly
effective types of nUClear weapons are intended to
ensure that the peoples shall not fall under atomic,
hyq.l'ogen or neutron bombs, that mankind shall never
experience war explosions of nuclear. weapons, as
happened with the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. That is what real humanitarian,ism nowadays means.
246. The efforts to represent the matter as if the
sponsors of the draft resolution were conce:rnedabout
the well-being of peoples or were desirous of maintaining peace are spurious through and through.
Genuine, not fictitious humanitarianism~ genuine, not
fictitious solicitude for the well-being of present and
future generations, genuine .and not fictitious anxiety
for peace, required from everyone the most energetic
'and resolute struggle on behalf .of peace. We must
avert the possibility of the eruption of nuclear or
rocket warfarl. which, if it once breaks out, can, in
a matter of hours and minutes,. destroy J1uge citie~
inhabited by many. miIlionl~, annihilate whole countries'
and peoples and devastate entire continents. ill sucb
a war, many tens and even hundreds of millions of
people will perish. World treasures of civilization
will disappear beyond recall. With. these monstrous
consequences of nuclear and rocket warfare, the ap",,:,
prehensions expressed. hereabout atomic radiation

i;;:;:~:~~d,::::::::::~~:e~:
o f cuurse, in no way comparable.
-'':'::'"" 'i.,., .. "

,'.

<.".;;.,:;

to rE

253.
rela:
and
"""""C'i,'

.~

526

General Assembly - Sixteenth Session - Plen:\rv Meetings

247. As regards the Soviet Union, no manoouvres by
the NATO Powers will divel't it from the taldng of
measures to strengthen the defensive power of the
Soviet Union, or weal\:en its efforts to ensure universal
peace. The Soviet Union, or weal\:en its efforts to
ensure universal peace. The Soviet Union will fellow
this policy so long as the United states and its allies
refuse to drop their policy of acting from a "position
of strength", so long as they do not follow the line of
deciding unsettled problems by negotiation, and so
long as they refuse to agree to proceed to general
and complete disarmament. Countries that are not
members of bloos must also play their part in this
matter. The neutral and non-aligned stat(~s must not
stand apart from the realities of the world situatioh.
They must realize that the testing of nuclear weapons
is a consequence, not a cause. The cause giving rise
to this consequence consists in the intensive military
preparations of the Western Powers, preparations
which have recently been particularly intensified.
248. The testing of nuclear weapons by the Soviet
Union is the inevitable outcome of the Western Powers'
policy of conducting international affairs "from a
position of strength", the outcome of their refusal to
settle unsolved prClblems, and more especially the
German problem, by negotiation.
249. In the circumstances of the crazy arms race
and of intensive military preparations by the Western
Powers, when these Powers, in reply to the Soviet
Union's determination to conclude a German peace
treaty. openly threaten to tal\:e up arms, instead of
agreeing to settle the problem by negotiation-in such
circumstances, the most effective way of eliminating
the growing threat of war is to counter aggressive
force with the overwhelming power of the peacelOVing States. Only a readiness to deal aggressors a
crushing, annihilating blow can restrain them from
unleashing war and maintain peace. In this light
alone should the testing by the Soviet Union of the
newest and most effective types of nuclear weapons
pe viewed. When this is understood, all peace-loving
States will easily be able to grasp the position and
rightly concentrate their efforts with a ",iew to removing the causes which are pushing the world nearer
and nearer to the edge of a nuclear-:rocke~ war"
250. When the cause is removed there will, of
course, be no consequence, and the question of nuclear weapon tests will no longer arise.
251. All this goes to show that the main point on
which the United Nations and all peoples of the world
should now concentrate their ·efforts is the preserva-.
tion of peace, the prevention of war, and disarmament•. Such is genuine humanitarianism, genuine
solicitude for the well-being of peoples and the future
of mankind. It can be achieved, not by endless, futile
discussions, but only-by concrete measures.
252. The arms race, and the military preparations,
must be stopped. We must come to an agreement as
-quickly a~ possible about gl:llleral:and completedisarmament•.. Finally, we must give up the idea of
acti,ng, in international Ilffairs, from a "position of
strength". We must accept the principles of peaceful
coexistence and follow the path of settling all outstanding issues by negotiation, refraining from threats
to resort to the use· of force.
253. Only by following such a policy in international
relations can the· threat of war really be eliminated,
.and peace preserved.

------------

254. That is the directioll in which the United Nations
should bring its energy and its abilities to bear. That
is what it must seek to achieve, instead of vainly expending its time and strength on secondary iSsues
which, from the standpoint of preserving peace, settle
nothing and are also, in present circumstanoes
unproductive.
'
255. For these reasons the delegations of the Soviet
Union will vote against the draft resolution submitted
by the First Committee.
256. Mr. GEBRE-EGZY (Ethiopia): When this drp,ft
being debated in the First Committee
I spoke in support of it, and I said the following:

1 esolution was

"One, our position on nuclear tests is very cle9.l.'.
Two, as an expression of that position, we support
the draft resolution which is now before us. We
fully understand and appreciate the deep concern
of the peoples who are concerned with this draft
resolution.
"For these reasons, which are essentially an
expression of our position, we support the draft
resolution. ":!/
257. I want to add that we shared, and do share, the
deep anxiety of the peoples of Scandinavia, who are
our friends, and Canada over the detonation of a
50-megaton device that may take place in the Soviet
Union. Secondly, this morning when I moved in the
First Committee that the general debate be temporarily l3uspended in order to allow us to discuss, to
vote and to act On our draft resolution [A/C.l/L.283/
Rev, '3 and Add.I] against all nuclear tests, I said:
"I recall that the draft resolution"that is, the draft resolution which is now before the
General Assembly-"was submitted, and rightly so, as an emergency
resolution, and it is in that senee that my delegation
accepted it and voted for it. Yet, though I conceded
that point both by my statement and vote, I do not
and cannot concede that I am not against one, ten,
twenty, thirty, forty, sixty or whatever X megaton
the Soviet Union or the United states may detonate.
The position of my Government-and, I am most
certain, that of the great majority of this Committee-is against nuclear tests. "
Then, after I ha<l explained in more detail why I had
made my proposal, I said:
"I am, therefore, confident that they will understand our anxiety and will. support my proposal.
Our standard is the "ame: the problem is humanitarian and it is most urgent that the Committee
appeal to all concerned, including the Soviet Union,
that they stop all and every kind of nuclear test."Q!
258. The First Committee adopted this draft resolution and sent it to the Assembly, Rnd the point of my
repeati!1g what I have said is this. We are against aU
tests. Today we voted with a Clear conscience for the
draft resolution which is before us now. But I want to
make it absolutely clear that in so far as my Governm
ment and my delegation are concerned, we are against

Y This statement was made at the 1177th meeting of the First Comn.ittee, the official record of which was published only In summary
, form.
§! This statement was made at the 1179th meeting of the First Committee, the official record of which was published only In summary
form.

all tests. We make n
First Committee we
OU1' draft resolution.
259. Ml'. VAKIL (!:t.'
certain accusations I
resentative against n
vote today, which was
already said in the Fi
Although r made a nu
cusations at that sa
mittee, they are of
fallacious, that some
sembly is warranted
especially since the
tion has seen fit to
by circulating them
Nations and to the Pr
260. First of all, I
raise this question. I
great Power not to ex
peril. to the health
stretch of the imagin
gressive act? As is I
the Soviet Union has
Organization and the
by its secretariat. It
I should like to co
documents are absol
foundation whatsoeve
inconceivable that a
believe that the auth
circumstances subje
annihilation.
261. I said on Wecln
it is quite contrary to
tices to call into qu
State. The represent
rest assured that the
close to the hearts of
tions have not and
shaking the loyalty of
ever been a source
when the interests of
stake.

262. It is, I think,
period directly after
leadership, by restori
prevented the disme
glad indeed that the
deliberate distortion
influencing the Comm
majority voted for th
pose could not be ass
its co-sponsors seriou
263. Mr. IQBAI :PaI\:
been levelled aga ust
of the Soviet Union
spoken about them in
certainly based on fal
are being told that ther
they have discovered
zation in which PaI\:iGt
annihilating their own

l043rd meeting - 17 Ootober 1961

--------------all tests. We make no exceptions, and therefore in the

First Committea we shall press for the adoption of
our draft resolution.
259. MT. VAKIL (h'an): I should like to comment on
certain accusations levelled by the Soviet Union representative against my country in his explanatioh of
vote today, which was only a rep5tition of what he has
already said in the First Committee [1l77thmeeting].
Although I made a number of references to these accusations at that same meeting ef the First Committee, they are of a nature so gross, so utterly
fallacious, that some further elaboration in the Assembly is warranted in order to clarify our position,
especially since the Soviet representative's delegation has seen fit to publicize the accusationa further
by circulating them to the Members of the UnitGd
Nations and. to the Press.
260. First of all, I should like in all sobriety to
raise this questiono If a group of states plead with a
great Power not to explode a super bomb, with all its
peril to the health of mankind, could this by any
stretch of the imagination be interpreted as an aggressive act? As is his wont, the representative of
the Soviet Union has referred to the Central Treaty
Organization and the documents allegedly prepared
by its secretariat. It has been previously stated, and
I should like to confirm it once again, that these
documents are absolutely spurious and there is no
foundation whatsoever for those allegations. It is
inconceivable that anyone in his right m.ind could
believe that the authorities of a country could in any
circumstances subject their own people to utter
annihilation.
261. I said on Weclnesday, and I repeat it now, that
it is quite contrary to established international practices to call into question the person of a Head of
State. The reprel:lentative of the Soviet Union mL;.y
rest assured that the Head of the Iranian state is so
close to the hearts of his people that these falsifications have not and will not succeed in any way in
shaking the loyalty of his peopie. His leadership has
ever been a source of encouragement, especially
when the interests of his country and people are at
. stake.
262. It is, I think, a timely moment to recall the

period directly after the Second World War when his
leadership, by restoring a province to the motherland,
prevented the dismemberment of his oountry. I am
glad indeed that the Soviet Union, in spite of this
deliberate distortion of the facts, did not succeed in
influencing the Committee which by an overwhelming
majority voted for the measure whose purity of purpose could not be assailed or the noble intentions of
its co-sponsors seriously challenged.
263. Mr. IQBAI :Pakistan): The charges which have
been levelled aga ust my country by the representative
of the Soviet Union are false and we have alrf' _dy
spoken about them in the First Committee. They are
certainly based on falsehood and en lies. And now we
are being told that there are cert2in documents which
they have disQovered about the Central Treaty Organization in which Pakistan and Iran were-contemplating
annihilating their own populations.

527

264. Could there by anything more that could be
regarded as faked? I leave it to the Assemb'y to
understand that documents are very easy to fix, and
I regret to say here in the Assembly that such documents can be made up which are absolutely baseless
and have no foundation at all. We have repeatedly
denied these charges and they have been glibly repeating them.
265. I am not goin{' u add more to what we have
already said in the Fi:i.'st Committee. The resolution
which has been adopted there hy an overwhelming
majority is a solemn appeal to the Soviet Union to
refrain from detonating the bomb that could lead to
so much suffering in th<;l long' run so far as the health
and welfare of all humanity is concerned. To regard
this as something which has been moved by Powers
belonging to ap.:~/·~ssive pacts is something which is
beyond the un~,'~.' .~ ·:::nding of any rational man.
266. The PRESIDENT (translated from F.eench): I
have no more speakers on my li·st;!,;n I shaH therefore put to the vote the draft resol11"i.on whose adoption has been recommended to the General Assembly
by the First Committee, and which appears at paragraph 10 of that Committee's report [A/4942]:
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Finland, haVing been drawn by lot by the President.
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Finland, France, Gabon, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Ha;~i, Honduras, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq. Ireland, Israel, Italy, Ivory
Coast, Japan, Jordan, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mauritania, Mexico, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Per'.l, Philippines, Portugal, Saudi Araoia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Togo,
Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Cambodia,
Camerouil, Canada, Central African Republic,Ceylon,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo (Brazzaville},
::::ongo (LeopoldvUle), Costa Rica, Cyprus, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuado~, El Salvador, Ethiopia,
Federation of Malaya.
Against: HUUf;ary, Mongolia, Polan.d, Romania,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republi{ls. Albania. Bulgaria, Byelorussiar...
Soviet Socialist Republic, Cuba, Czechoslovakia.
Abstaining: Mali.
The draft resolution was adopted /by 8'1 votes to 11.
with 1 abstention.

267. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
thank the Members of the Assembly for their cooperation. We have thus finished with this item. The
elections to the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council will be postponed until a later
meeting.
. ..
~

The meetiiJgrose at 7.50 p.m.

4

Cl

0;

527

1043rd meeting - 17 October 1961
all tests. We make no exceptions, and therefore in the
First Committee we shall press for the adoption of
our draft resolution.
259. Mr. VAKIL (Iran): I should like to comment on
certain accusations levelled by the Soviet Union representative against my country in his explanatioh of
vote today, which was only a repetition of what he has
already said ill the First Committee [1177th meeting].
Although I made a number of references to these accusations at that same meeting of the First Committee, they are of a nature so gross, so utterly
fallacious, that some further elaboration in the Assembly is warranted in order to clarify our position,
especially since the Soviet representativets delegation has seen fit to publicize the accllsations further
by circulating them to the Members of the United
Nations and to the Press.
260. First of all, I should like in all sobriety to
raise this question. If a group of States plead with a
great Power not to explode a super bomb, with all its
peril to the health of mankind, could this by any
stretch of the imagination be interpreted as an aggressive act? As is his wont, the representative of
the Soviet Union has referred to the Central Treaty
Organization and the documents allegedly prepared
by its secretariat. It has been previously stated, and
I should like to confirm it once again, that these
documents are absolutely spurious and there is no
foundation whatsoever for those allegations. It is
inconceivable that anyone in his right mind could
believe that the authorities of a country could in any
circumstances subject their own people to utter
annihilation.
261. I said on Wednesday, and I repeat it now, that
it is quite contrary to established international practices to call into question the person of a Head of
State. The representative of the Soviet Union may
rest assured that the Head of the Iranian State is so
close to the hearts of his people that these falsifications have not and will not succeed in any way in
shaking the loyalty of his people. His leadership has
ever been a source of encouragement, especially
when the interests of his country and people are at
stake.

· .. ~":.

264. Could there by anything more that could be
regarded as faked? I leave it to the Assembly to
understand that documents are very easy to fix, and
I regret to say here in the Assembly that such documents can be made up which are absolutely baseless
and have no foundation at all. We have repeatedly
denied these charges and they have been g'libly repeating them.
265. I am not going to add more to what we have
already said in the First Committee. The resolution
which has been adopted there by an Qverwhelming
majority is a solemn appeal to the Soviet Union to
refrain from detonating the bomb that could lead to
so much suffering in the long run so far as the health
and welfare of all humanity is concerned, To regard
this as something which has been moved by Powers
belonging to aggressive pacts is something which is
beyond the understanding of any rational man.
266. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
have no more speakers on my list and I shall therefore put to the vote the draft resolution whose adoption has been recommended to the General Assembly
by the First Committee, and which appears at paragraph 10 of that Committee's report [A/4942].
A vote was taken by roll-call.

Finland, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Finland, France, Gabon, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Ivory
Coast, Japan, Jordan, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mallritania, Mexico, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria., Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Toga,
Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Urug11uy, Venezuela,
Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghani stan, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Cambodia,
Cameroun, Canada, Central African Republic, Ceylon,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo (Brazzaville),
::ongo (Leopoldville), Costa Rica, Cyprus, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia,
Federation of Malaya.

262. It is, I think, a timely moment to recall the
period directly after the Second World War when his
leadership, by restoring a province tothemotherland,
prevented the dismemberment of his country. I am
glad indeed that the Soviet Union, in spite of this
deliberate distortion of the facts, did not succeed in
influencing the Committee which by an overwhelming
majority voted for the measure whose purity of purpose could not be assailed or the noble intentions of
its co-sponsors seriously challenged.

Against: Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, Romania,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, Albania, Bulgaria, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Cuba, Czechoslovakia.

263. Mr. IQBAL (Pakistan): The charges which have
been levelled against my country by the representative
of the Soviet Union are false and we have already
spoken about them in the First Committee. They are
certainly based on falsehood and on lies. And now we
are being told that there are certain documents which
they have discovered about the Central Treaty Organization in which Pakistan and Iran were contemplating
annihilating their own populations.

267. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
thank the Members of the Assembly for their cooperation. We have thus finished with this item. The
elections to the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council will be postponed until a later
meeting.

Litho in V.N.

;]i..,

..

""-.4

Abstaining.' Mali.
The dra:ft resolution was adopted by 87 votes to 11,
with 1 abstention.

The meeting rose at 7.50 p.m.

7700i November 1962 2,175
