UNITED NATIONS

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

1850 th

MEETING:

#$#&A
~~su;k~yQ?
22 OCTOBER

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

Page
1
agenda (S/Agenda/ 1850) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation concerning Western Sahara:
Letter dated 18 October 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Spain to
the President of the Security Council (S/11851) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1850

,..,;..
.

.

.‘,

,

-:
.,-“..-

NOTE

,.

‘,,.

a,’

.,

/

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters corn- : bined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
I
Nations document.
i
,,.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system ‘adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied .’
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1850th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday,
President:

Mr. Olof RYDBECK

(Sweden)..

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

was called to order.at 8.40 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Western Sahara:
Letter dated 18 October 1975 from the Permanent
Representative
of Spain to the United Nations
addressed’to the President of the Security Council
(S/11851)
1. Tlie PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken [1849th meeting], I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Spain and Morocco to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.
At the invitation
of the President, Mr. de Pinie’s
(Spain) and Mr. Slaoui (Morocco) took seats at the
Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT:
In addition,
I have also
received a letter, dated 20 October, from the representative of Algeria requesting that he be invited to
participate in the discussion of the question on the
agenda in accordance with Article 31 of the Charter.
Pursuant to that Article and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure, I propose, if I hear no objection,
to invite the representative of Algeria also to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr.
(Algeria) took a seat at the Council table.

3: The PRESIDENT:
The Security’Council
will now
continue its examination
of the item on its agenda
relating to the situation concerning Western Sahara.
‘Since our last meeting, members of the Council have
been engaged in most intensive consultations,
as a
result of which the text of a draft resolution has been
arrived at and is now before the Council in document
S/l 1858.
4. Before we proceed to deal with draft resolution
S/ 11858, I call on the representative of Algeria.

agenda (S/Agenda/MO)

1. Adoption of the agenda
.
2. The-situation
concerning Western Sahara:
Letter dated 18 October 1975 from the Permanent
Representative
of Spain to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1851)
The meeting

22 October 1975, at 8 p.m.

Rahal

5. Mr.
RAHAL
(Algeria)
(interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, first of all I should like to
thank you, as well as all the members of the Council,
for having been so good as to agree to my request to
participate,in your present debate. This meeting of the
Council, which is being held on the initiative of Spain,
is devoted to the consideration
of the situation in
.Western Sahara and to the dangers which certain
initiatives might create for the security of the entire
region. I therefore believe that the participation
of
the delegation of Algeria in such a discussion can
come as no surprise to any member of the Council,
not only because of the geographical location of my
country, which makes it particularly
sensitive to
any aggravation of tension on its frontiers, but also,
and perhaps .above all, because of the interest which
my Government
has constantly
shown in the
decolonization
of the Sahara.
6. The Government
of Algeria has already make
known, on several occasions and in the most solemn
manner, that it makes no territorial claim on Western
Sahara. My Government reiterated this position both to
the United Nations Visiting Mission and before the
International
Court of Justice at the time it was
preparing an advisory opinion’ on this question at the
request of the General Assembly
in its resolution 3292 (XXIX).
7. But the Government of Algeria has also reaffirm&l,
with the same constancy and with the same conviction, ’
the interest it naturally has in the manner in ,which the
decolonizati,on
of that Territory will be carried out,
because this development must necessarily affect the
peace and security of the entire region, which includes
Algeria.- Furthermore,
we have always believed, and
we are certainly not alone in this, that for a party to
be concerned with a problem of decolonization
it its
not necessary for it to have a claim on the Territory
to be decolonized.

8. At any rate, this is how it was understood when the
three heads of State of Algeria, Morocco and Mauritania met together, the last time being at Agadir in
July 1973, in order to decide to join their efforts so as
to ensure for the Saharan people the exercise of their
right to self-determination.
This was also the situation
when the General Assembly, in the many resolutions
which it has adopted in regard to the Sahara, called
on the administering
Power to organize a referendum
of self-determination
in consultation
with Morocco,
Mauritania and Algeria; Algeria was referred to by the
term “interested party”, but everyone knew exactly
what this expression meant. This was still the case
when the United Nations Visiting Mission, on a visit
to Spain and to the Sahara under Spanish domination,
completed
its investigations
by going in turn to
Morocco, Algeria and Mauritania.

it could make an on-the-spot evaluation of the position of each of the parties concerned or interested and
prepare a report which, together with the advisory
opinion of the International
Court of, Justice, would
enable the General Assembly to take a final decision
on the modalities for decolonization
of the Sahara.
14. The report of the United Nations Visiting Mission
to Western Sahara has just been issued,* and the
advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice
was made public a few days ago.’ In the opinion of
the Government of Algeria, these documents represent
a most serious study, and bear witness both to the
lofty conscience and to the unquestionable
probity of
their authors. The conclusions
contained
therein
allow no room for any tendentious interpretation
or
fantasy. They indicate, with all the precision that one
could expect from legal language, that the valid
settlement
of the problem
of the Sahara can be
achieved
only on the basis of the free selfdetermination
of the Saharan people.

9. Finally,
the International
Court of Justice,
although it was acting within the limits defined by
the questions put to it by the General Assembly,
could not ignore the special position of Algeria in
relation to the problem of the Sahara and the multiple
ties which exist between Algeria and that stilldependent Territory,
as well as the ties existing
between all the countries of that same region.

15. This is not the time for me to dwell on an
analysis of the report of the United Nations Visiting
Mission or of the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice. At any rate, that is not the
purpose of this Council meeting. It is clear that these
documents themselves do not constitute a decision on
the settlement of the problem of the Sahara. Such a
decision is obviously up to the General Assembly,
which has included this question in its agenda, and
which will itself determine what use it will make of
the information
and judgements
communicated
to it
by both the Visiting Mission and the International
Court of Justice; this decision will, of course, be
taken in conformity with General Assembly resolution 3292 (XXIX) and on the basis of resolution 1514
(XV), the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

10. These ties, which were forged throughout
a
common history in which our destinies were intermingled, are strong enough to survive the temporary
vicissitudes which may perturb our coexistence. For
more than 10 years, the decolonization
of the Sahara
has offered our countries an opportunity to strengthen
our solidarity by uniting in a common struggle to
ensure the liberation of a Territory which belongs so
completely to our common region.
11. Algeria associated itself totally with this common
effort and, side by side with Morocco and Mauritania,
Algeria has year after year claimed for the people of
the Sahara their right to choose their own future. The
joint position of our three countries was on this point
in accord with the attitude
of the international
community, which makes of the right to self-determination the cardinal principle of decolonization.

16. It is for this reason that we consider it to be
extremely
dangerous for peace in the region for
anyone to take a unilateral
initiative
intended to
forestall a General Assembly decision or to create a
de facfo situation. Furthermore,
an initiative of that
nature would most obviously
be contrary to the
commitment
undertaken by all Members of the United
Nations to respect and comply with the decisions of
the Organization.
That commitment
is all the more
binding for those Members which have requested
such a decision and solemnly announced in advance
that they would abide by it.

12. When last year, for the. first time, Morocco
proposed that the International
Court of Justice give
an advisory opinion on certain historical and legal
aspects of the problem of the Sahara, Algeria followed
Mauritania in supporting this request, first of all so as
not to shatter this solidarity, but also-why
not say
so?-in
the hope that the opinion of such a highly
competent
and universally
respected body as the
International
Court of Justice would be conducive to
facilitating the decolonization
of the Sahara by making
it possible to assess the claims advanced by both
Morocco and Mauritania.

17. It is the duty of the Security Council, after
having learned of the present developments
in the
region and the consequences they would inevitably
entail, urgently to take all necessary measures to
maintain peace and security and to prevent any act
of such a nature as to hinder the rule of law and bring
about the failure of the authority of the Organization.
We are aware of all the efforts made by members of
the Council to arrive at a decision which would be

13. It was with this same desire for clarity and
justice that we agreed to the sending of the United
Nations Visiting Mission to Western Sahara, so that
2

sufficiently balanced to put an end .to the :dangerous
evolution of this situation while ensuring the loyal
and effective . co-operation
of all parties interested
and concernedin the work of restoring and atmosphere
of detente and peace.
18. We fully appreciate this concern of the Council,
but we cannot emphasize too strongly that the crisis
which is developing in our region and on our frontiers
is growing in intensity and demands an urgent, clear
and firm decision from the Council. It goes without
saying that Algeria is following the progress of events
with the utmost vigilance and so far we have been
able to show, as the world is our witness, the utmost
moderation
in our attitude,
despite the manifest
hostility and pm
of certain acts which are as
inexplicable as they are unexpected. Algeria reaffirms
both its devotion to the principles which we have
never ceased to proclaim and defend and its profound
desire to include the settlement of all the problems of
the region within a framework of co-operation, understanding and brotherhood
among all the peoples of
that part of Africa. It is in that spirit that, calling on
the Council to take decisions consonant with its
responsibilities
in these particularly
grave circumstances, Algeria is prepared to offer to the Council,
within the framework of Articles 33 and 34 of the
Charter, all the assistance necessary for it to fulfil
its mission, which is to maintain peace and security
in the world.

nization of Western Sahara. That question lies squarely
within the competence
of the -General Assembly,
which will later be discussing it pursuant to its own
resolution 3292 (XXIX).
The Assembly will be discussing it in the light of the report of the Visiting
Mission* which it despatched this year, taking into
account the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice which it requested and recently
received.’
The question of the decolonization
-of
Western Sahara will therefore be pursued normally
and logically in the appropriate organs of the United
Nations.
Nevertheless,
my delegation
wishes to
reiterate its deeply held view that the process of
decolonization
of that Territory, like that of all other
colonial Territories,
must be undertaken
in strict
4zx3m@waa*8fNination
for the people of the Territory.
22. The question, which was properly before the
Security Council, was and remains the potentially
explosive situation in relation to Western Sahara
resulting from recent developments
in the area. It is
a situation which could cause international
friction
-indeed,
some allege that it has already done so;
it is a situation which could lead to a breach of
international
peace and security; and it is a situation
which could encourage disregard of the principle of
self-determination,
which I have already mentioned
and to which my delegation resolutely adheres.
23. It is thus a situation with which the Security
Council is legitimately
concerned, pursuant to its
responsibilities
under the Charter, in particular Article 34. It will come as no surprise, therefore, that
the efforts of my delegation
have been directed
towards defusing that situation and towards alleviating
the causes, both actual and potential of tension in that
area. My delegation consequently enjoins each of the
parties concerned and interested to comport itself
with the utmost restraint and to refrain from taking
any action likely to exacerbate an already tense
situation.

19. The PRESIDENT:
I made reference a moment
ago to the intensive consultations
that had taken
place during the last few days among all members of
the Council, the result of which is before the Council
in the text of draft resolution S/l 1858. One of the points
of agreement reached in our consultations was that all
members of the Council would be prepared to adopt
draft resolution S/11858 by consensus. Accordingly,
I shall not put it to the vote but, if there are no
objections, declare it adopted by consensus.
The draft resolution

was adopted.3

24. My delegation, which was one intensely involved
in the negotiations for an acceptable text, is gratified
that the Council was able to reach a measure of
consensus. As the word consensus implies,
concessions are sometimes necessary. This is one such
occasion. My delegation would have preferred some
more precision in the terms of the resolution. That
notwithstanding,
we would hope that acting in
accordance with both the letter and the spirit of the
resolution which the Council has just adopted, each and
every one of the parties concerned and interested
will in the future act in a manner which will command
the plaudits of the members of the Council and indeed
of the international
community as a whole.

20. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to place it on
record that the draft resolution submitted at our last
meeting by the representative
of Costa Rica and
subsequently revised [S/11853/Rev. I] has now been
withdrawn.
21. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): We are meeting here in
circumstances which have been described as urgent,
and as a result of a letter submitted to the President
of the Council by the representative of Spain [S/Z1851 1.
My delegation has given the most serious attention to
the situation which has developed in Western Sahara
and in neighbouring
areas, described in the letter
and amplified,
albeit
from somewhat
different
perspectives,
earlier
by the representatives
of
Morocco and Mauritania [1849th meeting] and how by
the representative of Algeria. Thus we are not here
and now concerned with the substantive aspects of
the matter. We are not now dealing with the decolo-

25. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China)(translationfiom
Chinese):
The consistent position of the Chinese delegation on
the question of Western Sahara is that Spain should
terminate
its colonial
domination
over Western
3

Sahara. At the same time, we hope that the African
countries concerned and interested,, together with the
people of Western Sahara, will find a reasonable
solution to the problem existing in this region through
friendly consultation,
on the basis of unity against
colonialism,
so as. to avoid the aggravation
and
complication
of the matter. Basing ourselves on that
position,
we supported
draft resolution
S/l 1858.
Moreover, we would like to point out that the Chinese
delegation did not participate
in the voting at the
twenty-ninth
session of the General Assembly on
resolution
3292 (XXIX)
referred to in the draft
resolution. The reason was explained at the time.. I
shall not repeat it here.

positive elements, in spite of everything.
However,
they have not dispelled the legitimate concern aroused
by the severity of the decolonization
crisis in Western
Sahara. The Secretary-General
should+nd
we,should
subsequently, when we have seen his report-study
the
various aspects of this crisis and attempt to find. a
solution for it. No doubt there will be a great deal to
do but we hope to be assisted by, the ,General
Assembly, as stated in paragraph 1 of the resolution
adopted this evening3-and
we are happy that the
Assembly is in session at the moment-and
also by
the parties themselves.
31. My delegation wanted to indicate in the resolution that the path of direct negotiation is open to the
parties. I would like to stress the importance of such
negotiations because it is clear that, among the means
of overcoming the crisis in Western Sahara, personal
contacts and the sincere search for .a compromise
between the interested parties themselves are the best
guarantee first of an easing of the crisis, and
subsequently of its final solution.

26. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (interpretation
frofi
French): The intense and long consultations
which
have taken place over the last two days and which
have brought us together at this late hour have made it
difficult for my delegation to prepare the very detailed
statement that I would have liked to devote to the
important subject of Western Sahara.
27. We congratulate ourselves on the results we have
arrived at, thanks to the good o&es,
imagination
and sense of conciliation
of our five colleagues and
friends from the non-aligned group. They have worked
very hard and have done a good deal of negotiating.
My delegation has given them every support and is
grateful that a balanced text has been reached and has
won agreement by consensus.

32. The resolution is conservative in character. It is
in keeping with the effort we should make to defuse a
dangerous dispute. As it appears in the text, which is
the result of attentive and intense work, all the words
of this resolution count. The central idea is, I repeat,
the mission of consultation entrusted to the SecretaryGeneral. But we know that this mission can only
succeed if all the parties concerned and interested
observe the necessary moderation.
My delegation
would like to express the ardent wish that satisfactory
conditions,
based on a spirit of peace, will make it
possible for the Secretary-General
and the Council
to make a contribution to a settlement of this question
on the agenda.

28. I should also like to express my satisfaction at
the attitude of the parties to the dispute which we
have had to consider, parties which of course include
the administering
Power of the territory under ‘discussion, the sincerity of whose intentions leaves no
room for doubt on our part. In spite of the gravity of
the dispute, the parties referred to have set forth
their position with ‘clarity and with, care. They have
shown a desire for mutual understanding
which we
hope will be confirmed in the next ,few days and
weeks.

33: .Mr. RICHARD
(United. Kingdom):
Mr. President, we have had indeed arduous discussions over
the last two days, and our thanks go to you first
,for the way you have patiently and skilfully’ guided
us to a successful conclusion. My thanks and appreciation also go to the non-aligned members of the Security
Council who’have worked so hard for a result which
would not only be consistent with the Council’s
mandate, but, in addition, would be. acceptable to
all the parties in so far as was possible.

29. The comer-stone of the resolution just adopted is
the request we addressed to the Secretary-General.
By asking him to undertake immediate consultations,
we are placing on his shoulders an additional burden.
We should‘almost
apologize, since we have so often
had recourse to his good offtces, his wisdom and his
whole-hearted devotion to the cause of peace in the
world. We hope that the Secretary-General
will accept
this assurance of our profound gratitude for the great
services which he has again been willing to render in
the work of the United Nations. We have no doubt
that all the parties will assist the Secretary-General
and
co-operate with him.

34. We were happy to associate ourselves with the
consensus which we have just reached on the question
of the Sahara. The situation in the area is of great
concern to my delegation.
The Council’s primary
task is to do all it can to maintain international
peace
and security, and to defuse threatening
situations.
In doing so, the Charter provides for a number of ways
in which the Security Council can carry out this
important task. The consensus we have just adopted,.
in my delegation’s view, faithfully reflects the spirit
of the Charter. We hope that this consensus will serve
to reduce -tension in the area and we hope that the
immediate consultations which the Secretary-General

30. The statements which‘we heard last Monday and
this evening from the representatives
of Spain,
Morocco, Mauritania and Algeria-ah
four of them so
close to France-seemed
to us to contain some
4

will now undertake with the parties’concerned
and
interested will bear fruit, so that he can report on a’
successful outcome. We make an urgent‘appeal
to all
the parties I have just mentioned to refrain from any
action in the meantime which might aggravate the
situation. We’hope this appeal will not go unheeded;

38. It is obvious that this action, made known to us
by the representative of the administering
Power of
Western Sahara, is a violation of a Territory which,
on the authority of the General Assembly, is’going
through a process of. decolonization
which we all
hope will soon be completed. In view of such a danger,
which could even have led to an armed confrontation,
what really matters is for the Security Council to act
as quickly as the situation reported by Spain demands.
We must be pleased that, after such delicate and
intense consultations,
we have been able’to adopt a
resolution which represents a response by the Security
Council to the problem of Western Sahara. In the
course of the negotiations,
my delegation insistently
pointed out the need to reach an agreement before the
events under way rendered the problem more difficult.

35. The consensus we have just adopted rightly refers
to action which the General Assembly may take in
future under ‘the terms of resolution 3292 (XXIX).
In the course of our consultation,
many speakers
referred to the important
distinction
between the
tasks of the Security Council and those of the General
Assembly. The Fourth Committee
of the Assembly
will shortly be considering the question of the Sahara,
in the light of the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice and of the report of the United
Nations Visiting Mission to Western Sahara ,recently
sent to the area by the Special Committee
on. the
Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the
Declaration
on the Granting
of Independence
to
Colonial Countries and Peoples. A number of important
questions concerning the future of the Sahara will
then have to be decided. My delegation hopes that a
spirit of understanding
and moderation
will likewise
prevail in future debates on this subject.

39. BY virtue of this resolution, the Security Council
has taken the first step in associating itself with the
delicate situation before it and, as the text of the
resolution indicates, we shall have to deal further with
this matter when we receive the report of the SecretaryGeneral. In the meantime, it is to be hoped that the
consultations
of the Secretary-General,
under the
mandate conferred on him by the Council, will meet
with a positive response among the countries that he
will consult.

36. Mr. SALAZAR (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation wishes to state the reasons
why we are joining in the consensus on draft resolution
S/11858. My delegation,
as is known, sponsored
another draft resolution [S//f853/Rev.l]
which, in a
more direct manner, called attention to an act likely to
endanger international peace and security. I consulted
members of the Security Council about that draft
resolution, and some of them persuaded me that in the
first stage of dealing with the problem it was preferable
to choose the draft resolution we have now adopted,
which perhaps has a more cautious approach to some
aspects of the problem.

40. Mr. SAITO (japan): After overcoming
many
difficulties during intensive consultations, the Council
has produced the text of a resolution on the question
of Western Sahara. My delegation is gratified that the
Council unanimously adopted draft resolution S/l 1858.
On this occasion I wish to express my delegation’s
sincere thanks and appreciation
in particular to the
representatives
of the non-aligned
members of the
Council, who greatly contributed to the satisfactory
result.
41. By adopting the resolution, the Council decided
to request the Secretary-General
to enter immediately
into consultations
with the parties concerned and
interested. I hope that the Secretary-General
will
perform his mission successfully so that the Council
will be able to take appropriate
measures to deal
with the situation. The Council also decided to appeal
to the parties concerned and interested to exercise
restraint and moderation.
My delegation
sincerely
hopes and believes that they will heed the appea1 of
the Council and will avoid any action which might
aggravate the current situation.

37. Having withdrawn our own draft resolution
so as to support the draft resolution which we have
adopted, my delegation’s
concern was that what
was as important
as the text of the resolution was
the promptness, which in this case had been called
for urgently, with which the Security Council could
adopt appropriate measures in order to prevent the
occurrence of events which might later prove very
difficult to reverse. My delegation, in this respect,
has reiterated its position sufficiently in the past, as
well as in the course of the informal consultations
of the Council-that
is, we maintain that it is essential,
when the Council considers an event which may
affect international peace and security, that its actions
should be as speedy as circumstances
permit. My
delegation was seriously worried because the Council
had not been able to find a formula of general
acceptance likely to prevent a deterioration
of the
situation in Western Sahara as a result of the proposed
march which had been announced by His Majesty
King Hassan of Morocco.

42. The delegation of Japan will follow the situation
closely and will be prepared to support any action by
the Council which will contribute
to peace and
stability in the region. In conclusion, I should like to
express my delegation’s hope that the question of the
decolonization
of Western Sahara will be solved in
a spirit of understanding and conciliation.
43. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(interpretation
from Russian): The Soviet delegation
5

sided advantage from the situation which has arisen
in the matter of Western Sahara. The Security
Council acted correctly in taking a decision to prevent
any of the parties undertaking any action which might
lead to a deterioration
of the situation in this matter
and which would prevent the Secretary-General
from
carrying out the mission entrusted to him by the
Council with regard to Western Sahara.

has listened with attention to the statements of the
representatives
of Spain, Morocco, Mauritania
and
Algeria on the question of Western Sahara. The facts
they have adduced clearly demonstrate
that the
situation with regard to the question of Western
Sahara has recently become considerably
more
complicated.
The Soviet delegation is compelled to
express its regret at such a course of events. There
can be no doubt that the situation which has arisen is
a result of the fact that the colonial system continues
to be maintained in Western Sahara-a system which
has led precisely to an exacerbation of the situation
in this area.

48. The United Nations should give assistance in
the search for a peaceful solution to this problem so
that the people of Western Sahara, who are the lawful
masters of their own country, can solve the problem
of their future in accordance with the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries
and Peoples. It is precisely on the basis of the abovementioned considerations
that the Soviet delegation
supported the resolution adopted by consensus by the
Council.

44. The process of decolonization
of Western Sahara
has been inordinately
protracted. The talks between
the interested parties on the question of Western
Sahara have so far not led to an agreed view on ways
of solving this important
problem,
which is being
discussed at almost all levels. The decisions of the
General Assembly on this question have not been
complied with. In the consideration of this item, and
in determining
its position,
the Security Council
should of course take into account the fact that the
United Nations has been dealing with this problem for
a considerable period of time now. Resolutions of the
General Assembly have already set forth a number
of principles, which may be summarized as follows.
In accordance with those principles, the process of
the decolonization
of Western Sahara should be
accelerated and the colonial domination
of Spain
over this Territory should be ended. The population
of Western Sahara has the right to self-determination
in accordance with the decisions of the General
Assembly.

49. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania): A
very serious problem is now before the Security
Council. In the consideration
of the problem before
us, my delegation
has listened with the utmost
attention and seriousness to the important statements
made by the representatives
of Spain, Morocco,
Mauritania and Algeria.
50. It is our evaluation that the recent developments
with regard to the so-called Spanish Sahara, or Western
Sahara, if allowed to continue, may on the one hand
affect the peace and security of the region as well as
international
peace and security and, on the other
hand, affect the principle of the right of peoples to
self-determination
so persistently
defended
and
championed by the United Nations.

45. The Soviet delegation at sessions of the General
Assembly has repeatedly set forth its position on this
question. Our position of principle is that the question
of the future of Western Sahara should be decided by
the people of that Territory themselves.

51. The Security Council, which is the main organ
of the United Nations for the maintenance of peace
and security, has a clear responsibility
to act, and
act decisively,
to prevent the escalation
of the
current tension, create conditions for moderation and
restraint, and thus make it possible for the General
Assembly, whose responsibility
it clearly is, to deal
with the substance of the problem.

46. In the African continent the process of decolonization is reaching a point of culmination.
One
Territory after another is freeing itself from colonial
slavery. This process is irreversible and cannot be
halted by any manceuvres on the part of the opponents
of decolonization.
In a speech at the solemn meeting
at Berlin on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the German Democratic Republic in June
last year, the General Secretary of the Central
Committee
of the Communist
Party of the Soviet
Union, Mr. Brezhnev, stated:

52. The United Republic of Tanzania, consistent
with its foreign policy and loyal to the position of
the Organization
of African Unity
(OAU),
has
steadfastly stood for the liberation
of the African
continent. In this connexion, jointly with our African
brothers members of OAU, we have spared no effort
in the struggle for the total decolonization
of our
continent.
Here we speak of the entire African
continent, making no exceptions or distinctions. Thus
the issue of the decolonization
of Western Sahara
is very much an African issue and has been dealt
with as such in the various councils of OAU. It is at
the same time a United Nations issue, since the United
Nations is equally involved in the problem as it
affects the rights of the people to self-determination,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514

“The collapse of Portuguese colonialism
is a
major turning point in the struggle for the full and
final liquidation
of colonial slavery on the African
continent. We are convinced that the day is near
when the whole of Africa, from the Cape of Good
Hope to Western Sahara, will be free.”
47. Of course, we cannot. permit a situation in which
anyone might attempt to derive for himself a one6

(XV). Nothing that has happened in the recent past
or in the last few days has changed these basic
facts.
I
53. As a member of both OAU and the United
Nations,
the United
Republic
of Tanzania
is
committed
now, as it was committed
then, to the
principle of the-decolonization
of the Territory, and it
is from this perspective that we evaluate the issue
before the Council. In this connexion, we should like
to make a few observations.

the opinion? By any standard, and under whatever
circumstances,
the answer is patently obvious. The
General Assembly
has ‘a clear responsibility
to
pronounce on its position in the light of these developments and taking into account the express wishes of
the people of the Territory.
58. Since the Security Council is not the forum for
of
considering
the substance of the question
decolonization
of the Territory,
I shall confine my
remarks accordingly. It remains for me to express our
confidence that the Secretary-General
will be given
all the co-operation
and assistance necessary as he
undertakes the delicate .and urgent mission that has
been entrusted to him by the Council.

54. We see the problem in two different ways,
though not in totally unrelated dimensions. First, it
is a question of defusing the current cri& w&i& as
I have already stated, has all the potential of escalating
to a serious breach of the peace and security of the
area. Secondly, there is the issue of the decolonization
of the Territory as recognized, accepted and defended
by the United Nations.

59. I should like to conclude by paying a tribute to
you, Mr. President, for your wise leadership and
patience, as well as to all our colleagues in the Council
with whom we have collectively
worked in order to
arrive at the consensus which we have just adopted.

55. It is our understanding that the first issue is what
legitimately
preoccupies
the Council.
Here the
Council must exercise its responsibility
and prevent,
the escalation of tension, and indeed strive for the
normalization
of the situation. We view the decision
which the Council has just taken by consensus as a
step in this direction. In this respect, we earnestly
appeal to all the parties concerned and interested to
exercise a statesmanlike
approach and moderation,
so as to avoid a further deterioration of the situation.

60. Mr. VINCI (Italy): The resolution on Western
Sahara which we have just adopted by consensus is
the result of long, arduous, intense and elaborate
consultations which reflected faithfully the intricacies
and complexities
of a situation in which so many
interests and principles are involved. The statements
that we have heard up to now confirm this assessment.
61. We feel indebted first of all to you, Mr. President,
for having guided these consultations with skill, energy
and foresight. My delegation feels equally indebted to
the five non-aligned States members of the Security
Council for having taken up the main burden and
carried their task to a successful outcome. It was
certainly not easy, and we feel all the more grateful
to them for their-relentless
efforts. I believe that,we
are all aware that at this stage it was the most we
could achieve.

56. This then brings us to the second problem. This
is the issue of the decolonization
of Western Sahara.
Here we must first of all stress that it is imperative
that the current crisis should not be allowed to develop
to the point where it would threaten the application
of the principle of decolonization
with regard to the
Territory.
It is therefore obvious that the Council
must guard against the creation of situations which
might complicate the task of the General Assembly
in regard to the implementation
of the process of
decolonization
of Western Sahara.

62. At this moment when the Secretary-General
is
entrusted with another important and delicate mission,
I wish to express again to him our full support,
confidence and human solidarity. We sincerely hope
that the Secretary-General
will receive from each
party a response and find a spirit of co-operation in
keeping with the unconditional
dedication to the main
purpose of the Charter which he has shown in rendering
his high services to the Organization.

57. Last year the General Assembly,
with the
concurrence of all the parties concerned and interested,
through its resolution 3292 (XXIX) of 13 December
1974 requested the International
Court of Justice to
deliver an advisory opinion. At the same time, it
authorized the Special Committee, over which I have
had the honour to preside, to send a Visiting Mission
to the Territory. The Mission, ably led by the representative of the Ivory Coast, Mr Akt, has concluded
its work and submitted its report.2 It was not an easy
Mission. The Special Committee
and the General
Assembly have yet to consider this report. At the
same time, the International
Court of Justice, on
16 October, handed down its advisory opinion.’ Is it
not only proper, fair and logical that the Assembly,
which requested both the Visiting Mission and the
advisory opinion, should be given the opportunity to
consider the question in the light of the report and of

63. Mr. OYONO
(United Republic of Cameroon)
(interpretation
from French): The delegation of the
United Republic of Cameroon is very pleased at the
Council’s adoption by consensus of draft resolution
S/ 11858 on the present situation concerning Western
Sahara. The Council has thus fortunately
made an
important
contribution
to the cause for a peaceful
settlement
designed to defuse the tension which
prevails in that part of Africa.
64. We sincerely
mandate entrusted
7

hope that,- in connexion with the
to him in this delicate matter, the

;
.

.

Secretary-General,
who has our complete confidence
and support, will have the co-operation .of all the
,parties concerned and interested so that he’ may
:undertake his mission and complete it in satisfactory
: conditions. The spirit of co-operation which was shown.
by .all the parties concerned and interested in the
.course of intense negotiations which led to the ‘draft
‘resolution adopted by the Council prompts us to be
optimistic in regard to the outcome of the Secretary1General’s mission.

maintenance of a colonial system in Western Sahara.
History has’ often witnessed attempts’ of colonial
Powers to Preserve domination
over: their subject
Territories
which have produced complicated
situations, and this shows that it is extremely necessary
to eliminate as soon as possible the remnants of the
colonial system both in Africa and in .&her parts of
the world.
70, The question of Western Sahara .has long been
consideredinthe
United Nations, which has repeatedly
confirmed
in its resolutions,
particularly
General
Assembly resolution 3162 (XXVIII),
the right of the
population of ‘that Territory to self-determination
and
independence.
The demand to free the African
Territories
has been repeatedly addressed to Spain
by OAU. The Special Committee is constantly dealing
with this” question, and this year, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 3292 (XXIX),
it sent a
Visiting Mission to Western Sahara, which submitted
a thorough. report on this question. That report
expresses the view that the General Assembly should
take steps to permit the.people of Western Sahara to
determine their own future in circumstances of total
freedom and in an atmosphere of peace and security
on the basis of the provisions of resolution 1514 (XV)
and in accordance with other relevant resolutions of
the Assembly. Our delegation also believes that the
Assembly should speed up the consideration
of the
question of Western Sahara at its current session.

65. Of course, the delegation of the United Republic
of Cameroon reserves its right to make a contribution
‘on the substance of the matter when it comes up for
consideration
before the General Assembly, particularly in the light of the advisory opinion of the
International
Court of Justice and the conclusions
of the United Nations Visiting Mission which some
months ago went to Western Sahara.
66. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America): My
delegation is gratified that the Council has reached a
consensus with respect to the resolution on the situation in Western Sahara. We are grateful to you,
Mr. President, in view of the particularly
heavy
schedule of activities you have had during this week of
your Council presidency,
for your patience and
perseverance in encouraging such a timely result of
our endeavours as the resolution which we have just
adopted. We should also like to commend in particular
our non-aligned colleagues on the Council for their
tireless persistence in developing this resolution. We
believe that the Council has acted in accordance with
its responsibilities
under the Charter.
We fully
associate ourselves with the appeal for restraint and
moderation on the part of all the parties concerned.

71. Against the background of considerable successes
on the part of the peoples of colonial Territories in
Africa in the struggle for freedom and independence,
it is quite clear that the process of decolonization
of
Western Sahara is unjustifiably
slow. Therefore our
delegation associates itself with the views of those
delegations which consider that the General Assembly
at.its’thirtieth
session should take measures to bring
about a culmination’of
the process of the decolonization of that Territory
by establishing stability and
peace in the area. We must ensure all the necessary
conditions to permit the people of Western Sahara to
implement
unimpeded
their lawful right to selfdetermination.

,67. ,My delegation hopes that the parties will give the
Secretary&General
every assistance in pursuing his
consultations.
Clearly, they must have a scope which
looks beyond the immediate
situation
towards a
satisfactory solution of the problem if they are to
achieve the desired result.
68. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet
Socialist
Republic)
(interprefation
from
Russian): The delegation of the Byelorussian
SSR
supported draft resolution S/11858, and in this regard
I should like to make the following statement. In
supporting the draft resolution, our delegation took
into account the,fact that the situation with regard to
Western Sahara has recently been exacerbated, as was
reflected in the statements of the representatives
of
Spain, Morocco, Mauritania and Algeria in the Security
Council.
Our delegation
also believes that the
exacerbation of the situation with regard to Western
Sahara affects above all the interests of the’ countries
of the African continent, which have expressed their
serious concern about that situation..’

72.’ The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR considers
that the steps taken by the Security Council will
promote a peaceful settlement of the problem and a
situation in which the people of Western Sahara itself
can ,resolve the question of its future in accordance
with one of the most important
instruments of the
United Nations, that is, the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence
to Colonial ‘Countries and Peoples.
.These steps by the Security Council will also promote
the strengthening of -peace and security in that part
of.Africa.
.;,
;,
73.; ,The PRESIDENT:
I should like to speak now as
the representative of SWEDEN.
Although speaking in
that capacity, “I cannot refrain from expressing also
my deep satisfaction, as President of the Council

69. Our delegation
shares the’ view’ that .the
fundamental
source of tension in this area is ‘the
8.

‘,

_

._..-

_.
:

for this month that it has been possible for members
of the Council to reach a consensus on an initial step
with regard to the question of Western Sahara in so far
as it falls within the competence of the Council. The
difficulties
in reaching a consensus have been
considerable.
However, throughout the negotiations
members worked in a constructive spirit, and I believe
that we have secured a result which to a large degree
meets the needs of the moment as regards this question.

78. The considerations
that I intend to present will
lead me naturally to speak of what ‘some consider to,
be a contradiction
in ‘the Mauritanian
position. ‘It is
believed, in fact, that acceptance by Mauritania
of
the principle of self-determination
is an irreversible
fact even though the conditions
in, which’ we
subscribed to that principle .have changed fundamentally. But when one takes the trouble to consider
more carefully the circumstances and the spirit in which
we accepted that principle, and when one analyses
the present situation, one cannot, I believe, justly
reproach Mauritania for giving priority to its territorial
integrity and the unity
of its people.
-

74. In particular, I want to express my thanks to the
non-aligned States members of the Council, who have
spared no efforts, and their efforts have given the
Council a solid basis for taking a decision which we
hope will achieve the ends that we all have in mind.
My delegation wants to stress strongly the seriousness
of the Council’s appeal to the parties concerned and
interested’ to exercise -restraint and moderation.
The
Council has ,again entrusted to the Secretary-General
an arduous and important
task, and we want to
assure him of our full support. He can count on our
delegation,
as I know he can count on the other
delegations,
at every stage of his efforts. It is our
sincere hope that the Secretary-General
will soon be
able to report back to us and that his report will give
the Council the necessary foundation for evaluating
the situation and considering what possible further
steps may be asked of the Council.

79. Selt?determmation
for the populations
of the
Sahara was proclaimed
in 1966 and.. .Mauritania
associated itself with this at the time. without any
hesitation, but without thereby--renouncing
its fundamental position or claims. Are the two.contradictory?
The reply is assuredly negative’@ so ‘far as any free
and genuine choice can lead to a. multitude
of solutions, including the most likely one, the one that
respects the ‘national unity and territorial integrity of
our countries.
80. However; those positions do become irreconcilable when the choice’can in fact lead to only one
solution, one prepared veiy carefully by the administering Power. But then it -is. out of place to speak of
a free and genuine choice as’s means of ascertaining
the will of the population and the manner in which it
wishes to decide its own destiny.- In our opinion,
our claims are inno contradVktion .withthe organization of a referendum, and we have emphasized this
constantly.

75. We have listened with great attention to the
representatives
of Spain, Morocco, Mauritania
and
Algeria. We .could not fail to notice deep differences
in the views of the parties concerned and interested.
However, we earnestly hope that-it will be possible
to work out a settlement of the current crisis based
on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We appeal to all parties concerned and interested to
co-operate whole-heartedly with the Secretary-General
and to do everything to defuse a potentially
very
dangerous situation.

81. I shall simply recall what, our position has been
since 1966, when we accepted the principle of selfdetermination
for the populations
of the Sahara.
Already in 1966 the representative
of our country
declared, in the Special Committee,
that’ Mauritania
accepted the principle of self-determination
because
we were certain of the choice which -would be made
by that population of the north-western part of the
nations territory.

76. Mr. EL HASSEN
(Mauritania)
(interpretution
from French): I know that the hour is late and that
it would be discourteous to the members of the Council
to prolong the debate. But I am also certain that the
members of the Council will understand that it is
difficult for the delegation of Mauritania to speak on
,the problem of the Sahara without going into some
detail on one of the aspects of this problem.

82. In 1967 the representative of Mauritania
stated
in the Fourth Committee4 that the fact that Sahara
belonged to Mauritania was not in contr’adiction-with
the loyal-I
insist on the word ‘iloyal’?Yapplication
of
the principle of self-determination
with regard to the
peoples of that region. In 1968 a similar statement was
made before the Fourth Committee,5
and ,it was
repeated in different ways in 1969, 1970, 1971, 1972
and 1973. This--means that since’ we accepted ‘the
principle of self-determination
from the .outset, it was
because we were certain that, if our brothers had to
choose objectively
in an atmosphere of calm, their
only choice would be integration with our countries.

77. I have already had the opportunity in the course of
the 1849th meeting of the Security Council of stating
the point of view of my Government on the advisory
opinion of the,Intemational
Court of Justice and on the
peaceful action envisaged by the Moroccan Government. I need not revert to that matter. Therefore
my statement will be devoted essentially to another
aspect of the problem,
that of self-determination.
And, if my statement will be devoted essentially to
that aspect of the problem, it is because it has been
mentioned both in contacts with many representatives
here in the United Nations and in some statements
made in the Council.

83. Nine years have elapsed since then, during which
time Spain has been regularly requested by the General
9

\

‘,

~,

Assembly to receive a visiting mission in the Territory
so as to prepare that referendum .and determine the
’ practical ways and means for it. Spain has consistently
refused to receive this’visiting
mission, on the pretext
either that it was conducting a census of the populations or that it was still advancing the economic and
political development of the Territory.
84. It is certainly not our intention, and we have no
reason, to doubt the good will of Spain or to underrate
the work accomplished by that country. But we are
compelled to note that those nine years have also
been used to influence the populations politically
so
that the referendum will lead to only one result, an
outcome which is contrary to the interests of the
peoples and countries
concerned.
Patiently
and
carefully,
political
arrangements
have been made
and a certain frame of mind has been created so as to
facilitate the attainment of this objective and prevent
real self-determination.
85. The logical outcome of this activity was that
Mauritania and Morocco should be the losers of the
game while the administering
Power would be able to
give a good account of itself without any real decolonization. What is more, this operation would have
been accomplished
with the, albeit involuntary,
blessing of the United Nations. When we discovered
this state of affairs, whose seriousness cannot be
overestimated,
we realized that it went beyond the
Territory concerned and threatened the very existence
of -our own, countries. Ideas of independence were
disseminated
in areas where tribal sentiments are
still very much alive and preponderate over national
feeling. It is regrettable to have to point this out in
the middle of the twentieth century, but there are
very few newly independent
societies, particularly
in Africa, which have not been tom apart in this way.

,

L

memberment
of our country, thereby ,really creating a
threat to peace and stability in the region. However,
a general principle is involved to which my country
has given its support and which it has sworn to observe
faithfully., Side by side with that principle, however,
are other no less solemn principles ’ which are the
essence and the very foundation of the Organization;
in particular, there is the principle of respect for the
territorial
integrity of States and of their national
unity.
88. Does not that principle, too, deserve the most
scrupulous
respect? We believe-indeed
we are
convinced-that
the reply can only be yes. If the
United Nations therefore wishes to be objective and
consistent, it should not attach more importance to
one principle than to another, particularly
since the
United Nations has always envisaged the implementation of these principles
in terms of the political
circumstances
of each particular
case. For the
decolonization
of the Sahara, the United Nations
has at its disposal data that the International
Court of
Justice has judged relevant and that unquestionably
place the Islamic Republic of Mauritania
and the
Kingdom of Morocco in a more favourable position
than ever. The United Nations will certainly not
contribute to peace if all the objective data which
I have indicated are not taken into account.
89. This decolonization
can, of course, be carried
out in accordance with the process envisaged by the
United Nations. But in that case the conditions required to bring that process”into conformity with the
spirit of United Nations resolutions must be duly
fulfilled. In particular, we must proceed to what I may
call the disindoctrination
of the population so as to be
able to return to a situation which does not threaten
the very existence of our countries even if that situation were to produce the result aimed at by the administering Power.

86. If the tribes concerned had been confined to the
territories administered
by Spain, the danger of fragmentation
would have been more limited because
Saharan independence
would have meant the independence of an area relatively
distinct from its
surroundings.
Such is not the case, as I think the
advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice
proves, for it is the movement of the nomadic populations alone that gives the problem
its peculiar
character. In other words, those who are in favour
of the independence of Sahara do not constitute-and
I say this in all sincerity-a
political movement in the
usual sense of the word, but an essentially tribal
movement which ignores frontiers, particularly
the
frontiers between the Sahara and the States of the
subregion. It is very clear that this situation entails
grave dangers for our countries, particularly when it
is exploited for political purposes.

90. In any case, our countries will do everything
in their power so that the decolonization
of the Sahara
does not become a synonym for the disintegration
of our lands. We remain open to any solution which
takes account of these fundamental facts. Among the
courses that can lead to such a solution, of course,
we must include negotiations
between Spain, the
Kingdom
of Morocco and the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania.
These negotiations cannot of course, be
excluded, particularly
now that the SecurityCouncil,
by the resolution it has adopted, has expressed its
wish that negotiations be undertaken. Our countries
are more than ever ready to start these negotiations
at once. For its part, Spain would not be true to
itself or to the past and present friendship which
unites our countries were it to reject this opportunity.
91. In conclusion,
I should like to assure the
Secretary-General,
who has just been charged by the
Security Council with a new responsibility,
of the
loyal and sincere co-operation of my country. I am sure
that, thanks to his statesmanlike qualities, his valuable

87. In these conditions, it can readily be understood
that our countries cannot subscribe to self-determination as now envisaged. To ask us to subscribe to
it is quite simply to ask us to subscribe to the dis10

experience as a diplomat and his keen awareness of
the mission of the United Nations and the interests
of peace, he will assist the Council to find the solution
dictated by justice and right.
_(
92. The PRESIDENT:
I call ‘on the representative of
Morocco.
’

provides in its paragraph 6 that “any attempt aimed at
the partial or total disruption of the national unity and
the territorial
integrity of a country is incompatible
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations”.
In other words, freedom of choice
with regard to the future is seriously’reduced
by the
limits imposed on it, particularly by the need to safeguard the national unity or territorial integrity of a
people or nation.

93. Mr. SLAOUI
(Morocco) (interpretation
frown
French): Mr. President, on behalf ,of my delegation
I should like to present to you and to all the members
of the Council my warm thanks for the- patience,
wisdom and skill you have shown in considering the
case before you.

99. Called upon to apply the two principles,
the
General
Assembly,
confronted
by geographical,
ethnic, political and historical facts, gave priority to
the one or the other. But each time that both principles
had to be applied together the General Assembly
gave priority to the principle of unity and territorial
integrity. And this is precisely the case as regards the
problem of the Sahara, it being understood, of course,
that the territorial
integrity we have to consider is
that of Morocco and Mauritania.

94. The reference in this resohttion to Article 33 of
the Charter implies, in our view, two conclusions.
The first is the need for recourse to all means of
peaceful settlement,
particularly
prior negotiations.
The second is that these negotiations must obviously
be between the parties which demand the integrity of
their territory and the administering
Power.

100. It is really not possible, in order to comply with
international
law on decolonization,
to permit the
dismemberment
of an independent
State. If it were
otherwise, Morocco, for example, would have been
doubly penalized, first by European colonization
at
the end of the nineteenth
and beginning
of the
twentieth centuries, and then by the adoption of a
solution which would only perpetuate the dismantling
of Morocco and the domination
of the administering
Power by new means. The process of decolonization
would be incomplete
and distorted if there were a
refusal to recognize the principle of unity and territorial
integrity as providing the necessary equilibrium.

95. As the Spanish press reported this morning
following the visit of the special envoy of the Spanish
Government,
Mr. Jose Solis, to Morocco, the path of
negotiation
with the parties concerned remains the
most objective and the most effective. In this, I
personally support the leader-writer of a great Madrid
daily newspaper, who this morning confirmed that:
“Morocco and Spain are, above all, neighbouring
countries united by many ties of history and blood.
It would be a serious mistake to take these
differences concerning the fate of the Sahara to a
field of conflict instead of resolving them calmly
by means of negotiations.”

101. The General Assembly has always taken decisions in the light of the particular circumstances of the
problems being examined.
It has never considered
itself bound by previous practices, each individual
case being dealt with in the light of specific local
features. Recourse to self-determination
has never
constituted,
in the view of the General Assembly,
a prerequisite for the’ application of the principle of
territorial integrity. And when, on the contrary, there
is a conflict between the two principles, the United
Nations has always been very scrupulous as regards
the principle
of unity and territorial
integrity.
Moreover, the two principles apply in different cases.
The principle of territorial integrity applies when it is
a question of reconstituting
a State that has been
dismantled
by colonialism
and that of freedom of
choice when it is a question of a territory’s having
had no connexion with another State at the time of
its colonization.

96. With regard to the reference to resolution 1514
(XV), it seems to me to be useful to recall here the
principles therein that are applicable to this particular
case. Paragraph 2 of resolution 1514 (XV) states “All
peoples have the right to self-determination”.
This is
a general principle laid down within the framework of
a realistic and generous concept of human rights, which
is thus enunciated as a rule which must be applied in
all cases in which it is a question of freeeing an
oppressed people from the yoke of foreign occupation.
97. This principle is in line with a position unambiguously enunciated in paragraph 1 of that resolution,
according to which “the subjection of peoples to alien
subjugation, domination
and exploitation
constitutes
a denial of fundamental human rights”. The principle
of self-determination
thus flows from the assertion of
the right of every individual to respect of his freedom
and dignity and reflects the will of the international
community
to preserve the freedom of choice of
every community with regard to its own destiny.

102. In summary, the United Nations applies the
two principles differently, but gives definite priority
to that relating to territorial
integrity,
particularly
when taking a decision in the case of a region that
formed part of a State before it was colonized. That
was the position in particular in the case of West
Irian.

98. However, such a principle applied literally in
all cases might lead to a result different from or even
contrary to that expected. Resolution 1514 (XV) also
11

_.
.le

.-

-,.

~ .,.,

‘.

,,:

,,:

.f

.’

103.. The .same concern is reflected &kin the United
Nations defines the‘atiangements
for appIying and’the
means of) impi;lementing
the .two principles. Indeed,
principle \I1 of Geaerd .Assep+ty resolution 1541 (XV)
states:
.- -- . .: --.,
‘-:
.
.. --. .’ .,
:
_._
“A Non-Self-Governing
Territory can be s&d to
1have reached a full measure of self-government by:
.(a) Emergence
or

as a sovere&n

indep&dent

requested :‘aq urgent’ ‘meeting of ih&’ Council, has
‘created intematiotiai
tenSion which iS a threat to
inter&tion&i
pedci, atid’ security., In ‘that context, in
the opinion ‘of my delegatibn, the par$raphs
which
confirm our position are particularly relevant in regard
to the review of this item in the statement I made in
the Council on 20 October; In this connixion, I should
like briefly, to recall our position. I saidi

State;

“My delegation would like to ljdint out to the
Council that the Sahara is a Non-Sklf-Governing
Territory under Spanish administration,
the decoIonization of which was to be concluded this year,
in accordance with the statement made by my
Government in my letter of 20 August 1974 to the
Secretary-General,
when it accepted the provisions
of General Assembly resolution 3 162 (XXVIII).
This
aspect of the decolonization
of the. Territory will
follow the normal course in the Fourth Committee
and in the plenary meetings of the General Assembly,
the competent
body in which all the interests
involved can be harmonized.”
[1849rh, meet&g,
para. 8.)

(h) Free association with an independent State;
-.’
- .
._ _:
-.
(c) Integration with an independent State.”

104. Those three r&S cover ail the possibilities
which could be contemplated.
They also meet the
principal concern of the United Nations, which, while
accepting the principle of the right of each people to
self-determination,
understands that that principle
must not be a pretext for diminishing
the unity of
nations or the integrity of their territory.
105. Thanks to principle’.VI of resolution 1541 (XV),
the United Nations‘.makds
clear the proper ways and
means’ of pei-initting. the~h,~rnionious combination
of
.’ the prindiples’in
resolution 1514 (XV). Colonization,
in-imposing i&presence,
has not always respected the
integrity df the countries it has attacked and,g&yiousiy,
has not &ways defended their unit6 Depending on the
results of certain negotiations,
the need fti concede
partitions pi to accept certain limitations
to their
appetites OT boundaries to their ‘claims, they have
naturally had to distort realities and what history had
so patiently and harmoniously
constructed.
Hence
decoionization
must redress the injustices committed
by coionitiiism.
The cases of Morocco and Mauritania
are very illuminating
in this r&pect.
-_
106. The strict application of the principle of selfdetermination
would lead to separate consultation of
all the entiiies emerging from the dismemberment
of
Morocco in 19!2, and it was through respect for the
principle ‘of territorial
integrity that, little by little,
Morocco partially recovered its territory-Tarfaya
in
1958 and Ifni in 1969. It is by virtue of the same
principle that it is entitled to claim the restoration of
the Sahara, with which it has been established by the
@ernational
COI& af Justice that it had ties of
alle~i~r$~~atthe
titi&df its- colonization by Spain.
.:
10;. The “PRESIDENT:
I czill now on the representative of Spain.

.109. Accordingly,
we believe that reaffirmation
of
resolution 1514 (XV) and of all other relevant resoiutions of the Generai Assembly on the decoionization
of the Territory will be an element of great usefulness
in accelerating consideration
of this question in the
Fourth Committee
and in due course in the General
Asskmbiy, in the light of the opinion of the Intemational Court of Justice and the contilusitins
of the
Visiting Mission, which clearly establish the right to
self-determination
of the people of the Sahara.
110. There are, nevertheless, in paragraph 1 ‘of the
resolution just adopted, some concepts which should
be clarified so that tlie mission entrusted to the
Secretary-General
under Article 34 of the Charter may
be carried out with the greatest guai;antees of
success, In our opinion., we must clearly distinguish
between the concept, of “parties
concerned and
interested’* for the purposes of resolution 3292 (XXIX)
and other relevant resolutions on the Sahara,and that
same concept as applied to the. negotiations
the
possibility of which is anticipated in accordance with
the provisions of Article 33 of the Charter.
111. In the first case there can be no doubt that the
concept of “parties concerned and interested”
has
been clearly delimited
and defined in the relevant
resolutions,
as has the scope of these terms. This
-obviously means the neighbouring countries. They are
interested parties for the purposes of determining the
modalities
of the referendum,
the organization
of
which was requested of the administering
Power by
the Genertii Assembly in resolution 3162 (XXVIII),
and which was to be carried out in the early months
of 1975 in accordance with the statement by the
Spanish Government
contained in our letter to the
Secretary-General
of 20 August 1974.‘j In this context
Spain, the administering
Power of Western Sahara,

108. Mr. de PINIl%
(Spain) (interpretation
from
Spanish): The Security Cotincil has just adopted a
resolution @n-the situation created in the Sahara by
the march to iiivade that Territory which the Govemment of .Morocco intends to carry out. The situation,
as I have already had tin opportunity
to explain in
my letter of 18 October 1975 [,S/ZZ851], in which I
.’
,.

12

’ does not consider that any new situation has been
created which’,,would make .it possible, to alter the
assumptions ‘on ‘which the ‘question is to’ be debated
in the- Fouith Committee
of the General Assembly
in the coming 1.1
‘days.
112. Regarding’ the negouations 1.provided for ; in
Article 33 of the Charter, in relation ‘to the intcmational tension created by the Government of Morocco
with the announcement
of a march on the Sahara,
my delegation ‘considers that’any action which would
contribute to eliminating the cause of .the international
tension which has been created must be,accepted in
accordance with the commitment
‘which all Members
of the United Nations ‘have undertaken in accepting
the Charter of the United Nations.
113. These clarifications
appear important
at this
time not only to facilitate the task entrusted to the
Secretary-General,
which is in itself extraordinarily
delicate, but also to contribute as far as possible to
clarifying the mandate in the resolution just adopted.
If we interpret the request addressed to the SecretaryGeneral in paragraph 1 of the resolution in connexion
with the purpose of the meeting of the Security
Council,as contained in my letter of ‘18 October 1975
and the provisions of paragraph 2, which appeals to
the parties interested-and
here we consider’ those
to be the neighbouring
countries of the Sahara-to
adopt an attitude of restraint and moderation and to
facilitate the mission of the Secretary-General,
there
can be no doubt, in our opinion as to the fundamental
purpose of the mission now being entrusted to the
Secretary-General:
to eliminate
a cause which
provoked international tension and which is now likely
to be a threat to the maintenance
of international
peace and security.
114. If, by means of the resolution which has been
adopted and the steps that the Secretary-General
may
be able to take pursuant to the mandate entrusted to
him, it proves possible to restore the normal situation
that existed in the area before’ thk meetings of the
Security Council were convened, we will have fully
attained our goal. If ye do not manage to,dissipate
tension, the consequences of the situation can in no
way be blamed on the administering
Power. It Will
then be necessary ‘for the Council to .assume the
functions
which States’ Members
of the United
Nations have entrusted to it under the Charter. At this
time when peace and security in the region are seriously
in danger, we hope that all the interested parties will
assume the responsibilities
incumbent upon them as
Members of the Organization and will comply with the
recommendations
of the Security Council and the
resolutions of the Generai Assembly on the decolonization of the Territory.
115. I do not wish to enter into further considerations. The observations made by the representatives
of Morocco and Mauritania
do not correspond,’ in
our opinion, with either the results ‘of the Visiting

Mission or the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice. But the hour is late and this matter
is beyond the competence of the Council,‘and I believe
that before appetites are further aroused ,we should
end here;as I personally intend to do.:
‘.’
116. I thank you all for the trouble you have taken to
make your contribution.
Let us hope that there will
be a relaxation of tension and that peace and tranquillity
will be ‘restored so that the process of self-determination of the Territory
may be completed as soon
as soon as possible and that by the competent organ
which, in our opinion, ‘is the General Assembly.
117. The PRESIDENT:
tive of Algeria.

I now call on the representa-

118. Mr. RAHAL
(Algeria) (interpretation
fromFrench): Mr. President, I would like to thank you and
all the members of the Security Council for your
patience because, albeit very unwillingly,
I feel
compelled to speak a second time at this meeting.
But I feel it is my duty to do so; first, in order to
convey to you my gratitude and that of the Algerian
delegation. I would also like to extend my gratitude to
all the members of the Council for the efforts they
have made and for the trouble they have taken to
reach a decision the effect of which we all hope will
be that of very rapidly reducing the tension‘-which
has prevailed in a region to which my own country
belongs,’
119. In the view of my delegation, this resolution does
not leave much room for interpretation.
In spite of the
measured terms in which it is couched, in’spite of the’:
obvious balance which was sought in’ the course of
its preparation,
I still, feel that its objectives are
extremely clear. The first is to relate’$he.reason
why
the Security Council met, and’since it is .the’task of
the Council to be the guardian of peace’ and security
throughout the world, particularly
in our own area,
I think this resolution means, in the minds of members,
that the cause of the present tension should disappear
immediately.
120. The second comment which I feel obliged to
make on this resolution is that the Council for the
aforementioned
purpose addresses all the parties
concerned and interested. I think that expression,
which has permeated the language of the United
Nations,
has in everyone’s mind a very precise
connotation.
121. This resolution also entrusts an additional task
to the Secretary-General
and we, better than anyone,
understand what a burdensome and delicate task it is.
On behalf of my Government,
I should like to assure
him that from Algeria and from its leaders he will
receive all the co-operation he will need to facilitate
his task.
122. An interpretation
has just been given of the
reference in this resolution to Article 33 of the Charter.

I would like to say right now that I consider this
interpretation
to be restrictive and contrary, first of
all, to the letter ofthe resolution, because the reference
to Article 33 of the Charter is to be found in the part
of the resolution which I shall read out:
“without prejudice to any action which the General
Assembly might take under the terms of its resolution 3292 (XXIX)” -and this is the phrase which
is of interest to us-“ and to negotiations that the
parties concerned and interested might undertake
under Article 33 of the Charter”.
This is quite apart from the fact, as I said in my
earlier statement, that we do not think that for a party
to be concerned or interested
in a problem
of
decolonization,
it has to make claims on the Territory
which is to be decolonized.
123. I am provided,
very felicitously,
with the
reply by my friend, the representative
of Morocco,
who just said that true decolonization
is that which
should play the balancing role which is inherent in
it. And it is in this sense that Algeria is a concerned
or interested party, as you like, in the problem of the
decolonization
of Western Sahara, because this
decolonization
should be brought about within the
balance of the region, and to eliminate Algeria from
the region seems to me to be rather a difficult exercise.
In any case, it would certainly not be in keeping with
geography, which puts Algeria in the region.
124. The Council has met solely to try to find a
remedy for a situation which, as you pointed out,
Mr. President, presents a very serious danger in the
region. It has been said-and
I say so myself-that
the settlement of the problem of Sahara is not the
object of this meeting, and that the General Assembly,
which has included this problem as an item on its
agenda, is responsible for discussing the problem
and taking decisions on it.

Nations resolutions dealing with problems of decolonization did not provide that the only end of decolonization would be the independence of a colonized
territory.
It is true that some resolutions, at least,
dealing with this problem
do contemplate
for a
Territory
which is in the process of decolonization
that it will become an independent State, that it will
associate itself freely with another independent
State, or that it may become part of an independent
State. But I would merely point out, that there is an
additional provision in all the resolutions which refer
to this choice, stating that it is the people of the
Territory which should choose freely one of these
three solutions. Now, I do not want to make a very
long statement here because I shall have an opportunity
to expatiate on these ideas when. we debate this
question in the General Assembly or in the Fourth
Committee.
126. But the position of Algeria is not one of opposition to the Territory of Spanish Sahara tomorrow
becoming either Moroccan territory, or Mauritanian
territory, or both at the same time. The position of
Algeria is simply this, that what happens should not
be the result of claims which the claimants themselves 1
consider valid, but that it should result from the
’
choice-the
free and genuine choiceof the people
of the Sahara under Spanish domination.
But to’take
territorial claims as a first step, and then to decide
yourself that you are right, that your claims are
justified, even when the International
Court of Justice,
after having studied all the documents presented to
it, has decided differently-it
will suffice to refer
members of the Security Council to the advisory
opinion of the International
Court of Justice which
they will certainly have studied, for them to understand that I am not exaggerating.
127. So I say that to undertake to meet your own
claims, to decide yourself that since you consider
these claims valid you will attempt to satisfy these
claims yourself-and
then to say “Now I must defend
the principle of my own territorial integrity”-is
to
follow a course based on the kind of logic which I
can neither support nor share.

125. That is why I did not want to develop the position of Algeria in my statement, and I would reassure
all the members of the Council who have been kept
here so late that .I certainly do not intend to do so
now. But since certain ideas have been developed
here, perhaps I could indicate those elements in the
comments made that do not entirely coincide with
my own viewpoint. For example, when we talk of the
principle
of self-determination,
this principle
is
connected, in our view, with the freedom of the people
seeking self-determination.
To say that one supports
the principle of self-determination
only when there is
advance assurance of the decision to be taken by the
self-determining
people is, in my view, to give to the
principle
of self-determination
a meaning entirely
different from its true one. It was also said that United

The meeting

rose at 10.50 p.m.

Notes
1 Western Sahara, Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 197s. p. 12.
2 OffkYal Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session,
Suppiiment No. 23, ~01, III, chap. XIII, annex.
3 See resolution 377 (1975).
* Oficial Records of the Genera/ Assemblv. Twentv-second
Sessign, Fourth Committee. 1746th meeting, pa&b. 10-17..
s Ibid., Twenty-third Session, Fourth Committee, 1803rd meeting,
para. 44.
6 See document A/9714 of 21 August 1974.

14
T
Litho in United Nations, New Y ork

00300

82-61202-December

1983-1200
