140

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

and to consider ways and means of backing the Government
in its efforts to meet those needs,
Bearing in mind that Benin is classified as one of the
least developed countries,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the measures he has taken to organize an international
economic assistance programme for Benin;
2. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations
of the mission, contained in the annex to the report of the
Secretary-General;
3. Urgently reiterates its appeal to all Member States
to provide ample and appropriate assistance, through bilateral and multilateral channels, wherever possible in the fonn
of grants or concessionary loans, in order to enable Benin
to implement fully the recommended special programme of
economic assistance;
4. Urges Member States, organizations and programmes of the United Nations system. regional and interregional governmental bodies, financial and development
institutions and non-governmental organizations to support
fully the efforts of the Government of Benin to mobilize
funds for its special programme of economic assistance and,
to this end, to respond generously to the needs of Benin at
the forthcoming round-table conference;
5. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization and the
United Nations Children's Fund-to maintain and expand
their programmes of assistance to Benin, to co-operate
closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective
international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him on the steps they have taken and the resources they have made available to help that country;
6. Calls upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental
organizations, as well as international financial and development institutions, to give urgent consideration to the establishment of a programme of assistance to Benin, or where
one is already in existence, to the expansion of that
programme;
7. Urges Member States and the relevant United Nations bodies-in particular the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Health Organization and
~e United ~ations ~und for Population Activities._-,to provide all possible assistance to help the Government of Benin
to meet the critical humanitarian needs of the population
and to provide, as appropriate, food, medicines and essential
equipment for hospitals and schools;
8. Invites the United Nations Development Programme.
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Bank
an~ the International Fund for Agricultural Development to
bnng to the attention of their governing bodies, for their
consideration, the special needs of Benin and to report the
decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General by IS
July 1982;
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective program of financial, technical
and material assistance to Benin;
(b) To ensure that the necessary financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the organization of the

international programme of assistance to Benin and the
mobilization of that assistance;
(c) To keep the situation in Benin under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and the international financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council.
at its second regular session of 1982, of the status of the
special programme of economic assistance for Benin;
(d) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
of Benin and the progress made in organizing and implementing the special programme of economic assistance for
that country in time for the matter to be considered by the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
103rd plenarv meetinx
17 December /9R/

36/209.

Assistance to Sao Tome and Principe

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/ 187 of 21 December 1976. in
which, inter alia, it expressed deep concern at the serious
economic and social situation in Sao Tome and Principe as
a result of the total lack of infrastructure for development
and appealed urgently to the international community to
assist the Government of Sao Tome and Principe to enable
it to establish the necessary social and economic infrastructure for development,
Recalling also its resolutions 32/96 of 13 December 1977.
33/ 125 of 19 December 1978, 34/131 of 14 December 1979
and 35/93 of 5 December 1980, in which it reiterated its
appeal to the international community to provide financial,
material and technical assistance to Sao Tome and Principe.
Bearing in mind its resolution 31 /156 of 21 December
1976, in which it urged all Governments. in particular those
of the developed countries. to lend their support, in the
context of their assistance programmes, for the implementation of the specific action envisaged in favour of developing island countries, and its resolution 32/ I 85 of 19
December 1977, in which it urged all organizations in the
United Nations system to implement, within their respective
spheres of competence, appropriate specific action in favour
of developing island countries, as well as its resolution 34/
205 of 19 December 1979, which sets out a specific action
programme in favour of developing island countries.
Recalling its resolutions 32/160 of I 9 December 1977
and 33/ 197 of 29 January 1979 on the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa,
Having considered the conclusions and recommendations
contai_ned in_ the report of the Committee for Development
Plannmg on its seventeenth session concerning identification
of the least developed countries, 186
Noting the renewed request of Sao Tome and Principe
that its exceptional economic circumstances should again
be reviewed by the Committee for Development Planning.
Taking account of the statement made by the representative of Sao Tome and Principe before the Second Committee on 29 October 1981 187 to the effect that there are no
recent official national income statistics available for Sao
Tome and Principe and that available published data are out
of date and do not reflect the current situation in that country.

"" See Official Records or rh,· t:conomic and Social Council. 19/i I.
Supplement No. 7 (E/1981/27). ~hap. IV.
"' Official Records or the General Assemhlv. Thirtv-sixth S,•.Hion. Sl'<ond Commit/et'. 27th meeting. para,. 52 and -53.
·

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
economic assistance to Sao Tome and Principe, 188 to which
was annexed the report of the review mission dispatched
to that country,
Aware that the economic and social development of Sao
Tome and Principe has been seriously hindered not only by
inadequate health, educational and housing facilities but
also by inadequate infrastructure, and that urgent improvement in these sectors is a prerequisite for the country's future
progress,
Taking note of the current development priorities of the
Government of Sao Tome and Principe, notably in agriculture and livestock, fisheries, manufacture, mining, transport and other infrastructure, as well as in education,
training, health and housing,
Noting that substantial international assistance is needed
to improve the infrastructure in sea, air and land transport
in Sao Tome and Principe,
Noting also paragraph 2 of decision 80/30 of 26 June
1980 of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme, 189
Noting with concern that a large number of the projects
and programmes identified in the report of the SecretaryGeneral have not yet been financed,
Concerned about the conclusion of the report that, unless
there is a significant increase in the volume of international
assistance, the Government of Sao Tome and Principe will
not be able to finance a development programme,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance to Sao
Tome and Principe;
2. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations
contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General;
3. Expresses its appreciation to Member States and international organizations for the assistance provided to Sao
Tome and Principe, both in food aid and development
assistance;
4. Regrets, however, that the assistance so far provided
falls far short of the needs of Sao Tome and Principe;
5. Also regrets that no resources have been provided
to Sao Tome and Principe for the implementation of the
action programme in favour of developing island countries;
. 6. ~enews its appe!11 to Member States, regional and
mterreg1onal orgamzat1ons and other intergovernmental
bodies to provide financial, material and technical assistance
to Sao Tome and Principe to permit the implementation of
the projects and programmes identified in the annex to the
report of the Secretary-General, as well as that of the action
programme in favour of developing island countries, to enable the Government to launch an effective programme of
economic and social development;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to a~sist the Government of Sao Tome and Principe to prepare new official
national income statistics on the country so that the Government can bring these data to the attention of the Committee for Development Planning in order that it might, on
the basis of existing criteria and of these new statistics, reexamine the request of Sao Tome and Principe for inclusion
in the list of the least developed countries;
8. Requests the Economic and Social Council to invite
the Committee for Development Planning, in the light of
new data and information provided by the Government of
Sao Tome and Principe, to consider, on the basis of the
188

N36/262.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, /980,
Supplement No. 12 (E/1980/42/Rev. I) chap. XI.
189

141

existing criteria, the eligibility of that country for inclusion
in the list of the least developed countries;
9. Requests Member States and the organizations and
programmes of the United Nations system to accord Sao
Tome and Principe special measures of assistance similar
to those called for in paragraph 4 of its resolution 34/ 123
of 14 December 1979;
10. Urges the United Nations Development Programme, the appropriate specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to respond
favourably to requests from the Government of Sao Tome
and Principe for technical assistance to help in formulating
development projects and to assist in the implementation
of its development programme;
11. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the World Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural
Development to bring to the attention of their governing
bodies, for their consideration, the special needs of Sao
Tome and Principe, and to report the decisions of those
bodies to the Secretary-General by 15 July 1982;
12. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to report
periodically to the Secretary-General on the steps they have
taken and the resources they have made available to assist
Sao Tome and Principe;
13. Appeals to the international community to contribute to the special account which was established by the
Secretary-General, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 32/96, for the purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to Sao Tome and Principe;
14. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Sao Tome and Principe;
(b) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary arrangements are made to continue the organization of the
international programme of assistance to Sao Tome and
Principe and the mobilization of assistance;
(c) To keep Lhe situation in Sao Tome and Principe
under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental organizations and international financial
institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and
Social Council, at its second regular session of 1982, of the
current status of the special programme of economic assistance for Sao Tome and Principe;
(d) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
of Sao Tome and Principe and the progress made in organizing and implementing the special programme of economic
assistance for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/210.

Assistance to Chad

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/120 of 14 December 1979
and 35/92 A and B of 5 December 1980 on reconstruction,
rehabilitation and development of Chad and emergency humanitarian assistance to that country.
