A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/148
9 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 108
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/50/631)]
50/148.

International action to combat drug abuse
and illicit production and trafficking

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/12 of 28 October 1993, 48/112 of
20 December 1993 and 49/168 of 23 December 1994,
Profoundly alarmed by the magnitude of the rising trend in drug abuse,
illicit production and trafficking in narcotics and psychotropic substances,
including synthetic and designer drugs, which threatens the health and
well-being of millions of persons, in particular the youth, in all countries
of the world,
Gravely concerned that, despite increased efforts by States and relevant
international organizations, the illicit demand for, production of and traffic
in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, including synthetic and
designer drugs, have expanded globally and, therefore, continue to threaten
seriously the socio-economic and political systems and the stability, national
security and sovereignty of an increasing number of States,
Deeply alarmed by the growing violence and economic power of criminal
organizations and terrorist groups that engage in the production of, traffic
in and distribution of drugs, arms and precursors and essential chemicals,
which at times places them beyond the reach of the law, corrupting
institutions, undermining the full exercise of human rights and threatening
the stability of many societies in the world,
Deeply alarmed also by the growing links at the transnational level
between criminal organizations and terrorist groups engaged in drug
trafficking activities and other criminal activities, such as money laundering
and illicit traffic of arms and precursors and essential chemicals,
Fully aware that States, the relevant organizations of the United
Nations system and multilateral development banks need to accord a higher
priority to dealing with this scourge, which undermines development, economic
and political stability and democratic institutions, and the combat against

96-76585

/...

A/RES/50/148
Page 2

which entails increasing economic costs for Governments and the irreparable
loss of human lives,
Convinced of the desirability of closer coordination and cooperation
among States in combating drug-related crimes, such as terrorism, illicit arms
trade and money laundering, and bearing in mind the role that could be played
by both the United Nations and regional organizations in this respect,
Reaffirming that a comprehensive framework for international cooperation
in drug control is provided by the existing drug control conventions, the
Declaration 1/ and the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline of Future
Activities in Drug Abuse Control, 2/ the Political Declaration and Global
Programme of Action 3/ adopted by the General Assembly at its seventeenth
special session devoted to the question of international cooperation against
illicit production, supply, demand, trafficking and distribution of narcotic
and psychotropic substances,the Declaration adopted by the World Ministerial
Summit to Reduce the Demand for Drugs and to Combat the Cocaine Threat, 4/
the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Drug Abuse Control, 5/ the
Naples Political Declaration and Global Action Plan against Organized
Transnational Crime 6/ and other relevant international standards, and
stressing the need for increased efforts to implement them,
Recognizing the efforts of countries which produce narcotic drugs for
scientific, medicinal and therapeutic uses to prevent the diversion of such
substances to illicit markets and to maintain production at a level consistent
with licit demand in line with the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of
1961, 7/
Acknowledging that there are links, under certain circumstances, between
poverty and the increase in the illicit production of and trafficking in
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and that the promotion of the
economic development of countries affected by the illicit drug trade requires
appropriate measures, including strengthened international cooperation in
support of alternative and sustainable development activities in the affected
areas of those countries, which have as their objectives the reduction and
elimination of illicit drug production,
Emphasizing the need for an analysis of transit routes used by drug
traffickers, which are constantly changing and expanding to include a growing
number of countries and regions in all parts of the world,

1/
See Report of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and
Illicit Trafficking, Vienna, 17-26 June 1987 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.87.I.18), chap. I, sect. A.
2/

Ibid., sect. B.

3/

Resolution S-17/2, annex.

4/

A/45/262, annex.

5/

See A/49/139-E/1994/57.

6/

See A/49/748, annex, sect. I. A.

7/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 7515.
/...

A/RES/50/148
Page 3

Underlining the role of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs as the
principal United Nations policy-making body on drug control issues,
Reaffirming the leadership role of the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme as the main focus for concerted international action for
drug abuse control, and commending the way in which it has carried out the
functions entrusted to it,
Recognizing that the new forms of criminal activities of international
drug trafficking organizations call for enhanced international cooperation, as
well as a renewal of the international commitment to fight against these
menaces, and require the formulation of new strategies, approaches and
objectives which, respectful of the sovereignty of States, can deal more
effectively with the international operations of those involved in the illegal
traffic of drugs and arms, the diversion of precursors and essential
chemicals, and money laundering through financial and non-financial
operations,
I
Respect for the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and international law in the fight against
drug abuse and illicit production and trafficking
1.
Reaffirms that the fight against drug abuse and illicit
trafficking should not in any way justify violation of the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and international law,
particularly respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States
and non-use of force or the threat of force in international relations;
2.
Calls upon all States to intensify their actions to promote
effective cooperation in the efforts to combat drug abuse and illicit
trafficking, so as to contribute to a climate conducive to achieving this end,
on the basis of the principles of equal rights and mutual respect;
II
International action to combat drug abuse and illicit
production and trafficking
1.
Renews its commitment to further strengthening international
cooperation and substantially increasing efforts against the illicit
production, sale, demand, traffic and distribution of narcotics and
psychotropic substances, based on the principle of shared responsibility and
taking into account experience gained;
2.
Urges all States to ratify or accede to and implement all the
provisions of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 7/ as amended by
the 1972 Protocol, 8/ the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 9/
and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances of 1988; 10/

8/

Ibid., vol. 976, No. 14152.

9/

Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.

10/

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.91.XI.6.
/...

A/RES/50/148
Page 4

3.
Calls upon all States to adopt adequate national laws and
regulations, to strengthen national judicial systems and to carry out
effective drug control activities in cooperation with other States in
accordance with those international instruments;
4.
Requests the United Nations International Drug Control Programme
to continue to provide legal assistance to Member States which request it in
adjusting their national laws, policies and infrastructures to implement the
international drug control conventions, as well as assistance in training
personnel responsible for applying the new laws;
5.
Supports the focus on regional, subregional and national
strategies for drug abuse control, particularly the master-plan approach, and
urges the United Nations International Drug Control Programme to continue to
complement those strategies with effective interregional strategies;
6.
Reaffirms the danger and threat posed to civil society by drug
trafficking and its links to terrorism, transnational crime, money laundering
and the arms trade, and encourages Governments to deal with this threat and to
cooperate to prevent the channelling of funds to and between those engaged in
such activities;
7.
Acknowledges that there are links between the illicit production
of, demand for and traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and
the economic and social conditions in the affected countries and that there
are differences and diversity in the problems of each country;
8.
Calls upon the international community to provide increased
economic and technical support to Governments which request it for programmes
of alternative and sustainable development that have as their objectives the
reduction and elimination of illicit drug production and that take fully into
account the cultural traditions of peoples;
9.
Notes the strong support expressed by members of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs for the initiatives of the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme to establish a dialogue with multilateral development banks
so that they might undertake lending and programming activities related to
drug control in interested and affected countries, and requests the Executive
Director of the Programme to inform the Commission of further progress made in
this area;
10.
Stresses the need for effective government action to prevent the
diversion to illicit markets of precursors and essential chemicals, materials
and equipment used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances;
11.
Commends the International Narcotics Control Board for its
valuable work in monitoring the production and distribution of narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances so as to limit their use to medical and scientific
purposes, and urges increased efforts to implement its mandate under article
12 of the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances concerning the monitoring of the movement of
precursors and essential chemicals;
12.
Calls upon the United Nations International Drug Control Programme
to continue providing assistance to Member States which request it in
establishing or strengthening national drug detection laboratories;
13.
Calls upon States to increase efforts, with international
cooperation, to reduce and eliminate illegal crops from which narcotics are
/...

A/RES/50/148
Page 5

obtained, as well as to prevent and reduce the demand for and the consumption
of illicit drugs;
14.
Underlines the need for Governments, with international
cooperation, to increase and implement alternative development programmes with
the objective of reducing and eliminating the production of illicit drugs,
taking into account the economic, social, cultural, political and
environmental aspects of the area concerned;
15.
Emphasizes the need to maintain the capacity of the International
Narcotics Control Board, including through the provision of appropriate means
by the Secretary-General, within existing resources, and adequate technical
support by the United Nations International Drug Control Programme;
16.
Reaffirms the importance of achieving the objectives of the United
Nations Decade against Drug Abuse 1991-2000, under the theme "A global
response to a global challenge", by Member States, the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme and the United Nations system;
17.
Takes note of the provisional report presented to the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs at its thirty-eighth session by the Executive Director of
the United Nations International Drug Control Programme on the economic and
social consequences of drug abuse and illicit trafficking, 11/ and invites
the Commission to continue considering this issue in the context of the
general debate;
18.
Welcomes resolution 13 (XXXVIII) of the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs 12/ on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 48/12;
19.
Welcomes with satisfaction Economic and Social Council resolution
1995/16 of 24 July 1995 on the integration of demand reduction initiatives
into a cohesive strategy to combat drug abuse, in which, inter alia, the
Council requested the Executive Director of the United Nations International
Drug Control Programme, in consultation with Governments and appropriate
agencies and organizations, to define clearly their global strategy for demand
reduction and to develop a draft declaration on the guiding principles of
demand reduction for submission to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its
thirty-ninth session;
20.
Welcomes with satisfaction resolution 5 (XXXVIII) of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs 12/ on strategies for illicit supply reduction,
reaffirming the need to apply effective strategies for supply reduction, based
on the implementation of plans and programmes for alternative development,
which have as their objectives the reduction and elimination of illicit drug
production;
21.
Invites the Economic and Social Council, while considering the
issue of international cooperation against the illicit production, sale,
demand, traffic and distribution of narcotics and psychotropic substances at
its high-level segment of 1996, to pay special attention to the

11/

See E/CN.7/1995/3.

12/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1995,
Supplement No. 9 (E/1995/29), chap. XII, sect. A.
/...

A/RES/50/148
Page 6

recommendations on the follow-up to General Assembly resolution 48/12,
contained in the report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs; 13/
22.
Requests the United Nations International Drug Control Programme,
in its report on illicit traffic in drugs, to include an assessment of
worldwide trends in illicit traffic and transit in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, including methods and routes used, and to recommend
ways and means for improving the capacity of States along those routes to deal
with all aspects of the drug problem;
III
Global Programme of Action
1.
Reaffirms the importance of the Global Programme of Action 3/ as a
comprehensive framework for national, regional and international action to
combat illicit production of, demand for and trafficking in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances;
2.
Calls upon States to implement the mandates and recommendations of
the Global Programme of Action, with a view to translating it into practical
action for drug abuse control at the national, regional and international
levels;
3.
Urges all Governments and competent regional organizations to
develop a balanced approach within the framework of comprehensive demand
reduction activities, giving adequate priority to prevention, treatment,
research, social reintegration and training in the context of national
strategic plans to combat drug abuse;
4.
Calls upon the relevant United Nations bodies, the specialized
agencies, the international financial institutions and other concerned
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to cooperate with and
assist States in their efforts to promote and implement the Global Programme
of Action;
5.
Welcomes the efforts made by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and
the United Nations International Drug Control Programme to facilitate
reporting by Governments on the implementation of the Global Programme of
Action, and encourages them to pursue those efforts so as to increase the
number of Governments that respond;
6.
Notes the efforts being made by the United Nations International
Drug Control Programme and other United Nations bodies to obtain reliable data
on drug abuse and illicit trafficking, including the development of the
International Drug Abuse Assessment System, encourages the Programme, in
cooperation with other United Nations bodies, to take further steps to
facilitate the efficient collection of data so as to avoid duplication of
effort, and encourages also the increased and timely provision of updated
information by Member States;
7.
Invites the United Nations International Drug Control Programme to
consider ways of providing assistance to Member States which request it in
their efforts to establish appropriate mechanisms to collect and analyse data
and to seek voluntary resources for this purpose;

13/

Ibid., chap. VII.
/...

A/RES/50/148
Page 7

IV
Proposal for an international conference to combat the illicit
production, sale, demand, traffic and distribution of narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances and related activities
1.
Takes note of the recommendations contained in the report of the
Executive Director of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme
on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 48/12, 14/ including
the recommendation regarding the proposal to convene an international
conference ten years after the International Conference on Drug Abuse and
Illicit Trafficking, to review progress made by Governments and the United
Nations system in combating drug abuse and illicit trafficking; 15/
2.
Takes note also of resolution 13 (XXXVIII) of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, 12/ in which the Commission decided to keep under
consideration the proposal for the convening of an international conference to
review progress made by Governments and the United Nations system in combating
drug abuse and illicit trafficking;
3.
Takes note further of Economic and Social Council resolution
1995/40 of 27 July 1995, in which the Council recommended that the General
Assembly and the Commission on Narcotic Drugs give priority consideration to
the proposal to convene an international conference for the purpose of
evaluating the international situation and the status of international
cooperation against the illicit production, sale, demand, traffic and
distribution of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and related
activities;
4.
Takes note of the proposal to hold a second international conference
and requests the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to discuss this issue fully, as
a matter of priority, at its thirty-ninth session, and to present its
conclusions and suggestions through the Economic and Social Council to the
General Assembly at its fifty-first session;
5.
Stresses that, when discussing this issue, the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs should take into account that the proposed conference should
focus, with a balanced and integral approach, inter alia, on the assessment of
existing strategies, as well as on the consideration of new strategies,
methods, practical measures and concrete actions to strengthen international
cooperation to address the problem of illicit drugs, including illicit demand
reduction, illicit supply reduction, the promotion of alternative development
programmes, the combat against criminal organizations and illicit arms trade
related to drug trafficking, money laundering, the diversion of essential
chemicals, the control of stimulants and their precursors and the promotion of
law enforcement cooperation, on the basis of the principles and guidelines set
forth in the present resolution;
6.
Also stresses that, when considering the proposal for holding such
a conference, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs should take into account
international drug control priorities and resources, the financial and other
implications of holding such a conference, as well as ways and means to
increase the implementation of existing international conventions and other
international instruments for cooperation on drug control;

14/

E/CN.7/1995/14.

15/

Ibid., para. 50.
/...

A/RES/50/148
Page 8

V
Implementation of the United Nations System-wide Action Plan
on Drug Abuse Control: action by organizations of the
United Nations system
1.
Supports the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Drug Abuse
Control 5/ as a vital tool for the coordination and enhancement of drug abuse
control activities within the United Nations system, and requests that it be
updated and reviewed on a biennial basis with a view to continuing efforts to
improve its presentation and usefulness as a strategic tool of the United
Nations for the drug problem;
2.
Reaffirms the role of the Executive Director of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme in coordinating and providing effective
leadership for all United Nations drug control activities so as to increase
cost-effectiveness and ensure coherence of action within the Programme as well
as coordination, complementarity and non-duplication of such activities
throughout the United Nations system;
3.
Endorses the agreed conclusions adopted by the Economic and Social
Council at its coordination segment of 1994 16/ regarding coordination by
the United Nations International Drug Control Programme of drug controlrelated policies and activities of the United Nations system, including
international financial institutions;
4.
Urges the governing bodies of the United Nations organizations
associated with the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Drug Abuse
Control to help ensure effective follow-up by including drug control in their
agendas with a view to assessing the activities undertaken in accordance with
the Plan and examining how the drug problem is addressed in relevant
programmes;
5.
Invites Member States to inform the Economic and Social Council at
its high-level segment of 1996 on progress in international cooperation,
especially on specific national efforts to engage the United Nations system
and the multilateral development banks in addressing the drug problem;
VI
United Nations International Drug Control Programme
1.
Welcomes the efforts of the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme to implement its mandates within the framework of the
international drug control treaties, the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary
Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control, the Global Programme of
Action and relevant consensus documents;
2.
Notes with concern the decline of available resources for the Fund
of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme;
3.
Urges all Governments to provide the fullest possible financial
and political support to the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme, in particular by increasing voluntary contributions to the

16/
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 3 (A/49/3/Rev.1), chap. III, sect. B.
/...

A/RES/50/148
Page 9

Programme, to enable it to continue, expand and strengthen its operational and
technical cooperation activities;
4.
Invites Governments and the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme to consider ways and means of improving the coordination of
United Nations drug control-related activities;
5.
Welcomes the work of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its
thirty-eighth session on the programme budget of the Fund of the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme, in accordance with the mandate
contained in section XVI, paragraph 2, of General Assembly resolution 46/185 C
of 20 December 1991;
6.
Notes with appreciation the efforts made by the Executive Director
of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme to comply with the
approved format and methodology of the programme budget of the Fund, in
accordance with relevant resolutions of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and
the General Assembly and the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and encourages the Executive Director
to continue his efforts to improve the presentation and transparency of the
budget;
7.
Stresses the importance of the meetings of heads of national law
enforcement agencies, and encourages them to consider ways to improve their
functioning and to strengthen their impact so as to enhance cooperation in the
fight against drugs at the regional level;
VII
1.
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General submitted under
the item entitled "International drug control"; 17/
2.
Requests the Secretary-General, taking into account the promotion
of integrated reporting:
To submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session an
(a)
updated report on the status of the United Nations Convention against Illicit
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances;
(b)
To include, in his annual report on the implementation of the
Global Programme of Action, recommendations on ways and means to improve
implementation and provision of information by Member States.
97th plenary meeting
21 December 1995

17/

A/50/460 and A/50/461.
