S/2006/810

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 October 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 12 October 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), I have the honour to
convey the attached letter, dated 6 October 2006, which I received from the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, transmitting the thirtieth report on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement, which covers the period from 1 February to 30 June 2006 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-56255 (E) 261006

*0656255*

S/2006/810

Annex
Letter dated 6 October 2006 from the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina addressed to the Secretary-General
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995) of 15 December 1995, in
which the Council requested the Secretary-General to submit reports from the High
Representative to the Council in accordance with annex 10 to the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the conclusions of
the London Peace Implementation Conference of 8 and 9 December 1995, I
herewith present to you the thirtieth report (see enclosure). I would kindly ask that
the report be distributed to the members of the Security Council for their
consideration.
The present report covers the period from 1 February 2006 to 30 June 2006. It
is the first report that I have the honour of submitting through you to the Security
Council. Should you or any Council member require any information beyond what
is offered in the report or have any questions regarding its contents, I should be
pleased to reply in writing.
(Signed) Christian Schwarz-Schilling

2

06-56255

S/2006/810

Enclosure
Thirtieth report of the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
1 February-30 June 2006
Summary
1.
I took over as High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina on 31 January
2006. In my first address to the citizens, I made it clear that, building on the work of
my predecessor, my aim during my term of office would be to help Bosnia and
Herzegovina intensify its transformation into a normal and peaceful country
occupying its rightful place in Europe. I also stressed that I intended to oversee a
shift in the part played by my own Office and that of the international community
more generally: rather than providing hands-on leadership, the Office of the High
Representative would offer advice and support to the domestic authorities as they
assumed ownership of and full responsibility for the country’s continuing progress
towards both institutional sustainability and Euro-Atlantic integration. My priorities
therefore are to advise the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to advocate on
behalf of its citizens regarding those issues that they consider to be their principal
priorities. I am determined neither to substitute Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in making laws nor to intervene if politicians of Bosnia and
Herzegovina should occasionally fail to discharge their responsibilities. On the other
hand, if there should be any serious threat to the country’s peace and stability — or
any evident obstruction of cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) — I have made it plain that I will not hesitate to use
my powers.
2.
The decision of the Peace Implementation Council of 23 June to authorize the
Office of the High Representative to prepare for its closure and likely replacement
in July 2007 by an office of the European Union Special Representative testified to
the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina is reclaiming its full sovereignty. Enhanced
efforts on the part of the domestic authorities to take ownership of the necessary
reforms and consistent stewardship on the part of the international community will,
however, be required to make this happen. The proposed changes in the nature and
degree of international engagement in Bosnia and Herzegovina also lend crucial
importance to the impending general elections. The politicians elected on 1 October
will bear responsibility not only for ensuring effective and efficient governance in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also for maintaining the country’s progress towards
Euro-Atlantic integration.
3.
The reporting period was comprised of two very distinct parts: a period of high
expectations resulting from the unprecedented agreement among the leaders of six
of the country’s main political parties on 18 March to propose a package of
constitutional amendments to the Presidency and Parliamentary Assembly, followed
by a period of increasingly nationalistic vituperation after the narrow defeat of the
reform package in Parliament on 26 April. This failure provided the context in
which the parties defined their positions in an election campaign that has already
generated more heat than light. As is usual in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the

06-56255

3

S/2006/810

nationalist parties have sought to rally their respective constituencies by
emphasizing the threats supposedly posed to their national or entity interests by the
others. The accentuation of dangers and divisions has not only made the passage of
reform legislation almost impossible, it has also envenomed political discourse.
Politicians in the Republika Srpska referred to the 21 May independence referendum
in Montenegro and the Kosovo (Serbia) final status talks and claimed the right to a
referendum on the future of the Republika Srpska. On the other hand, some Bosniak
politicians suggested that the Republika Srpska be abolished.
4.
Nonetheless, some progress was made in Stabilization and Association
Agreement negotiations with the European Commission (EC) during the first half of
2006. Were it not for the preconditions set by EC in regard to police restructuring,
public broadcasting reform and full cooperation with ICTY, it would be possible to
predict a successful outcome to the Stabilization and Association Agreement talks
by year’s end and the opening of a bright new phase in the post-war development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Unfortunately, failure to fulfil any one of these
preconditions could yet scupper hopes of signing an agreement late this year or
early next year. Police reform has experienced difficulties since May, when the
Republika Srpska reduced its presence to observer status.
5.
The pace of economic reform has likewise slowed during the reporting period
and, owing to increased tax receipts and the election calendar, public spending has
risen markedly. The entities and other lower-level governments have been
borrowing against future revenues and making commitments that will be
unaffordable in the longer term. The Council of Ministers failed to finalize and
adopt the draft law on the National Fiscal Council, while the dispute over the
allocation of indirect tax receipts among the entities and Brcko District continued to
rumble. In March I reappointed Joly Dixon to serve for a further three months as
Chairman of the Governing Board of the Indirect Taxation Authority.
6.
The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to engage actively in the
process of public administration reform during the first half of 2006. The Public
Administration Reform Coordinator’s Office is finalizing a national strategy and
action plan for the State, entities and Brcko District that will set out the steps
necessary to secure quick and substantial progress in this field.
7.
Despite the international community’s regular reiteration of the need for full
cooperation with ICTY, the suspension by EC in May of Stabilization and
Association Agreement talks with Belgrade and recurrent media speculation that
Serbia might finally be on the verge of arresting Ratko Mladić, no progress was
made in apprehending either Mr. Mladić or Radovan Karadzić. Their continuing
liberty once again disqualified Bosnia and Herzegovina from joining the NATO
Partnership for Peace.
8.
Based on the principles of equity and legality, as well as the judicious exercise
of my mandate and the need to strike a balance between protecting national stability
and individual rights, I have accelerated the rehabilitation of persons whom my
predecessors had removed from public office. This process will be completed before
the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
9.
The unification of the Mostar city administration slowed considerably this
year. Little if any progress has been made in finalizing the systematization of the
administration, forming an urban planning institution, resolving the status of

4

06-56255

S/2006/810

Hercegovacka Television and various cultural institutions, or forming a single public
utility company.
10. Direct discussions between the Council of Ministers and the government of
Brcko District, facilitated by the United States Government and with the Office of
the High Representative and the Brcko Final Award Office taking part as well, took
place in February and June. Their aim is to put Brcko-State relations on a secure
footing without recourse to the Arbitral Tribunal. In June, the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council urged the parties — and the Council of Ministers in
particular — to engage intensively to resolve outstanding issues.
11. My Office continued to urge the State and entity authorities to comply fully
with decisions of the Human Rights Chamber, especially in the long-standing cases
of Colonel Avdo Palic and those Sarajevo Serbs who have been missing since the
war.
12. The lack of progress on education reform during the reporting period is also
regrettable. One of my top priorities for 2006 has been the establishment of an
agency for standards and qualifications at the State level and the adoption of several
other laws in that sector, starting with a law on higher education that will enable
Bosnia and Herzegovina to live up to its commitments under the Bologna process
and the Convention on the Recognition of Qualifications Concerning Higher
Education in the European Region (Lisbon Convention), and so improve both the
university educations and future prospects of graduates in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
13. My colleagues and I have endeavoured to fulfil both the workplan of the
Office of the High Representative and the revised Mission Implementation Plan
approved by the Peace Implementation Council in March. Our efforts have been
hampered, however, by pre-election politicking. The domestic authorities have
proved increasingly unwilling and/or unable to engage with reforms that provide no
short-term political gains. The workplan and Mission Implementation Plan
completion rate has thus suffered.

I.

Introduction
14. This is my first report to the Secretary-General since assuming the office of
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina on 31 January 2006. As has been
the norm, it assesses progress made towards attaining the goals outlined in previous
reports and reviews developments during the reporting period.

II.

Political update
15. The reporting period comprised two very distinct parts: a period of high
expectation and optimism resulting from the unprecedented six-party agreement on
constitutional reform that, after several months of intensive talks, was finally signed
on 18 March, and a subsequent period of political antagonism increasingly
underscored by nationalistic rhetoric following the narrow defeat of the
constitutional reform package on 26 April. That coincided with and set the tone for
the unofficial start of the general election campaign. The first phase was
characterized by cooperative engagement on the part of a united Republika Srpska
political establishment and disarray among the divided parties of the Federation

06-56255

5

S/2006/810

over the prospect of limited constitutional reforms. The latter phase has seen
increasingly radical initiatives on the part of the new Premier of the Republika
Srpska, Milorad Dodik, whose pronouncements on a possible secession referendum
in the Republika Srpska, the revocation of previous transfers of competency to the
State and the unacceptability of any police restructuring plan doing away with the
Republika Srpska police marked a newly aggressive assertion of Republika Srpska
interests. A month-long boycott of the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and
Herzegovina by Republika Srpska delegates in May and June made it impossible for
Parliament to function. The issue was the failure of the Council of Ministers to
establish a commission to investigate the wartime suffering and fates of Sarajevo
residents of all nationalities, but the effect was to demonstrate Republika Srpska
unity.
16. The Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina passed as at May
eight major laws necessary for Bosnia and Herzegovina to meet the requirements of
the European Union (EU), the NATO Partnership for Peace and ICTY. The Council
of Ministers had previously adopted (in April) an EU integration strategy, its first
long-term strategic document setting out the goals to be attained as Bosnia and
Herzegovina proceeds towards full EU membership.
17. However, the harmonization of entity-level public broadcasting service (PBS)
legislation with that of the State is still not complete. This is a still outstanding
requirement of the EC 2003 feasibility study that has aroused formidable opposition
among Croats in the Federation. Their invocation of a “vital national interest” case
in the House of Peoples of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the spring
meant that the Federation PBS was referred to the entity’s Constitutional Court,
where it remained unresolved during the period under review.
18. After a delay of five months, the Ministry of Civil Affairs finally submitted a
draft law on higher education to the Council of Ministers in April. More delays
ensued, but the Council of Ministers eventually adopted the law by majority vote on
1 June and sent it to Parliament. The opposition of Serb ministers in the Council of
Ministers ensured, however, that Members of Parliament from the Republika Srpska
would also oppose the law. Efforts to draft amendments that would satisfy the Serbs
while not risking the support of Croats and Bosniaks have continued.
19. The Parliamentary Assembly adopted amendments to the Election Law in
March. Significantly, those amendments included the introduction of passive voter
registration and the shortening of the period between calling and holding elections
from 170 to 150 days. The advent of the passive voter registration system has
already resulted in an increase of the number of voters on the electoral register by
approximately 10 per cent. The 1 October elections were announced on 4 May. The
Central Election Commission certified 48 political parties and 12 independent
candidates for the elections.
20. The negative political climate that has prevailed since late April has had many
manifestations. One was a mid-May vote of no confidence in Prime Minister Adnan
Terzić, which he narrowly survived. As noted above, however, Members of
Parliament from the Republika Srpska returned to the charge over the issue of a
commission to determine the wartime fates of Sarajevo’s missing civilians. Terzić’s
refusal to establish such a commission provoked Serb deputies to walk out of the
House of Representatives on 24 May, a boycott that lasted until 20 June and
achieved its object. The loss of nearly a month of parliamentary time not only held

6

06-56255

S/2006/810

up important reform legislation, but also exemplified the increasingly fraught state
of inter-ethnic and inter-entity relations.
21. Prime Minister Dodik’s speculative but inflammatory comments about a
possible referendum on secession in Republika Srpska contributed to this
deterioration. Although immediate reactions by Republika Srpska politicians to the
21 May Montenegrin vote for independence had been generally measured and
mature, Mr. Dodik’s decision a week later to raise the spectre of a similar
referendum in the Republika Srpska, albeit in certain hypothetical circumstances,
evoked wide enthusiasm there and outrage in the Federation. Calls by Bosniak
politicians and commentators to abolish the Republika Srpska had the predictable
effect of feeding ever more demands for self-determination among Serbs. Despite
strong statements by the international community that there was no parallel between
the Montenegrin or Kosovo cases and a sovereign Bosnia and Herzegovina — and
explicit condemnation of Mr. Dodik’s remarks — he continued to revert to the idea
of a referendum throughout June.
22. Immediately upon taking office at the end of February, Mr. Dodik had
launched an attack on the legitimacy of the Police Restructuring Directorate
Steering Board that he has sustained over the reporting period. He asserted his
support for the three EU principles on State-level budgetary and legislative primacy,
political non-interference and functional policing regions, but challenged both the
composition and the proposals of the Steering Board. He has not, however, put
forward any scheme that would satisfy the principles while supplanting the twolevel policing model being developed by the Police Directorate. The latter body,
meanwhile, had laboured over several months to maintain decision-making by
consensus. That proved impossible by May, and the Republika Srpska was outvoted
when the Steering Board finally opted for a model based on State and local police
authorities, that is, without a place for entity police forces. The Republika Srpska
responded by unilaterally downgrading its participation in the Steering Board to that
of a mere observer, regardless of previous assurances to EU heads of mission that it
would do no such thing. Republika Srpska disengagement prevailed through June.
Constitutional reform negotiations
23. Intensive negotiations among the leaders of the country’s eight largest political
parties, coordinated over four months by the United States Embassy in Sarajevo,
culminated on 18 March in an agreement by six of them on a set of draft
constitutional amendments. The Constitutional and Legal Affairs Commission of the
House of Representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina affirmed the constitutional
grounds for those amendments on 31 March and a public consultation on them took
place in Parliament on 12 April.
24. The amendments envisaged an indirectly elected President and two VicePresidents who would rotate every 16 months in place of the popularly elected
collective Presidency whose chairmanship rotates every eight months; a stronger
and larger Council of Ministers with a real premier at its head; an expanded House
of Representatives and House of Peoples, but with restricted competencies for the
latter; and a more clear-cut division of responsibilities between the State and the
entities.
25. Regardless of any such weaknesses, the Office of the High Representative —
like other international agencies — lent its support to that historic effort to improve

06-56255

7

S/2006/810

upon and effectively domesticate the Dayton Constitution. As the parliamentary
procedure continued, however, it became clear that opposition to the amendments
had become a defining issue for Croat deputies who had broken with the Croatian
Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina (HDZ) and would soon form the
“HDZ 1990”. They contended that the reforms did nothing to improve Croats’
standing, even going as far as to suggest that signing the reforms would lead to the
complete marginalization of the Croat people within Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Party for Bosnia and Herzegovina (SBiH) also opposed the package, thereby
providing a re-entry ticket into active politics for party founder Haris Silajdžić, who
argued that the amendments were both superficial and legitimized the Republika
Srpska.
26. Although the package scraped through the committee stage, it failed on
26 April (by two votes) to win the required two-thirds majority in the lower House
after a two-day session. That result was due to the opposition of SBiH and the
nascent HDZ 1990, and one independent Member of Parliament and a single
defector from the Party of Democratic Action (SDA).
27. The discussion about constitutional reform marked a party-political
realignment that split both HDZ and the Bosniak parties. The failure to enact them
inaugurated what has turned out to be a highly polarized and vituperative election
campaign.
28. The April package will probably provide the basis for a renewed effort to agree
and enact constitutional reforms after the elections. If the six parties behind the deal
win a two-thirds majority in the House of Representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, it is possible that the package could be rapidly passed. I plan to take a
proactive role in the continuation of this process.
Republika Srpska
29. A new Republika Srpska government, led by Milorad Dodik’s Alliance of
Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), took office in early March. By the end of
June, it had pushed a raft of legislation (54 new laws) through the National
Assembly of the Republika Srpska, related mainly to combating organized crime,
revising previous privatization deals and reorganizing the public administration. The
National Assembly has functioned more efficiently and the government has been
more open to non-governmental organizations, citizens’ associations, the media and
the general public than its predecessor.
30. Several laws proposed by the government aroused controversy, however, and
were blocked by invocations of “vital national interest” by the Bosniak or Croat
caucuses in the Council of Peoples of the National Assembly of the Republika
Srpska. Mr. Dodik, meanwhile, has sought to leave no room on his nationalist right
and has missed no chance to demonstrate his arch-Serb credentials by challenging
the international community, above all on police reform and fiscal issues.
31. The first significant controversy concerned the replacement of assistant
ministers who occupy civil service positions. Mr. Dodik, however, sought to make
new appointments under the Law on Ministerial Appointments, which the Office of
the High Representative opposed on the grounds that this relates to political
appointees, not to civil servants. The Prime Minister, however, has thus far had his
way. He was forced to backtrack, however, when he appointed a special

8

06-56255

S/2006/810

prosecutorial team to fight organized crime without consulting or acknowledging the
authority of the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council in such matters. Those
appointed promptly resigned when the Council decried the illegality of their
appointments and negotiations commenced to bring the relevant Republika Srpska
law into line with that of the State.
32. As noted above, Mr. Dodik launched an attack on the legitimacy of the Police
Restructuring Directorate Steering Board upon coming to office.
33. Mr. Dodik’s inflammatory remarks on the possibility of a secession
referendum in the Republika Srpska were a cause for serious concern. They were in
marked contrast to the generally measured and mature reactions of other mainstream
Republika Srpska leaders following the Montenegrin independence referendum. I
felt it was important to lay down a marker and to issue a statement warning that any
concrete plan to organize a referendum on Republika Srpska self-determination or
secession would clearly call into question the stability of the State, and that I would
have no option in such circumstances but to use my executive powers.
34. Far from retracting his remarks, in a subsequent interview, Dodik heralded the
advent of an “era of referendums”, insisted that a referendum was a theoretical
possibility and castigated the international community for its supposedly inveterate
hostility towards the Republika Srpska. However, he was careful to say that any
Republika Srpska referendum would be under the auspices of the European Union.
My Office restated its position, following which Mr. Dodik appeared to back down
to some extent. On the eve of a reputed “State visit” by the Serbian Prime Minister
to Banja Luka on 9 June, however, I felt obliged to caution him in writing that any
discussion of a future referendum on that occasion would be impermissible.
Fortunately, there was none.
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
35. The harmonization of the entity-level Public Broadcasting Law with that of the
State — a long-deferred feasibility study requirement — has not yet taken place,
owing to the submission of a vital national interest case to the Constitutional Court
of the Federation by the Croat Caucus of the House of Peoples. The Court did not
rule on the merits of that case during the period under review.
36. A worrying attempt to reassert political control over the electricity regulator
following its approval of price rises was headed off by intervention of the Office of
the High Representative. The proposed amendment of the relevant law would have
contravened an EU directive. That instinctive response by politicians to an
unpopular decision by an independent regulatory agency was a telling example of
both why such regulators are necessary and how fragile they remain in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

III.

European Partnership requirements
37. In March 2006, the Council of Ministers adopted an action plan to address the
European Partnership priorities. In April, it adopted an EU Integration Strategy: its
first long-term strategic document setting out the steps and benchmarks it foresees
in order to fulfil the EU membership criteria.

06-56255

9

S/2006/810

38. On the basis of the findings of the European Commission’s 2005 Progress
Report on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s preparations for further integration with the
European Union, EU adopted in January 2006 a revised European Partnership with
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
39. The Council of the European Union has judged that the conclusion of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement depends in particular on progress achieved
by Bosnia and Herzegovina in developing its legislative framework and
administrative capacity, the implementation of police reform in compliance with the
Agreement on Police Restructuring of October 2005, the adoption and
implementation of all necessary Public Broadcasting legislation and full cooperation
with ICTY. While the negotiations on the Agreement proceeded well, there was less
progress in addressing the key European Partnership priorities, particularly in the
areas of Public Broadcasting Service reform and police reform.
Police reform
40. As a result of the October 2005 Agreement on Restructuring of Police
Structures adopted by the Republika Srpska National Assembly, the Federation
Parliament, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly and the Council of
Ministers, the Directorate for Police Restructuring Implementation was established
and commenced work. The primary task of the Directorate is to propose a phased
implementation plan for police reform, including proposals of police regions, which
conform to the three European Commission principles on police reform, that is,
• All legislative and budgetary competencies for all police matters must be
vested at the State level
• There must be no political interference in operational policing
• Where operational command is exercised at the local level, such policing areas
must be determined by technical policing criteria.
41. The Directorate’s Steering Board met 13 times from its inaugural session in
late January to the end of June 2006. In February, the Steering Board resolved most
administrative and internal organization issues, including the completion of the
Directorate’s Executive Board membership, adoption of a Directorate Rule Book,
Strategic Guidelines for the Work of the Executive and the Directorate’s Plan of
Activities, which Brussels had requested in order to monitor progress.
42. The Directorate soon fell behind schedule, however, most importantly by
missing the deadline for deciding on a future model of policing and its internal
organization. Political interference from and denials of the Directorate’s legitimacy
by the government of the Republika Srpska were mostly to blame. The root of the
problem lies in the reluctance of the government of the Republika Srpska to accept
the EC principles and refusal to contemplate the loss of its own entity police force.
Furthermore, the Prime Minister Milorad Dodik in particular continued to
emphasize that the Republika Srpska would never back down from its stance in the
future.
43. Despite continuing political obstruction from the Republika Srpska, in early
May the Directorate Steering Board broke the deadlock and abandoned its effort to
make all decisions by consensus when it adopted an Opinion on the basic elements
of the future police structure, which should be based on two levels — State and

10

06-56255

S/2006/810

local — in place of the current three-level model. The Steering Board adopted this
Opinion by majority vote.
44. Given both past delays and the enormous technical task still facing the
Directorate, it seemed highly unlikely by the end of June that the plan would be
complete by the 30 September deadline.

IV.

Entrenching the rule of law
45. In recognition of the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina now possesses both the
legal framework and Statewide institutions required to maintain the rule of law, the
Rule of Law Department of the Office of the High Representative closed at the end
of 2005. Mindful, however, that there is still work to be done in cooperation with
domestic institutions and authorities to ensure that past reforms are fully
implemented, the Office established an Implementation Unit.
46. In addition to the active engagement of the Office of the High
Representative/EU Special Representative in the process of police reform, they have
remained engaged in issues related to organized crime, citizenship and capacitybuilding in the field of criminal intelligence.
Organized crime
47. Because of the dire effects of organized crime and corruption on both the
economy and citizens’ trust in the political system, the focus of the monitoring and
advisory work of the Office of the High Representative is now on those debilitating
phenomena. The Office of the High Representative/EU Special Representative
monitored and encouraged the work of the working group, chaired by the Ministry
of Justice, aimed at redrafting the National Plan of Action Against Organized Crime
and Corruption. The plan sets out a coordinated strategy, as well as precise and
measurable goals. Its implementation will also be closely monitored. The
Implementation Unit approaches rule of law issues from the law enforcement
perspective, working to build up the capacity and independence of the Ministry of
Security, the State Border Service and the State Investigation and Protection
Agency.
Criminal Intelligence Unit
48. Before closing down at the end of March, the staff of the Criminal Intelligence
Unit worked to train their domestic counterparts in the State Investigation and
Protection Agency on the effective use of specialized computer hardware and
software purchased for them.

V.

Cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia
49. A number of complex war crimes trials are under way in the State Court,
including that of a group accused of genocide following the conquest of Srebrenica
by Serb forces. The Court has also initiated the trials of cases transferred from ICTY
(Radovan Stanković and Gojko Janković) and confirmed the indictment of another

06-56255

11

S/2006/810

(Zeljko Mejakić), also transferred from The Hague. The case of a fourth accused
(Pasko Ljubicić) was due to be transferred shortly.
50. Although there was little or no progress in capturing remaining ICTY
fugitives, Bosnia and Herzegovina played a significant role in the transfer of Dragan
Zelenović to The Hague. He was extradited by the Russian Federation to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but was quickly sent to ICTY, where he awaits trial. This testified to
the efficiency of the court of Bosnia and Herzegovina that processed him without
incident or delay.
51. The Federation and Republika Srpska police arrested a number of domestic
war crimes indictees during the period. While such compliance with court orders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina across entity boundaries wins no international media
attention, it does show an enhanced commitment by law enforcement agencies to the
pursuit of war crimes indictees.

VI.

Reforming the economy
52. Recent economic policy advances were confirmed during the reporting period
by the decision of Moody’s Investor Service to upgrade the key debt rating of
Bosnia and Herzegovina from B3 to B2. Moody’s particularly highlighted the
resolution of the longstanding issue of compensation for frozen foreign currency
deposits, plans to deal with other internal debts and restitution, as well as the
smooth introduction of the value-added tax (VAT) in January.
53. The overall macroeconomic situation remains positive. Economic growth has
been estimated at 5 to 5.5 per cent of real gross domestic product, which is among
the highest in the region. Exports accelerated by 33 per cent in the first quarter of
2006 relative to the same period last year, and that increase presumably reflects
stronger incentives for accurate reporting by exporters as a result of VAT. Growth of
imports also accelerated sharply in December 2005, mainly driven by pre-emptive
buying ahead of the application of VAT. Inflation rose slightly in 2005, reflecting an
increase in excise tax and higher oil prices.
54. This momentum needs to be maintained. That will require enhanced fiscal
coordination and a reduction in fiscal risks. One of the key economic reforms the
Office of the High Representative expects to see enacted before the end of 2006 is a
law on the National Fiscal Council that will ensure proper functioning of the
existing but informal Council. Other reforms to be enacted are laws on obligations
and salaries of State civil servants and other employees. They will, respectively,
rationalize the management of public finances, introduce legal certainty across the
entire spectrum of commercial contracts and put the remuneration of civil servants
and parliamentarians on a realistic and financially sustainable footing.
55. However, the overall pace of economic reform has slowed significantly. There
are three principal reasons for this. First, the incipient change of government in the
Republika Srpska resulted in a two-month interruption of efforts to take the
economic reform agenda forward before Mr. Dodik took office. Secondly, the early
and unofficial start of the election campaign has had significant and generally
negative implications for making progress this year on both economic and political
reforms. Lastly, the Council of Ministers and other authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have continued to show a marked inability to take tough decisions and

12

06-56255

S/2006/810

have sought to pass responsibility for them to the High Representative. For example,
as a result of gridlock among stakeholders, the High Representative had to extend
the mandate of the international Chairman of the Governing Board of the Indirect
Tax Administration in March and to appoint a new Chairman at the end of June.
56. The major economic challenge at present is the pre-election loosening of fiscal
discipline, which is weakening public finances. The entities and other lower-level
authorities have already started to spend the higher-than-expected VAT revenues, in
addition to borrowing against future revenues, and are apparently committing
themselves to vote-winning wage rises for public-sector workers. Police salaries in
the Republika Srpska have been increased by 17 per cent, while a random check of
six Federation municipalities shows average wage increases of around 10 per cent.
Furthermore, there are currently several laws in legislative procedure that would
increase benefits to State and Federation officials, including parliamentarians
themselves. Their passage will only encourage other groups to press for similarly
generous deals.
57. Prime Minister Terzić announced at the March meeting of the Peace
Implementation Council that the Council of Ministers would use the VAT surplus to
facilitate labour market reform, including a reduction of labour taxes and social
contributions. There has, however, been no follow-up thus far.
VAT introduction
58. All signs point to the successful introduction of VAT. After the first five
months, the Indirect Tax Administration had collected 150 million convertible
marka more than expected.
59. However, arguments over revenue allocation among the State, entities and
Brcko District have consumed an alarming amount of political time and energy.
Agreement on permanent allocation coefficients for 2006 was not achieved in the
reporting period. Demands by the Republika Srpska for a larger share of last year’s
receipts led to an agreement to conduct an external audit, but the parties were unable
to concur on its terms of reference. The dispute over the allocation of revenues also
delayed progress on the agreement of the National Fiscal Council law while, at the
same time, underlining the need for such a law.
60. Several sets of amendments to the VAT law have been tabled that would
exempt certain products or introduce a zero rate. The likelihood that any such
reductions would reflect electoral considerations rather than fiscal wisdom caused
the Office of the High Representative to oppose such proposals at this stage. My
Office has made it clear, however, that it would not seek to prevent Parliament from
amending the law.
Single economic space
61. During the reporting period, the Republika Srpska was reluctant to transfer the
competency for banking supervision and obligations to the State. Although the
government of the Republika Srpska twice adopted a transfer agreement on the Law
on Obligations, the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska has not endorsed it.
62. Centralizing banking supervision under the Central Bank (or a State banking
agency) is an EU Partnership priority. Political stakeholders have accepted this in
principle, but real progress is dependent upon the adoption of a transfer agreement.

06-56255

13

S/2006/810

Despite lobbying by the Office of the High Representative and the clear economic
incentives, the government of the Republika Srpska has thus far proved unwilling to
adopt the transfer agreement. The Federation government adopted a transfer
agreement in May.
63. The Law on Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices of Bosnia and Herzegovina
was adopted by the Council of Ministers and has entered Parliament. Apart from
establishing uniform conditions for the manufacture, testing and sale of
pharmaceuticals and medical devices, the law also introduces a countrywide
supervision regime by establishing a single regulator, the State Pharmaceutical
Agency. It thus would represent a significant step towards creating a single
pharmaceuticals market that would not only facilitate business development and
investment, but also safeguard public health. The law encountered strong opposition
from the predominant domestic producer and its political supporters.
64. Infrastructure reform during the period focused on the completion of a legal
framework for the railways, which aims to transform the Public Railways
Corporation of Bosnia and Herzegovina into a single infrastructure management
company. Despite the fact that 170 million euros in funding is on offer, the
objections of the Republika Srpska to separating operators from infrastructure
providers has delayed matters.

VII.

Strengthening the State Government
65. The Joint Action Plan for Staffing and Premises, which Prime Minister Terzić
presented to the Peace Implementation Council in September 2004, continued to
provide the agenda during the first half of 2006 — and with the Office of the High
Representative still acting in support. The focus was again on the State Property
Commission, which has been tasked with developing laws that identify each
government level’s ownership rights over the various categories of public property,
and with elaborating criteria by which State-level institutions can acquire/
expropriate property necessary to the exercise of State-level functions, not least
those stemming from European integration. After extensive discussions, the Legal
Subcommittee of the Commission, comprised of State, entity and Brcko officials,
prepared initial draft laws. The Office of the High Representative has observed,
advised and assisted the Commission’s work in particular in forging political and
technical agreements on key aspects of the draft by the several layers of
government.

VIII.

Public administration reform
66. During the reporting period, the National Public Administration Reform
Coordinator finalized the first draft of the national public administration reform
strategy, as well as an accompanying action plan for adoption by the State, entity
and Brcko District authorities. Six intergovernmental working groups conceived the
strategy between March and May 2006. It encompasses the six horizontal public
administration reform areas: human resources; legislative drafting; administrative
procedures; information technology; institutional communications; and public
finance. On 22 June, the three Prime Ministers and the Brcko mayor publicly
endorsed the strategy. The Office of the High Representative provided both political

14

06-56255

S/2006/810

support and technical assistance throughout. Also in June, the Civil Service Agency
completed the recruitment procedure for six staff members of the National Public
Administration Reform Coordinator’s Office, thereby providing it with long-needed
manpower.
67. The adoption and start of the implementation of a comprehensive public
administration reform action plan forms part of the key short-term priorities of the
European Partnership, the conditions for signing the Stabilization and Association
Agreement.

IX.

Defence reform
68. As I outlined in my last report, Bosnia and Herzegovina made great strides
towards reforming its defence sector in 2005. As a result, the country now has just
one Minister of Defence, one Chief of Staff, one chain of command and one army.
In line with the Law on Defence, the Presidency signed in early July a decision
determining the size, structure and locations of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as proposed by the Minister of Defence.
69. The technically challenging and complex process by which the State is
assuming all defence-related tasks has continued. The implementation of the
transition phase is being led, planned and managed by the Minister of Defence,
assisted by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). A Transition
Implementation Expert Team has been set up to assist the Minister. At the highest
managerial level, the Minister chairs the Defence Reform Coordination Group, in
which his own deputies and senior military commanders participate. The Group
assists the Minister in coordinating the activity of the defence institutions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina with the international community. Although NATO takes the lead
among the latter, the Office of the High Representative remains closely involved in
the process.
70. The remaining challenges are now to ensure that the agreed reform is
implemented in the manner intended and within the relatively ambitious deadlines
set in the Law on Defence. The formation of the new Armed Forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be complete by the end of 2007.
71. I will continue to monitor closely any attempts to prolong and/or to establish
ethnic parallelism within the defence system. Trust takes time to build, and some
countervailing influences still exist both inside and outside the defence
establishment.

X.

Intelligence reform
72. Intelligence reform continued during the first half of 2006. The responsibility
of the Office of the High Representative for overseeing the digitizing, processing
and storing of war-crimes archives in the Intelligence and Security Agency remained
on track. The Norwegian Government continued to fund the project. Discussions
also continued on how best to provide secure access by the State Investigation and
Protection Agency to the database maintained by the Intelligence and Security
Agency.

06-56255

15

S/2006/810

73. A few technical amendments to the Law on the Intelligence and Security
Agency were adopted by the Council of Ministers, reviewed by the Parliamentary
Assembly’s Constitutional and Legal Affairs Committee and finally passed by both
Houses of Parliament. Having received positive assessments from the Presidency
and Parliamentary Assembly, the Council of Ministers unanimously reappointed the
senior leaders of the Intelligence and Security Agency to full four-year terms.
74. Given the sensitive nature of intelligence reform, I will continue to monitor
and advise the Intelligence and Security Agency, the Intelligence-Security
Committee of the Parliamentary Assembly and the Intelligence-Security Advisory
Service in the Office of the Prime Minister. In fact, I consider this to be of critical
importance over what is likely to be an eventful and possibly bumpy 12 months
leading up to the closure of the Office of the High Representative.

XI.

European Union military mission
75. The European Union military mission (European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (EUFOR)) has continued to conduct operations to ensure compliance
with the General Framework Agreement for Peace and to maintain a safe and secure
environment. EUFOR troops conducted a number of operations, including presence
patrolling, observation activities, weapons’ collections and specific operations
targeted at the support networks of war crimes indictees and associated criminal
elements. EUFOR maintains around 6,000 troops from 22 States members of the
European Union and 12 other countries. The Force remains deployed in three
regional multinational task forces based in Banja Luka, Mostar and Tuzla, in
addition to 44 liaison and observation teams (LOT houses) throughout the country.
76. EUFOR has continued its active engagement in the Crime Strategy Group
bodies, chaired by the EU Special Representative, which are tasked with overseeing
the coordination and coherence of the EU Security and Defence Policy in support of
the domestic authorities’ fight against organized crime. New EUFOR and European
Union Police Mission operational guidelines mean that EUFOR now plays a less
active role in conducting operations targeting organized crime, but is instead
backing local law enforcement agencies, on request, when endorsed by the Police
Mission.
77. In recognition of the successful restructuring of the Armed Forces of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, EUFOR is aiming to transfer its inspection functions and
activities to the Ministry of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina and other relevant
ministries. As Bosnia and Herzegovina moves towards normality and EU
integration, EUFOR has likewise shifted from deterrence towards providing
reassurance. The EUFOR presence is, however, still deemed essential to the
maintenance of overall stability. A potential change in force posture over the coming
year would need to take into account not only developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but also in the region as a whole. Any decision regarding EUFOR will
be taken in close consultation with me as High Representative and European Union
Special Representative.

16

06-56255

S/2006/810

XII.

Return of refugees and displaced persons
78. At the end of 2003, when property repossession was nearly complete, the
Office of the High Representative handed over responsibility for the refugee-returns
process under annex 7 to the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to the domestic authorities. (Apart from Novi Travnik
municipality, which has had particular difficulties, repossession is now complete.)
79. Permanent returns — and the sustainability of those returns — are, however,
another matter. The situation here varies enormously from region to region and
municipality to municipality. Although there are places in both entities, as well as in
Brcko District, where a given area’s pre-war, multinational demography has been
partially restored, the non-Serb population of the Republika Srpska remains well
below 10 per cent, while more than 20 per cent of displaced Serbs have returned to
the Federation.
80. While the number of potential returnees grows ever smaller, a large number of
people would still consider return if housing-reconstruction funds were available,
improvements to the infrastructure and schooling were made and, above all, jobs
were available. As it is, “ethnic cleansing” has been reversed only in part, and many
returns remain provisional or seasonal.
81. As a consequence of this year’s introduction of passive voter registration, the
State and entity refugee and human rights ministries were endeavouring during the
period under review to reregister displaced persons, removing those from the lists
who no longer had any intention of returning to their pre-war homes. The previous
number of 180,000 displaced persons in Bosnia and Herzegovina is expected to fall
to about 100,000 when the process is completed during the summer.

XIII.

Mostar
82. Although the unification of Mostar has progressed during the two years that
have passed since the then High Representative promulgated a new city statute, the
city’s two main political parties have lately been deadlocked on a number of issues.
Hardliners in the Party of Democratic Action (SDA) and the Croatian Democratic
Union (HDZ) appear to have regarded the late 2005 closure of the Mostar
Implementation Unit of the Office of the High Representative as an opportunity to
obstruct implementation of outstanding items on the unification agenda. Three
months after I met with Mostar officials in February, the city had still not adopted a
2006 budget. Nor had officials made any progress in systematizing the city
administration, forming an urban planning institution, resolving the status of
Hercegovaka Television (HTV) and other cultural institutions, or forming a single
public utility company.
83. At the end of May, I summoned Mostar’s political party leaders to an
emergency meeting, during which I warned them that if they did not break current
deadlocks, I would have to submit a highly negative report to the Steering Board of
the Peace Implementation Council. I set a deadline of 20 June for adopting a budget
and making substantial progress on systemization and forming a single public works
company. Within four days the City Council finally adopted a budget for 2006 and
set its own deadlines for resolving the status of HTV and cultural institutions. This

06-56255

17

S/2006/810

demonstrated some ability to cooperate over crucial issues, but follow-through has
latterly been lacking and the ascendancy of the hardliners remains worrying.
84. Violence was also seen on Mostar’s streets on 13 June, following the World
Cup football match between Croatia and Brazil, when hundreds of youths clashed
along the former front line in the city centre, resulting in dozens of injuries and
considerable damage to property. In any other city, such an occurrence might be
attributed to simple football hooliganism, but in this case, inter-ethnic animosity
was a major factor. It was no coincidence that this near-riot followed several more
weeks of political deadlock and incitement by some religious and political leaders.
To its credit, the City Council met in emergency session the next day to condemn
the violence unanimously and vigorously.
85. The completion of Mostar’s unification according to the city’s statute remains
a priority during the final year of the Office of the High Representative.

XIV.

Brcko District
86. The working group initiated by the United States Government in November
2005 and designed to find long-term political solutions to problems bedevilling
Brcko District’s relationship with the State met twice in the reporting period, in
February and June. The first meeting paved the way for the long-mooted
establishment of the Brcko District Office in the Council of Ministers. The Office
opened in March. The second meeting agreed on an action plan centring on the
drafting and adoption of a State law incorporating the main elements of the Final
Award in domestic legislation, thereby paving the way for the eventual termination
of the supervisory regime. The action plan also envisages the early amendment of
the Law on the Council of Ministers in order to provide the Brcko District Office
with an enhanced status. The working group is scheduled to meet again in
September to draft the required State law. Passage of both a State law and
amendments to the Law on the Council of Ministers should make further
proceedings by the Arbitral Tribunal unnecessary.

XV.

Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region
87. During the reporting period, regional issues had a significant impact on Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The start of Kosovo status talks in February and the independence
referendum in Montenegro encouraged politicians and commentators in Serbia and
the Republika Srpska to draw false parallels between the future of Kosovo and/or
Montenegro and the Republika Srpska. As noted above, Montenegrins’ vote to
dissolve the State Union with Serbia led Prime Minister Dodik of the Republika
Srpska to speculate about the circumstances in which voters of the Republika Srpska
might one day opt for national self-determination. The readiness of Federationbased politicians, above all Haris Silajdzic, the candidate of the Party for Bosnia
and Herzegovina for the Presidency, to respond with demands for the abolition of
the Republika Srpska created a vicious circle of rhetorical radicalism.
88. A purported “State visit” by Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica to
Banja Luka on 9 June passed off without any talk in public about a referendum in
the Republika Srpska, but with much public discussion of the need to update the
agreement on parallel relations between Belgrade and Banja Luka. That, likewise,

18

06-56255

S/2006/810

served to incite Bosniak protests over any deal that aimed to bypass State-level
institutions. Given both the context in which the need to revise the existing
agreement was floated and Mr. Kostunica’s oft-repeated view that the Republika
Srpska constitutes an integral part of the Serbian nation, each side acquired yet more
arguments to fling at the other.
89. The relationship of Bosnia and Herzegovina with Serbia has also been
complicated by the genocide case lodged against the former Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia by the then Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina at the International
Court of Justice in 1993, hearings on which finally commenced in late February.
Bosnian Serb politicians, including the Foreign Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and the Serb member of the Presidency have argued that the case is
both illegitimate and poses yet another threat to the existence of the Republika
Srpska. From Belgrade’s perspective, the main concern, apart from being branded a
genocidal State, is the risk of being saddled with the payment of enormous
reparations.
90. The suspension by the European Community in May of its talks on a
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Belgrade because of the Serbian
Government’s failure to arrest ICTY indictee Ratko Mladić affects Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as all but two of The Hague’s indictees still at large are indicted for
war crimes committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina (Goran Hadzić and Vlastimir
Djordjević).
91. It should be noted that Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to have minor but
unresolved border issues with both of its neighbours. More troublesome difficulties
stem from the fact that many citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina also have Croatian
or Serbian nationality, and the constitutional bans in those countries on extraditing
their citizens mean that the regional battle against organized crime and the pursuit of
putative war criminals not indicted by ICTY are impeded. Fortunately, Montenegro
and Bosnia and Herzegovina have no territorial disputes or other unresolved issues.

XVI.

European Union Police Mission
Transition phase
92. The first five months of 2006 saw the European Union Police Mission in
transition, with the development of a refocused mandate, a reduction of Mission
strength and the establishment of new structures. A number of key transitional tasks
thus needed to be carried out in the period:
• Establishment of the Organized Crime Policy and Coordination Department
responsible for the overall synchronization of the Mission’s activities in
support of the fight against organized crime
• Establishment of the Criminal Justice Interface Unit, tasked to address
deficiencies in cooperation between police and prosecutors. The Unit focuses
on enhancing both general and case-specific cooperation in order to facilitate
effective investigations and prosecutions and to contribute to strengthening the
integrity of the criminal justice system of Bosnia and Herzegovina

06-56255

19

S/2006/810

• Establishment of inspection teams based in Sarajevo and Banja Luka that are
to be the main Mission instruments for ensuring local accountability and
dealing with such issues as police integrity, corruption and political
interference
• European Union Police Mission/EUFOR Common Operational Guidelines.
During this phase, the negotiation, preparation and agreement of the guidelines
took place. The guidelines formalize the working relationships of the Mission,
EUFOR and the domestic police in the fight against organized crime. They
ensure that the Mission assumes the leading role in the policing aspects of
European Security and Defence Policy efforts and came into effect on 1 June.
Staffing
93. On 30 June, the European Union Police Mission numbered 419 staff: 175
seconded police officers; 29 international civilians; and 215 national staff. The
Mission has started to take proper account of in all its activities of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security. The gender ratio remains
unsatisfactory among seconded Mission personnel, with 12 female international
police officers and 7 international female civilians. Nonetheless, the 127 female
members of national staff place the Mission well above the gender-balance target in
this area.
Mission objectives
94.

The Mission has four principal objectives:
• Support to the police restructuring process. As foreseen by its operational plan,
the Mission has worked to promote the restructuring process, with the
Commissioner serving as the only international member of the Steering Board
of the Police Restructuring Directorate under the guidance of the EU Special
Representative. Despite the efforts of the government of the Republika Srpska
to discredit the Steering Board and its representative’s subsequent adoption of
“observer” status, the Steering Board has maintained its technical work, albeit
at a slower pace than envisaged
• Support in the fight against organized crime. The Common Operational
Guidelines represent a significant step forward in assisting the development of
the local police. The Mission has also continued to help build the capacity of
the State Investigation and Protection Agency and the State Border Service,
which are key agencies in combating organized crime. Through its case
management system, the Mission actively monitors and assists the domestic
police in investigating individual crimes
• Enhance accountability. Led by two dedicated inspection teams and supported
by other Mission resources, as required, the European Union Police Mission
carried out 17 inspections up to the end of June, as well as smaller, local-level
inspections. The Mission has aimed to encourage the local police to identify
irregularities and to act upon them. It has then overseen the work of
prosecutors as cases are passed to them, ensuring that they are dealt with
appropriately and lead to a conclusive result. For that reason, the majority of
cases remain ongoing

20

06-56255

S/2006/810

• Horizontal tasks. The Mission remains active in other areas, including the
completion of projects initiated during its previous mandate, developing the
capacity of law enforcement agencies and working with the local police in
planning public awareness campaigns.

XVII.

Human rights
Implementation of Human Rights Chamber decisions: the Palić case
95. The Commission established by the government of the Republika Srpska early
in the year to carry out immediately a full investigation capable of exploring all the
facts regarding Colonel Avdo Palić’s fate following the July 1995 fall of the United
Nations “safe area” of Žepa was due to submit its final report by 21 April. The
Commission then reported that it had acquired information regarding the
whereabouts of Colonel Palić’s remains, but extended its reporting deadline by 40
days because of heavy snow in the area. Despite this unilateral extension, the
Commission failed to locate any remains by the end of June. Prime Minister Dodik
had meanwhile promised to visit the mountainous region in question, but failed to
do so. The Office of the High Representative has denounced this continuing failure
by the Republika Srpska to fulfil the terms of the decision of the Human Rights
Chamber and initiated private talks with both the Republika Srpska and Serbian
authorities. The latter are relevant because material witnesses to Palić’s execution
are assumed to be in Serbia.
Missing persons of Sarajevo
96. On 8 March, Federation Prime Minister Ahmet Hadzipašić met with
representatives and family members of Serbs missing from eastern Sarajevo. He
promised to establish a commission to determine their fates by 31 March. Despite
intermittent protests by Serb non-governmental organizations, no such commission
was named, although Mr. Hadzipašić, like Mr. Dodik in the Palić case, continued to
offer private assurances that the 2001 ruling by the Human Rights Chamber would
be obeyed. The June decision by the Council of Ministers to form a commission to
investigate the wartime suffering of civilians of all nationalities in the Sarajevo
region had the effect of taking the pressure off the Federation government, but the
issue remains outstanding.

XVIII.

Removals policy of the Office of the High Representative
97. Following close consultation with the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, on 21 March, I announced two new steps to accelerate the
lifting of bans on officials removed by my predecessors for obstructing
implementation of the Peace Agreement. Those two steps run in parallel. The first is
to review the cases of individuals who apply to the Office of the High
Representative for their bans to be lifted. After investigating their post-removal
behaviour, I decide whether to lift the sanction against them. If the ban is removed,
such individuals regain the right to stand for and hold any public position, whether
elected or appointed. From 21 March to 30 June, I cancelled the removal orders on
11 former officials. That brings the total number of ex-officials whose bans have
been lifted to 41.

06-56255

21

S/2006/810

98. As to the second step, I instituted a horizontal approach, whereby previously
removed officials will regain their eligibility for public office and employment in
phases, leading gradually to their complete rehabilitation through a series of
decisions. On 4 April, I issued a decision allowing removed officials to apply for
and hold positions in publicly owned companies and other public institutions, such
as hospitals. That will be followed by further steps.
99. Those measures apply to all those removed by previous High Representatives,
with the exception of persons banned from public life because of their support for
The Hague indictees or obstruction of full cooperation with ICTY, both of which
represent clear obligations under the General Framework Agreement for Peace.

XIX.

Non-certification of police officers
100. In February, I wrote to the President of the Security Council and the UnderSecretary General for Peacekeeping Operations expressing my support for the
United Nations effort to explore, together with the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, possible solutions to the longstanding impasse over police officers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina denied certification by the former United Nations
International Police Task Force but for whom no appeals process has been available.
While in New York to address the Security Council in April, Prime Minister Terzić
and I called upon the United Nations to set up a review process based on the
October 2005 Opinion of the Venice Commission. In subsequent meetings with the
United Nations Secretariat, I agreed to send a team to New York to explore potential
solutions with the Security Council Coordination and Drafting Group and with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
101. In June, an expert team from the Office of the High Representative/European
Union Special Representative met with the EU missions to the United Nations under
the auspices of the Austrian EU Presidency and with the Coordination and Drafting
Group and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. The expert team agreed
during those meetings to provide the additional information requested by the
Coordination and Drafting Group and to continue its discussions with the
Department. The expert team returned to New York in July. I am looking forward to
a decision from the Department and the Coordination and Drafting Group.

XX.

Media development
102. The final handover of responsibility for public broadcasting reform by the
Office of the High Representative to domestic institutions — the Communications
Regulatory Agency and the broadcasters’ governing bodies to be appointed by the
respective parliaments — still depends upon the enactment of a Federation PBS law
in accord with State-level legislation and the subsequent consolidation of the
resulting institutions. As noted above, the Croats’ invocation of the Vital National
Interest procedure has meant that the Federation law passed by parliament on
4 April was referred to the entity’s Constitutional Court, which had issued no ruling
by 30 June. The National Assembly of the Republika Srpska adopted the Republika
Srpska PBS law on 11 May.
103. Four harmonized PBS laws are required for the establishment of a financially
sustainable and editorially independent public broadcasting system in Bosnia and

22

06-56255

S/2006/810

Herzegovina that will consist of one Statewide PBS channel and two entity-based
channels. The Federation law before the Constitutional Court envisages one public
channel to cover the territory of the Federation and prescribes equal use of the
country’s three official (but fully communicable) languages in its programmes. The
Croats, however, have consistently demanded an exclusively Croatian-language
channel. A Federation Constitutional Court decision upholding that demand or
finding other fault with the current law would further delay the establishment of a
functional public broadcasting system and, with it, the fulfilment of the PBS reform
required under the European Community’s 2003 feasibility study.
104. The delay in completing the necessary legislation has put back the
establishment of the constituent parts of the system, for example, the registration of
the separate public company that is to manage premises, property and technical
resources on behalf of all three public broadcasters, as well as the implementation of
the already adopted legislation. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary
Assembly was due to appoint a new governing board for the Statewide broadcaster
by 11 April 2006, but had failed to do so by 30 June. The Office of the High
Representative will be obliged to continue working on PBS matters whatever the
ruling of the Federation Constitutional Court.

XXI.

Mission Implementation Plan and the workplan of the Office of
the High Representative
105. The Office of the High Representative has pressed forward with its Workplan
since the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council endorsed my overall
approach in March. As expected, however, the early advent of the general election
campaign and the adversarial approach to politics, as well as my insistence that the
domestic authorities must take an ever larger share of responsibility for the
country’s affairs, meant that the rate of completion of both workplan and Mission
Implementation Plan tasks slowed markedly in recent months. That was despite my
attempt on 24 May to convince Members of Parliament to push forward with an
ambitious legislative agenda over the 100 days remaining before the elections. The
slowdown experienced will have serious knock-on effects on the Workplan and the
Mission Implementation Plan. Three core tasks of the Mission Implementation Plan
remain incomplete: rule of law, reforming the economy and institution-building.

XXII.

European Union Special Representative
106. In line with my dual mandate as European Union Special Representative in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (Council Joint Action 2006/49/CFSP), I continued to
promote the priorities listed in the European Partnership document of 2006, as well
as the implementation of the General Framework Agreement for Peace. I also
worked on behalf of constitutional reform, which remains essential to both
rationalize and strengthen the country’s governance and, by extension, to equip
Bosnia and Herzegovina for EU integration. In my role as European Union Special
Representative I also continued to provide political oversight of the European Union
Police Mission. The Commander of EUFOR, the Commissioner of the European
Union Police Mission and I revised the terms of reference for the EU Crime Strategy
Group during the reporting period.

06-56255

23

S/2006/810

XXIII.

Reinforced engagement of the European Union in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and closure of the Office of the High Representative
107. Bosnia and Herzegovina has made enormous progress in implementing the
Dayton Peace Accords over the past decade. It is now on the road to Euro-Atlantic
integration and has moved beyond peace implementation with one notable
exception: complete cooperation with ICTY. The overwhelming majority of the
reforms set out in the Mission Implementation Plan of the Office of the High
Representative since its introduction in 2003 have been delivered.
108. As the situation on the ground has evolved, so too has the international
community’s approach. The country has reached the stage where it must take full
responsibility for its own governance and destiny — particularly in meeting the
requirements of Euro-Atlantic integration. That is the ardent desire of both the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the country’s foreign friends. Anticipating
that watershed, the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
acknowledged at its meeting in Vienna on 15 March that the Office of the High
Representative would also need to change. As the communiqué noted:
“Understanding that EU is prepared to build on its current engagement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Steering Board expressed its view that the time
for transition from the Office of the High Representative to an EU Special
Representative Office is approaching. The precise moment is yet to be
determined. The Steering Board underlined that its decision on the actual
transition will be made upon a recommendation of the High Representative
and based on the situation then prevailing in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
region. It encouraged the High Representative to cooperate closely with EU in
preparing the transition to an EU Special Representative Office.”
109. In approving the 12-month workplan of the Office of the High Representative,
the Peace Implementation Council in March also noted that the closure of the Office
of the High Representative might take place during the first or second quarter of
2007.
110. On 15 May, EU Foreign Ministers expressed the readiness of the European
Union in principle to reinforce its engagement in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
context of the envisaged closure of the Office of the High Representative, provided
progress was sufficient and without prejudice to the decision of the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council in that regard. The Council invited the High
Representative/Secretary-General, with the Commission and in close consultation
with the EU Presidency, to begin consultations to that end with the Steering Board,
the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, other stakeholders and myself — and
then to present a joint assessment to the Council.
111. An EU delegation consulted the Presidency and Prime Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on 22 June regarding the reinforced engagement of EU. Meeting in
Sarajevo at the same time, the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
decided on 23 June that the Office of the High Representative should immediately
begin preparations to close on 30 June 2007, taking into account the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region. The Steering Board agreed that it would
then seek endorsement of such closure by the United Nations Security Council.
Preparations for the transition from the Office of the High Representative to the
Office of the EU Special Representative will intensify in the meantime.

24

06-56255

S/2006/810

112. At its meeting on 22 and 23 June, the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council also considered international community coordination in
Bosnia and Herzegovina following the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. Political directors expressed their willingness to work with the EU
Special Representative thereafter and to support granting him a coordinating role
among international agencies and Steering Board members. They recommended the
establishment of a new coordination body to bring together the members of the
Steering Board and the Board of Principals. Finally, and without prejudice to
established chains of command, political directors noted that members of that forum
would play an integral part in the policymaking process by sharing information and
providing their respective inputs and advice.
113. While the transition of the Office of the High Representative and the
promotion of domestic ownership will mean a transfer of responsibility to
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the international community will both need
and want to remain actively engaged in assisting the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take on the challenges and the opportunities of full sovereignty.

XXIV.

Reporting schedule
114. In keeping with my proposal to submit regular reports for onward transmission
to the Security Council, as required by the Council in its resolution 1031 (1995), I
herewith present my first regular report. Should the Secretary-General or any
Security Council member require information at any other time, I would be pleased
to provide an additional written update.

06-56255

25
