TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 19 JUNE 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1479) . . , , . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressedto the President of the Security Council by
the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia,, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Laos, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen,
Sudan, Swaziland, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United
Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9237 and Add. l-2)
Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/8954 and S/9252) . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1479

!
i/

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates q reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutiry Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-NINTH MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 19 June 1969, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. M. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay).
&sent:
The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/A#enda/l479)
1, Adoption of the agenda.
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rho.
desia:
Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzavllle), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus,
Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Laos, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,, Singapore, Somalia,
Southern Yemen, Sudan, Swaziland, Syria, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Republic,
United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yemen,
Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9237 and Addl-2)
Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 253 (1968) (S/8954 and
S/9252).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia
letter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President of the
Security Council by the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory
Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United

Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper
W& 2:emen, Yugoslavia and Zambia IS/9237 and
.- ’
Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of
i;;;$
Council resolution 253 (1968) (S/8954 and
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In accordance with the Council’s previous decisions, and with its
consent, I shall invite the representatives of Mauritania, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Guinea, Somalia, India,
Sudan and Saudi Arabia to participate in the debate on the
question before us, without the right to vote.
2. Because the space available around the Council table is
limited, in accordance with the practice followed in the
past in similar cases I shall invite these representatives to
occupy tkik seats which have been reserved for them, on the
understanding that when they have statements to make
they will be invited to sit at the Council table.
At the invitation of the fiesident, Mr. S. A. Ould Daddah
(Mauritania), Mr. A. B. C. Danieli (United Republic of
Tanzania), Mr. A. Tour6 (Guinea), Mr. A. A. Farah
(Somalia), Mr. S, Sen (India), Mr. M. Fakhreddine (Sudan)
and Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took the seats
reservedfor them in,the Councilchamber.

3. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Spanish): The Security Council will now continue its consideration of the
question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia.
4, A draft resolution has been submitted by five StatesAlgeria, Nepal, Pakistan, Senegal and Zambia [s/9270]; it
was distributed in all the working languages of the Council
a few minutes ago.
5. The first ,speaker on my list is the representative ,of
Algeria, who will introduce the draft resolution on behalf
of its five co-sponsors. I call upon him now.
6. Mr. RAHAL (Algeria) (translatedfrom French): By this
stage in our discussions, the Security Council has heard the
views of all its members. The delegations that have spoken
since the beginning of this session have all emphasized the
gravity of the situation in Rhodesia. They have referred to
the inadequate results of application of the policy of
economic sanctions and of the other measures called for in
Security Council resolution 253 (1968). They have reaffirmed the responsibility of the United Kingdom for the
aggravation of the situation in this part of Africa, and have

15. First, the sanctions which the Council decided upon
earlier have proved inadequate. In view of this failure, the
Council must now agree on effective measures for complete
and mandatory sanctions, and to that end reques,t all States
to sever all economic and other relations, as prescribed by
Article 41 of the Charter.

all expressed the need for the Council to adopt firm and
effective .measures to bring down the racist regime of
Southern Rhodesia and preserve the rights of the people of
Zimbabwe.
7. On behalf of Nepal, Pakistan, Senegal, Zambia and
Algeria, I have the honour to introduce to the Council a
draft resolution contained in document S/9270 of 19 June
1969. Our introductory statement will be brief, as the draft
is self-explanatory. It corresponds to the statements made
by its sponsors and by other delegations that have taken
part in our debate, and in particular by those of the African
States. We should like to draw attention more especially to
certain factors which appear to us fundamentally important
in this grave question now before the Council.

16. Second, experience has shown that it is not (enough for
this Council to decide on such measures without at’ the
same time considering what measures must be; taken to
prevent any action aimed at hampering its efforts. Obviously the present situation in Southern Rhodesia is perpetuated by the support, overt .or covert, of South Africa and
Portugal; and since neither Lisbon nor Pretoria shows any
readiness to change its attitude, the Council should not
merely condemn them for their act of defiance but also
take measures against them in conformity with the provisions of the Charter.

8. The preamble of the draft resolution recalls the earlier
resolutions adopted on this question and reaffirms that the
situation in Southern Rhodesia constitutes a threat to
irrternational peace and security, thus emphasizing the
responsibility of the Council, whose main task is to
maintain that peace and that security.

17. It is also incumbent on the United Kingdom, as the
administering Power, to take all the necessary steps to end
the minority regime. The Council should urgently caI1 upon
the United Kingdom to use all the means at its disposal,
including force, to enable the people of Zimbabwe to
exercise their right of self-determination and independence.
The United Nations and the international community will
undoubtedly help to speed up this process, but redress for
the damage caused to the people of Zimbabwe is the
responsibility of the United Kingdom.

9. Again in the preamble, the sponsors express their grave
concern that several States, in particular South Africa and
Portugal, have not fully complied with the measures taken
by the Security Council. Moreover, they are firmly convinced-as they have always been-that the primary responsibility for bringing about the conditions in which the
people of Zimbabwe can freely exercise their right of
self-determination and independence devolves upon the
United Kingdom as the administering Power. Inasmuch as
the United Kingdom has failed to act effectively to put an
end to the minority regime, it must be held responsible for
the deterioration of this situation with its tragic consequences for the Zimbabwe people.

18. Those, then, are the main elements which foti the
basis of the recommendations in our draft resolution for
the course of action to be taken.
19. I cannot conclude this brief statement without reiterating our conviction that the cause of the Ipeople of
Zimbabwe, who are fighting for their freedom, is a just one
and, with the help of all countries that love peace and
justice, will triumph in the end.

10. As in the Council’s earlier decisions, the sponsors of
the draft have been concerned to reaffirm the legitimacy of
the struggle of the people of Zimbabwe for the freedom
and independence of their country.

20. With these explanations I submit to the Council the
draft resolution presented by Nepal, Pakistan, Senegal,
Zambia and Algeria [S/9270/
for consideration and
approval.

11. Lastly, the preamble draws attention to the need to
take into account reports of the Committee established in
pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 (1968).

21. As the text has been distributed in all the official
languages of the Council, I do not think I need read it out.
Nevertheless, I should like to draw the Council’s attention
to an error which has crept into operative paragraph 3. In
the distributed text operative paragraph 3 reads: “Decides
that all Member States shall sever immediately all economic
and other relations . . .“. The word “Member” lshould be
deleted, so that operative paragraph 3 will now read:
“Decides that all States shall sever immediately all economic and other relations . . .“,

12. As we have already stated, these reports show that the
measures considered in resolution 253 (1968) have not
achieved the desired results, first because certain Member
States continue to trade with the Smith regime, and
secondly because South Africa and Portugal have refused to
respect the Security Council’s decisions.
13. In accordance with the decisions’ so far adopted by the
Council, which has stressed the primary responsibility of
the Government of the United Kingdom for the deterioration of the situation in Southern Rhodesia, and because of
the failure of the measures taken previously, we urgently
request the Council to adopt in conformity with the
Charter, particularly with its Chapter VII, effective
measures to put an end to the minority regime of Southern
Rhodesia.

22. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): The representative of Algeria
has just introduced a draft resolution on behalf of. the
co-sponsors. As he has so admirably stated, the draft
resolution reflects the principal points of view expressed
during the debates by representatives around this table. All
members of the Security Council have taken part fully in
the discussions on the situation in Southern Rhodesia. In
addition to the members of the Council, a large number of

14. The course of action recommended in the operative
part of our draft briefly is dictated by three main factors.
2

representatives from Asian and African States have cositributed their wisdom by participating in the debates. We are
grateful to those representatives for the real concern shown
by them over the situation that now prevails in southern
Africa. Each of those representatives has, with the greatest
degree of clarity and objectivity, brought home to the
Security Council the urgency and magnitude of the
problem we are facing.
23. The report of the sanctions Committee and the
current discussions in the Council leave no particle of doubt
in our minds that the measures taken so far have failed
miserably. There is also no doubt whatsoever about the
reasons for their failure. It has also been proved beyond any
doubt that the racist minorities in southern Africa have
been trying to perpetuate their hated r@mes and the
policies of discrimination among human beings. They are
isolating themselves from the general trend of civilization
and the march of history. But it is a pity that they are
assured of their own resources and of material co-operation
from various quarters which they need to keep them in
power.

presented to us. I may have other opportunities to do so.
Nevertheless, it may be helpful to the Council if I speak
again at this stage. I wish to speak on one question, the
question which must be uppermost in all our minds: what
can be done-not what can be felt or said. We deal with
issues on which many of us feel intensely. Certainly I make
no complaint if there is strong language; it would be
astonishing if there were not. What I wish to do at this stage
is to turn from strong feelings and strong language to direct
our attention to the single practical question of what can be
done. I shall do so as clearly as I can.
29. This is nd time for anything but very plain speaking.
All of us have had to ask ourselves this question many times
in recent years. I have certainly done so. It has been a
question constantly in my mind: what can be done? Can
Rhodesia be invaded by a British army? Can a trade
embargo and a naval blockade of all southern Africa be
mounted? Should the policy of economic sanctions against
Rhodesia be continued and intensified? Let me take those
three main questions.
30. We have heard a number of speeches calling on the
United Kingdom to lise force against Rhodesia. On this
issue I know there has been strong feeling, but that strong
feeling is, I believe, partly based on a lack of understanding.
Comparisons made in our debate have shown the extent of
that misunderstanding. The misunderstanding of the military and practical factors in the minds of some speakers is
so serious, that they even compare the situation in southern
Africa with that in Anguilla. This suggests extraordinary
misconceptions. Comparisons have been made between
Rhogesia and other British colonial Territories where force
has been used in the past to deal with disorder or violence.
But there has been no recognition of the fact that the
situation in Rhodesia has been and is quite different from
that in the other Territories which have been named.

24. Moreover, the African and Asian representatives have
underlined the real risk of a bitter and prolonged conflict
between races which the policies of the racist regimes
portend in Africa. A continent is being divided on serious
racial and human-rights questions. The supporters of this
criminal policy can no longer camouflage themselves.
25. It is high time the Security Council acted in order to
put an end to this situation. It is also high time the Council,
with one voice, recognized that the measures it has taken so
far have failed and that stronger measures are required. It is
in recognition of this fact and in the belief that the
situation can still be averted that the African and Asian
members of the Council have submitted the present draft
resolution, of which my delegation has the honour to be a
co-sponsor.

31. Since Rhodesia was first formed as a self-governing
colony in 1923 there has never been a British army there.
Nor since that time has there been any British official in
administ!ative authority there. In these respects Rhodesia
has been self-governing, with its own forces, for nearly half
a century. What is the importance of that? It means that it
is not a question of merely deciding to adopt a new local
policy or of taking local. action in order .to maintain order
as we did in colonies which Britain administered. It is a
question of an invasion-an invasion in the middle of a
continent. It is a question of starting a war. We know that
once force is used escalation can easily ensue. We know that
the results of violent action are incalculable. We cannot ,tell
where force would lead. We all know thatit is much easier
to start a war than to end one. At least we are entitIed to
expect recognition of the fact that those of us who are
against starting a conflict are serious and sincere in our
reluctance to resort to force.

26, The PRESIDENT (trandated from Spanish): Before
calling upon the next speaker on my list, I would inform
the Council that the Secretariat has taken note of the error
in operative paragraph 3 of the draft resolution to which
the Algerian representative drew attention on behalf of the
co-sponsors, and it will take the necessary action.1
27. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): First, if I may, I
wish to say a word to the Secretary-General of the Foreign
Ministry of Algeria. I understand that he is to return to his
country tonight, and, therefore, we may not have another
opportunity to thank him very warmly for coming to join
us in our debate. He will not be surprised when I tell him
that there are some things he has said with which I cannot
fully agree, but I should also like to say that I, like other
members of this Council, have been greatly impressed by
the restraint, vigour and persuasiveness with which he has
spoken to us in this Council. We thank him for coming and
we shall remember him with admiration in this Council in
future.

32. It should not be regarded as strange or even unusual in
this Council, charged with the responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security and with the peaceful
settlement of disputes, when we defend our opposition to
starting a war. We have seen so many examples in the world
of the results of violence and force that some of us may be
forgiven for believing that, rather than the use of force,

28. I do not propose this afternoon to endeavour to
comment on the draft resolution that has just been
1 Seedocument S/9270/Rev.l.
3

upon, we come to the question whether it is possible, as
maintained by the Committee on Apartheid, to Iproceed
at once to the extreme action of a full campaign of
economic sanctions against South Africa backeid, as it
would have to be, by a large-scale naval blockade.

every possible alternative should first be explored-explored
in peace and explored to the end.
33. Since the demand is that my country should undertake the military expedition, since the demand is that a
British army should start this war, we have a right to be
consulted and we have a right to be heard.

“I recognize the intensity of feeling and strong convlction with which the case for immediate enforcement
action is presented. I make no complaint if, arising from
that intensity of feeling, accusations are made against my
Government or even if our motives are misunderstood.
We respect the strong views and the strong language to
which we have listened. At the same time, everyone, 1
believe, will respect equal frankness from us. I do not
expect everyone to agree, but I trust that the Committee
will prefer me to speak bluntly, and to say that legally,
financially, economically and politically my Government
is unable to agree that a situation now exists in which we
could justify the extreme action which has been advocated.
“-. . .

34. I come to the second question.’ Can sanctions be
extended to apply to Portugal and South Africa? Can a
trade boycott, backed as it would have to be by a naval
blockade of all southern Africa, be mounted? Here I ask
the indulgence of the Council in this most important and
difficult matter. I have never failed to make my position
and the position of my Government clear. I did so first as
long ago as 1965. Then, speaking in the Special Political
Committee on the question of apartheid, I carefully set out
the considerations which my Government has to bear in
mind, considerations which we cannot possibly overlook
or disregard.
3.5. I have on subsequent occasions, in the General
Assembly and in this Council, referred to that statement of
our position and of our policy. Since I have never sought to
avoid answering these awkward questions, since I have
never tried to detract from what I said then, I’,ask the
permission of the Council to go over again what I said as
long ago as 1 December 1965. These are the factors, the
considerations, which have to be remembered. They cannot
be ignored. They had to be taken into account four years
ago. They certainly cannot be set aside today. This is what I
said in the Special Political Committee in 1965:

“Let me say that I greatly hope that natural feelings of
impatience and frustration and anger will not lead us td
disputes among ourselves which could do no good to the
people we want to help, and which could give comfort
only to the South African Government. I trust that it will
be recognized that the object we all have of achtievinga
change in South African policy will not be won by
demanding what cannot at present be carried out or by
creating divisions among ourselves, divisions which could
only give comfort to those whose policies we so strongly
condemn.

“I turn now to refer to the financial and economic
stake which the United Kingdonihas in South Africa. It is
true that strong economic ties between.my country and
South Africa have grown up over a century or more. The
development of South Africa has been undertaken mainly
with British capital, and the economies of Great Britain
and South Africa are, consequently, to a considerable
extent, mutually dependent. This is no new development.
Indeed, new British capital investment in South Africa is
now very small compared with the massive investment,
[particukzrly]
in mining enterprises, in past decades.
Some thousand million pounds of British capital has been
invested in South Africa [in the past]; British exports to
South Africa now amount to about 5!20 million a year,
and British imports from South Africa to about &SO
million. The effect of cutting off trade with South Africa
would be to create extensive unemployment in British
industry, including the shipping industry; cause serious
loss of trade at a time when it is essential to pursue a
major effort to increase British exports, and, in addition
to other widespread losses, could immediately worsenthe
British balance-of-payments position by something of the
order of 5300 million a year. The Expert.Committee on
Sanctions, and the Special Committee on Apartheid too,
have drawn attention to such facts. It ,is right that they
should be emphasized. The’y cannot be wished away, nor
can their great importance be disregarded or forgotten.

“I ask the Committee to face and accept the Ilegal and
economic and political and international facts of the
situation. We must accept the fact that . , t in the
circumstances of South Africa anything less than a major
economic and strategic blockade would fail to achieve the
required result. We must accept the fact that, as far asmy
country is concerned, it is impossible, at present, to go
beyond the arms embargo which we have already
imposed. We must accept the fact, moreover, th.at a full
campaign of economic sanctions backed by a blockade
would require resources beyond the present capacity of
our Organization.“z
36. I do not wish to vary or detract from what I said then.
I make no excuse for going back to what I said more than
four years ago. The same considerations, the same factors,
still apply. They apply with at least equal effect. My
country is no better placed now to face military snd
economic wars than it was in 1965. Improvement of our
international trade is still absolutely vital to us. :It is still
true that seriously to damage our trading and balsnceof-payments position at this time would do us irreparable
economic harm.
37. What then can be done? I come to the third question.
Should the policy of economic sanctions against Rhodesia

“Having stated some of the main factors in the situation
as my Government sees it and having referred to the
policy which my Government has declared and acted

2 Quoted from the unofficial verbatim text; seeOfficial Records

of the General Assembly, Twentieth

Committee, 472nd meeting, paras.23-24.
4

Session, Special Pditid

be continued and, if possible, intensified? I repeat what I
said in this Council before. This is not the time to give up.
It is the time to press on. I have much resented implications
in this Council that my country has not strictly observed
the sanctions which have been applied at our initiative and
at our insistence. No country has done more, My country
has borne a heavy share of the sacrifice. No country has
been more scrupulous in giving effect to the decisions of
this Council from the beginning, and including the unanimous decision of the Council taken in May last year.
38. We have promised that there will be no going back. I
repeat again what my Foreign Secretary has said: “We must
resolve to pursue steadily the present course of denying
recognition and maintaining sanctions against an illegal
regime which denies human rights.” We shall play our full
part.
39. Not only have we applied sanctions to the full, but in
the Committee on Sanctions we have taken the lead in the
work of closing gaps and tightening control. As our reports
to the Committee on Sanctions have shown, there is still an
important volume of trade flowing between Rhodesia and
States which have supported the Council’s measures,
estimated, as the representative of Algeria reminded us
yesterday, at no less than 244 million. This flow should be
stopped. The pressure on the illegal regime should not be
relaxed; it should be intensified. We are ready to consider
with others whatever measures of intensification can be
shown to be effective. These are the practical and urgent
questions to which we should direct our consultations.
40. I make no excuse for saying that it is a hard and
indeed a slow process on which we are engaged; but there is
no other effective course open to us. This is the course
which we should relentlessly pursue.
41, Tomorrow in Rhodesia the minority referendum is to
take place. Then the minority will decide whether it wishes
to go forward to political isolation and international
ostracism and economic stagnation. If they so decide, they
should know that they do so in the face of universal
condemnation and a reaffirmed refusal of recognition and
with the weight of sanctions continuing and increasing
upon them.

42. That is the message which should go from this
Council. I still hope and strongly advocate that it should be
unanimous and that our Governments should then proceed’
to undertake the consultations to which we are al1
committed.
43. Permit me, Mr. President, to say a few words for
myself. We here speak not for ourselves but for our
Governments. So it must be, and so it should be. But I
myself have long been involved in these problems in
southern Africa, and I once had the honour of being
appointed by the Secretary-General to give advice, with
others, on those problems. Before that, I resigned from my
position as an Ambassador here because I disagreed with
my Government at that time. I disagreed on the issue of the
need to consult all the people of Rhodesia on their
constitutional future, Permit me to say that I would not
have hesitated to resign again rather than be associated with
any dishonourable settlement in Rhodesia which offended
against the principles of consultation and consent. But
permit me also to say that I do not disagree with the two
main decisions which today I defend, the decision that the
United Kingdom cannot now send an army to start a war in
southern Africa and the decision that the United Kingdom
cannot now justify an economic war against southern
Africa.
44. As I have said, these are hard facts and hard decisions.
But they are facts which have to be faced. None of us can
run away from them.
4.5. The PRESIDENT (translated Porn Spanish): As no
other representative has asked to speak, I propose with the
Council’s consent to declare the meeting closed.
46, In accordance with the consultations that have taken
place, the next meeting of the Security Council for the
purpose of continuing its consideration of the situation in
Southern Rhodesia will be held on Monday next at 3.30
p.m. I trust that members of the Council will make the
fullest use of the time available between now and then to
hold consultations.
The meeting rose at 5.5 p.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

COMMENT

HAH

may
bookstore

SE PROCURER

Ler publications
der
dCpositoires
du monde
Notions
Unfes, Section

IlOIlY’fHTb

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS
Notions
entier.

Unies
sent
Informer-vow

des venter,
LlBAAHMfl

New

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

en

vente
dans
les libroiries
et les ogenccs
quprCs de votre libroirie
ou adrassez-vow
b:

York ou GenCve.

OPTAHH3A~UH

06bEAHHEHHblX

HAUHfi

,

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Las publicaciones
en todos
porter
Ventos,

Nuevo

PUBLICACIONES
de

del
York

DE LAS

Ior Nociones
Unidas
estitn
mundo.
Consulte
a su librero

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en libreriar
y cosos dirtribuidorar
o dirijase
o: Nociones
Unidas,
Seccibn

de

o Ginebro.

%
Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

82080-November

1972-2,050
