226

General Assembly - Thirty-ninth Session

of 1985 to allow enough time for a full discussion of this
important matter;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session a report on the
status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
13. Again urges the Secretary-General, taking into
account the suggestions of the Human Rights Committee,
to take determined steps within existing resources to give
more publicity to the work of the Committee and, similarly, to the work of the Economic and Social Council and its
Sessional Working Group and to improve administrative
and related arrangements to enable them to carry out their
respective functions effectively under the International
Covenants on Human Rights;
14. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to expedite the publication of the official public records of the
Human Rights Committee in bound volumes, as indicated
in General Assembly resolution 37/191, starting with its
first session;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat effectively
assists the Human Rights Committee and the Economic
and Social Council in the implementation of their respective functions under the International Covenants on
Human Rights.
JO 1st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/137. Elaboration of a second optional protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of
the death penalty
The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 35/437 of 15 December 1980 and
its resolution 36/59 of 25 November 1981 concerning the
idea of elaborating a draft of a second optional protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 189 aiming at the abolition of the death penalty,
Recalling also its resolution 37/192 of 18 December
1982, in which it requested the Commission on Human
Rights to consider the idea of elaborating a draft of a
second optional protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the
death penalty,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1984/19 of 6 March 1984 190 and the action taken by
the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities to implement that resolution, 191
Taking note also of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 192
1. Requests the Commission on Human Rights and the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities to consider further the idea of
elaborating a draft of a second optional protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty;
2. Invites Member States which are in a position to do
so, specialized agencies and international organizations to
189 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
l90 See Official Records oft he Economic and Social Council, 1984, Supple
ment No. 4 (E/1984/14 and Corr.I), chap. II, sect. A
l91 See E/CN.4/!985/3-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1984143. chap. XVlll. sect. A. re,
olution 1984/7.

assist the Commission and the Sub-Commission in the
consideration of this question;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the
General Assembly at its forty-second session of the consideration given to this question by the Commission and the
Sub-Commission;
4. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its forty-second session, in the light of the action
taken by the Commission and the Sub-Commission, under
the item entitled "International Covenants on Human
Rights".
/01 st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/138. Reporting obligations of States parties to
United Nations conventions on human
rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/44 of 3 December 1982 and
38/117 of 16 December I 983,
Considering that the General Assembly, as the principal
organ of the United Nations entitled to adopt conventions
on human rights, is in the position to take an overview of
their implementation as an integrated system of substantive provisions and reporting obligations of States parties
to the various conventions,
Conscious that the fulfilment of reporting obligations
constitutes an essential element of co-operation by States
parties in contributing to the assessment of their compliance with their obligations,
Bearing in mind the report of the Secretary-General on
the reporting obligations of States parties under various
United Nations conventions on human rights, 19 •1
Having considered the report of the meeting of the
Chairmen of the Commission on Human Rights, the
Human Rights Committee, the Sessional Working Group
of Governmental Experts on the Implementation of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination held at Geneva on 16 and I 7 August
I 984,194
Concerned about the problems experienced by the
above-mentioned bodies in the functioning of the reporting procedures, including the burden which several coexisting reporting systems place upon States parties to the
conventions on human rights.
Convinced, therefore, of the need to improve the existing
reporting systems in order to resolve the problems experienced both by the bodies entrusted with the consideration
of the periodic reports of the States parties and by the
States parties to the conventions on human rights,
I. Reiterates the importance it attaches to the obligations established under international conventions, including their respective reporting systems;
2. Takes note with interest of the report of the meeting
of the Chairmen of the Commission on Human Rights, the
Human Rights Committee, the Sessional Working Group
of Governmental Experts on the Implementation of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, which contains suggestions made by the
192 A1391535.
193 Af381393.
194 A139-484. annn

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Chairmen with regard to exchange of information among
their respective bodies, co-ordination of guidelines for the
submission of the reports of States parties, advisory services and assistance for States parties to the various conventions on human rights, and other matters; 195
3. Expresses the view that the presence at the abovementioned meeting of the Chairmen of all bodies concerned with reporting obligations of States parties to
United Nations conventions on human rights would have
further contributed to the review of problems experienced
in the functioning of reporting procedures;
4. Acknowledges that common problems have arisen in
the functioning of the reporting procedures, thus indicating
the necessity of considering them within the overall framework of reporting obligations of States parties under the
various conventions on human rights;
5. Decides to keep under consideration the problems
that have arisen from the coexistence of several different
reporting systems, in particular the proliferation of reporting obligations under the various instruments, as well as
the serious delays which have occurred in the submission
of reports;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, to that effect, to
submit to the General Assembly at its fortieth session a
report containing:
(a) Updated information on the general situation of
the submission of reports of States parties to all conventions which are already in force, thus enabling the General
Assembly to take an overview of the fulfilment of all
reporting obligations and to consider how to achieve an
improvement, particularly in the interest of States parties
with limited technical and administrative resources;
(b) A consolidated text of the guidelines of the various
bodies entrusted with the consideration of the reports of
States parties on the implementation of all United Nations
conventions on human rights;
7. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to consider, in the context of its standing item concerning advisory services in the field of human rights, the suggestions
made by the Chairmen;
8. Decides to consider the question of reporting obligations of States parties to United Nations conventions on
human rights in the light of the report of the SecretaryGeneral to be submitted in accordance with paragraph 6
above and to consider also the eventual convening of
another meeting of the Chairmen of the bodies entrusted
with the consideration of the reports of States parties;
9. Invites the bodies concerned to give particular attention to the present resolution when they next meet;
10. Decides to consider the question at its fortieth session, in the light of the report of the Secretary-General to
be submitted in accordance with paragraph 6 above.
JO 1st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/139. Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/197 of 18 December 1982
and 38/120 of 16 December 1983,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the Second International Conference on Assistance to
I95 Ibid., sect. V.
196 A/39/402 and Add. I and 2.

227

Refugees in Africa, held at Geneva from 9 to 11 July
1984, 196
Welcoming the results obtained by the Conference, in
particular the adoption of the Declaration and Programme
of Action, 197 which provide the international community
with a collective strategy to achieve lasting solutions,
Gravely concerned at the persistent and serious problem
of large numbers of refugees on the African continent,
A ware of the economic and social burden borne by
African countries of asylum on account of the presence of
these refugees and its consequences for their national
development and of the heavy sacrifices made by them,
despite their limited resources,
Recognizing the universal collective responsibility of
sharing the urgent and overwhelming burden of the problem of African refugees through effective mobilization of
resources to meet the urgent and long-term needs of the
refugees and to strengthen the capacity of countries of asylum to provide adequately for the refugees while they
remain in those countries, as well as to assist the countries
of origin in the rehabilitation of voluntary returnees,
Emphasizing the vital importance of the complementarity between refugee aid and development assistance,
Noting with satisfaction the wide participation of Member States, specialized agencies and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, and the commitments
and pledges made at the Conference,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme for their commendable effort in organizing the Second International
Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa;
2. Endorses the Declaration and Programme of Action
of the Second International Conference on Assistance to
Refugees in Africa; 197
3. Expresses its deep appreciation to African host
countries, which are the biggest donors, for their generous
contribution and continuous efforts to alleviate the plight
of refugees in spite of their critical economic situation;
4. Expresses once again its appreciation to the international community and, in particular, to all donor
countries, specialized agencies, regional organizations and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
for their support and initial response to the projects submitted to the Conference;
5. Urges the international community to maintain the
momentum created by the Conference and to translate
into reality the projects submitted as well as the principles
in the Declaration and Programme of Action agreed upon
by the Conference;
6. Emphasizes the vital importance of the complementarity of refugee aid and development assistance and of
achieving durable solutions to the problems of refugees in
Africa through the voluntary repatriation or local integration of refugees and the necessity of providing assistance
for the strengthening of the social and economic infrastructures of African countries receiving refugees and
returnees;
7. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to keep the situation of refugees
in Africa under constant review with a view to providing
197 A/39/402. annex.
