A /76/PV.48*

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

48

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 9 December 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 16
Culture of peace (continued)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/76/357)
Draft resolutions (A/76/L.19 and A/76/L.21)
Mr. Mohamed (Egypt): At the outset, allow me
to extend my thanks to the Secretary-General for his
report (A/76/357) entitled “Promotion of a culture of
peace and interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”, submitted
pursuant to resolutions 75/25 and 75/26. We commend
the efforts of Bangladesh, Pakistan and the Philippines
on the draft resolutions (A/76/L.19 and A/76/L.21)
presented under this agenda item. We also praise
the efforts of the various United Nations entities to
create and promote a culture of peace and engage in
interreligious and intercultural dialogue.
As described in the report, the magnitude of global
transformations has given rise to new opportunities as
well as threats, while global trends in certain areas,
such as media, trade and technology, have brought the
international community closer together. It is beyond
doubt that, across the globe, inequality, intolerance,
discrimination, xenophobia, violence and extremism
are on the rise.
The extraordinary coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic crisis, with its all-embracing and debilitating
repercussions, has highlighted the still missing
components of the culture of peace. It underscores the

urgent need to leverage the culture of peace as a means
of bridging divides across and within societies, as well
as ensuring peaceful coexistence as a foundation for
ensuring international peace, security and development.
The gravity and complexity of such challenges
required the combined efforts of the international
community. For example, the optimism that prevailed in
the world with the successful development of vaccines
and the establishment of the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
Access Facility quickly dissipated due to the significant
disparity in access to vaccines between rich and
middle-income and low-income countries. That issue
needs to be at the top of the international agenda. No
one is safe until everyone is safe.
In addition, as the world is at a crucial juncture in
technology governance, there is an essential role for
intellectuals, cultural leaders, the media and educators
to play. Primarily online, it is imperative to make
greater efforts to confront ideas that provoke hatred,
promote ignorance, reject diversity and exclude others
and to work on disseminating values of moderation
and tolerance. In that regard, the media should play
its role by raising awareness, combating extremist and
destructive ideas and transmitting noble values.
In that context, it is important to note that efforts
should also be made to prevent the misuse of modern
technologies, mainly social media and the Internet,
to spread incitement and hatred and to recruit under
the guise of false religious claims. We must ensure
that such technologies are used in the way in which
they were originally intended, namely, to disseminate

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-38474 (E)

*2138474*
*Reissued for technical reasons 11 November 2022.

A/76/PV.48

culture and knowledge and enhance positive interaction
among peoples and civilizations.
Egypt has always been, and will continue to be, a
power for promoting the culture of peace and tolerance
through initiatives and efforts at the national, regional
and international levels. I reiterate Egypt’s strong
support for the endeavours throughout the United
Nations system to promote a culture of peace, as well as
interreligious and intercultural dialogue. Only through
concerted efforts by the international community and a
dialogue can peace prevail and our efforts to eliminate
intolerance, prejudices, negative stereotyping and
discrimination succeed and endure.
Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important highlevel meeting on the culture of peace.
The Government of my country, the Syrian Arab
Republic, has always been convinced that a culture
of peace can be brought about and established only
through respect for the principles of international law,
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law resolutions. The adoption by the
General Assembly of the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace seeks to build and
establish such a culture at the international and national
levels. Unfortunately, significant challenges remain
in that regard. Everybody is aware that the first of
those challenges is that some influential States seek to
dominate our Organization by using its mechanisms
and resolutions to serve their narrow interests, while
concealing practices that flagrantly contravene the
purposes and principles of the Charter, particularly
with regard to respecting national sovereignty and
non-interference in the internal affairs of Member States.
The challenges to maintaining international peace
and security compel us all to promote a culture of
peace by practice, not just by theories and resolutions,
in order to ensure collective will that can lead to
enhanced human communication, without exclusion,
isolation, discrimination and antagonism, thereby
prioritizing dialogue, cooperation, acceptance of others
and coexistence, while putting an end to hegemonic
and aggressive policies, usurpation of rights and the
occupation of the territories of others. Establishing
a culture of peace requires us to move from words
to deeds by promoting the principles of the United
Nations Charter, putting an end to the exploitation of
2/33

09/12/2021

our joint mechanisms by some States to target specific
States based on erroneous interpretations of some
Articles of the Charter, such as Article 51, adopt a
policy of double standards, politicize humanitarian
issues or striving by certain States to impose their
will at the international level, as we can see through
unilateral coercive measures, whose catastrophic
effects are being suffered by many peoples, including
my people in Syria. In addition, policies of aggression
and occupation continue to exist, including the Israeli
occupation of Palestine and the occupied Syrian Golan,
as well as other Arab territories occupied in 1967.
My country stresses the need to robustly and
urgently address the recent increase in radical policies,
hate speech, racism, stigmatization, stereotyping,
undermining of religion and xenophobia, especially
against refugees and migrants. Such obstacles
will undermine the culture of peace to which we
aspire, widen the gap among peoples and weaken
confidence in the performance of our international
Organization. Many peoples are still paying a heavy
price for colonialist ambitions, interference, military
invasions and terrorist wars that are supported by some
Governments, in addition to the creation of illegal
alliances, which, through their crimes and aggression,
squander significant developmental and structural
achievements realized by many developing countries,
including my own country, Syria.
In conclusion, we hope to see joint action so that
we can achieve results and implementable solutions on
the ground that contribute to promoting a culture of
peace and respect the national sovereignty of countries,
given that the culture of peace is intrinsically linked to
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and is a
fundamental pillar for establishing international peace
and security.
Ms. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): It is a pleasure for me to take part in this
important debate on the culture of peace, which is a
necessity today if we are to combat violence, hate
speech and intellectual and religious intolerance in
order to achieve a more peaceful and tolerant world.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
latest report on the promotion of a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace (A/76/357).
The year 2021 has tested the international
community as we try to recover from the coronavirus
21-38474

09/12/2021

disease pandemic, whose social and economic impacts
have spared no people regardless of borders, religions,
gender or age. The United Arab Emirates believes that
promoting a culture of peace is extremely important to
ensure a better recovery and bring about more resilient
and inclusive societies.
A few days ago, my country celebrated its fiftieth
anniversary. We look forward to strongly and vividly
keep going for the next 50 years so that the United Arab
Emirates can be a haven for tolerance, coexistence and
human brotherhood, while achieving peace, tolerance
and well-being both for our own people and for the
peoples of the entire world. Tolerance, coexistence and
compassion are great human values to be shared by the
peoples of the world. They have been advocated by all
religions over time. The United Arab Emirates believes
in the importance of inclusivity by involving all parts of
society, in particular the most vulnerable, in all aspects
of life at the local, regional and international levels.
In that regard, the United Arab Emirates launched
the Global Alliance for Tolerance initiative in the
context of Expo 2020 to call for greater international
efforts to promote a culture of tolerance within all
nations and achieve a happier global society that lives
in peace and security.
Despite the vast technological and communication
progress, the digital transformation remains a luxury in
many parts of the world. If we want to be well-prepared
to combat future crises, such as those of the current
pandemic and the effects of climate change, we must
pool our international efforts to ensure that the next
generations can have a better future and define global
trends that can bring inspiration and hope to peoples
and urge them to work and realize achievements. In that
context, my country has developed a Government digital
strategy for 2025 that aims to bridge the digital gap and
reduce inequalities while maintaining a safe, stable and
peaceful society for a better future for humankind.
The United Arab Emirates is proud to have
established partnership between Dubai Cares and
United Nations Children’s Fund to expand the scope
of digital transformation that was launched last
year with a view to realizing digital communication
for all the people. We also welcome the efforts by
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the International Telecommunication
Union and the wider United Nations system to promote
digital transformation.

A/76/PV.48

It is crucial that Governments develop national
plans and strategies to ensure the dissemination of the
message of peace and tolerance with a view to a more
peaceful future. That will help to achieve the goals of
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The terms
“dialogue”, “tolerance”, “integration” and “compassion”
will serve humankind only if supported by tangible
measures and inter-community cooperation. In that
context, the United Arab Emirates, together with the
Arab Republic of Egypt, the Kingdom of Bahrain and
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, submitted the resolution
entitled “International Day of Human Fraternity”,
which coincides with 4 February and was adopted
unanimously by the General Assembly (resolution
75/200), to invite the world to celebrate common values
together, based on acquaintance, coexistence and
positive communication among human beings through
national and international initiatives for the benefit of
all throughout the world.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates will
continue its efforts and initiatives as a partner with the
world community to entrench the principles of peace
for generations to enjoy greater solidarity and tolerance
with a view to achieving sustainable development,
which will lead to a world free from hatred and where
peace prevails.
Ms. Ighil (Algeria): First of all, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (A/76/357), which
provides an important overview of the promotion of the
culture of peace and interreligious and intercultural
dialogue within the United Nations system. Allow
me also to thank the delegation of Bangladesh and
the delegations of Pakistan and the Philippines
for presenting the two important draft resolutions
A/76/L.19 and A/76/L.21) under this agenda item.
Today’s debate is an opportunity to recall that the
concept of peace is enshrined and deeply rooted in
the Charter of the United Nations and, as such, must
be promoted and upheld as a common driver of the
international community’s actions. The Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace is a
milestone document in that regard, as it recognizes that
peace is a process that requires everyone’s contribution
and cooperation. We therefore need to reaffirm our
commitment to international cooperation and solidarity,
which are needed now more than ever.
Apart from existing challenges, as the coronavirus
disease pandemic has spread, so has the alarming

21-384743/33

A/76/PV.48

number of tensions and conflicts, which has made a
culture of peace all the more relevant. A global response
is therefore required on the basis of coordinated action at
all levels as part of a vision for sustainable and peaceful
societies. The global pandemic has also underscored the
urgent need to leverage a culture of peace as a means of
bridging divides across and within societies and ensure
peaceful coexistence as a foundation for implementing
the Sustainable Development Goals. Concrete actions
must therefore be taken to realize the culture of peace
by addressing the root causes of conflicts, including
combating violent extremism conducive to terrorism,
eradicating poverty, promoting education and social
inclusion, fostering good governance and the rule of
law and decolonization.
As a crossroads of civilizations, throughout
its history Algeria has always been, and remains,
committed to the promotion of a culture of peace and
dialogue within societies and nations. Against that
backdrop, the values of peace and tolerance and the
importance of economic, social and cultural policies
based on inclusiveness and social justice were further
strengthened in our new Constitution. The values of
living together were also upheld by strengthening
the rule of law, ensuring respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms, promoting the rights and
status of women and preserving the social cohesion of
Algerian society.
Moreover, Algeria’s role at the regional and global
levels has been consolidated by making peace and
security and respect among nations an overarching
principle of its foreign policy. To that end, Algeria
continues to promote cooperation with its neighbouring
countries as a mediator on the conflict in Mali,
which led to the signing of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and its contribution in
promoting intra-Libyan dialogue. Furthermore, at the
initiative of Algeria, the International Day of Living
Together in Peace was proclaimed on 16 May, with the
aim of further contributing to promoting the values
of tolerance, peaceful coexistence, understanding and
mutual respect as a means to guarantee peace and
sustainable development.
Allow me to conclude by underscoring that, as
we are in the process of reforming our Organization
and implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, our hope is that the culture of peace
could advance with the willingness to pursue our efforts
towards achieving lasting peace throughout the world.
4/33

09/12/2021

As the International Decade for the Rapprochement
of Cultures nears its end in 2022, we have a unique
opportunity to sustain the momentum on the culture of
peace. My country is fully committed to that endeavour.
Mr. Zambrana Torrelio (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation appreciates
the convening of this meeting in order to adopt draft
resolutions A/76/L.19 and A/76/L.21 under the agenda
item “Culture of peace”, recalling that our Organization
and its Member States have a founding mandate to
achieve peace.
The Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace have contributed to the building of a
new notion of peace, intrinsically linked to sustainable
development, founded on the universal values of
respect for life, freedom, justice, solidarity, tolerance
and equality between women and men.
More than five years ago, we adopted resolution
70/1, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”, which, in the
eighth paragraph of its preamble states:
“We are determined to foster peaceful,
just and inclusive societies which are free from
fear and violence. There can be no sustainable
development without peace and no peace without
sustainable development.”
However, my delegation believes that the world is
artificially divided into societies where conflict,
inequality and intolerance are on the rise.
My country comes from a region declared as a
zone of peace, where strengthening multilateralism
was presumed by my delegation as a key element in
keeping our doors open to the world and highlighting
that the historical and current inequality makes us
prone to conflict.
In that context, concerned about the great tensions
at the global level due to the many conflicts and the
disproportionate impact of climate change, as well as
structural inequalities, the gaps between developed
and developing countries and discrimination among
today’s societies, which, in turn, bring with them
a great humanitarian cost, Bolivia has made a firm
commitment to the culture of dialogue among nations
through people’s diplomacy.
We are convinced that, in order to build a true
path to sustainable development, we need a dynamic,
21-38474

09/12/2021

inclusive and participatory process that promotes mutual
understanding and cooperation among States Members
of this Organization. The culture of peace can be
strengthened only in the context of an adequate quality
of life for the entire population, without exceptions.
Today we take this opportunity to emphasize
the consequences of the coronavirus disease. At a
time when access to health care and the lives of our
citizens were at risk, intolerance has increased. In my
delegation’s understanding, strengthening peaceful
societies also requires coordination for equitable,
universal and non-discriminatory access to vaccines,
as well as effective vaccination mechanisms.
In conclusion, Bolivia believes that we must
continue to work together to promote equality and
tolerance in diversity. We can do that only through
revitalized and inclusive multilateralism. Overcoming
divisions among societies and cultures is urgent and
necessary for peace, stability and development.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/76/L.19 and A/76/L.21. Delegations wishing to make
a statement in explanation of vote or position before
action on any or both of those draft resolutions are
invited to do so now in one intervention.
Before giving the floor for explanations of position,
may I remind delegations that explanations of are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): I take the floor in
explanation of position of the delegation of Armenia
on draft resolution A/76/L.21, entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace”.
Armenia is strongly committed to the values and
goals of the Declaration and Programme of Action on
the Culture of Peace. The protection of religious and
ethnic groups, the prevention of identity-based violence
and countering hate speech are important priorities
of multilateral cooperation to which our country is
fully committed.
We attach the utmost importance to the unity
and solidarity of the international community in
addressing challenges to the values of tolerance,

A/76/PV.48

peace and diversity, such as the rise in discrimination,
stigmatization and incendiary rhetoric in the time of the
pandemic. Upholding and promoting human rights and
fundamental freedoms are an important prerequisite
for promoting mutual respect, non-discrimination and
building peaceful and inclusive societies.
Draft resolution A/76/L.21, which is before us,
contains many valuable provisions related to the
promotion of a culture of peace, better understanding
and respect among civilizations, cultures and religions,
and countering discrimination and intolerance.
However, there are certain references that we deem
incompatible with the promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue.
In particular, we reiterate our objection to
the thirty-fifth preambular paragraph of the draft
resolution, which refers to an event held in a Member
State with a long-standing record of gross violations of
human rights, racist policies and promulgation of hate
speech that incites inter-ethnic hatred and violence.
In 2020, amid an unprecedented global pandemic,
that Member State launched an aggressive war, in
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire. The
massive violence was accompanied by numerous war
crimes, atrocities, torture and extrajudicial killings of
prisoners of war and civilian hostages, as well as the
intentional destruction and desecration of the Armenian
Christian heritage.
For decades, Azerbaijan has promoted a policy of
indoctrination of its own society, in particular its young
people, with Armenophobia and hatred. In their reports,
international organizations stress that political leaders,
educational institutions and the media have continued
to use hate speech against Armenians and that an entire
generation of Azerbaijanis has now grown up listening
to that hateful rhetoric.
One hideous example of such a policy is the
inauguration of the so-called military trophy park in
Baku on 12 April to display personal belongings and
helmets of fallen Armenian soldiers, along with a most
dehumanizing collection of wax mannequins depicting
ethnic Armenians. The park has been extensively
condemned by international organizations, human
rights organizations and the independent media as a
manifestation of intolerance and ethnic hatred.
While preparing reports on the promotion of a
culture of peace and interreligious and intercultural

21-384745/33

A/76/PV.48

09/12/2021

dialogue, it is imperative that the relevant United
Nations departments pay specific attention to the
context in which various international events are
being organized and their real intent before referring
to such events as “a key global platform for promoting
intercultural dialogue”. Due regard should also be given
to the record of the host country in terms of adherence
to its obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law and the protection of
cultural heritage of historical and religious significance.

Singapore, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Suriname, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, the United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, Zambia and Zimbabwe.

Armenia therefore asks for a vote on the draft
resolution and reiterates that references to the event
referred to in the thirty-fifth preambular paragraph
cannot be considered as agreed language in any
future negotiations.

The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/76/L.21, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”.

The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/76/L.19 and A/76/L.21, one by one. We
turn first to draft resolution A/76/L.19, entitled “Followup to the Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/76/L.19, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Belarus, Bhutan, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
the Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, the Dominican
Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, the Gambia, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, India, Iraq, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, the Philippines, Qatar, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
6/33

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.19?
Draft resolution A/76/L.19 was adopted (resolution
76/68).

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/76/L.21, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Bahrain, Bangladesh, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, the Central African Republic, China, Costa
Rica, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, the Gambia, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Indonesia, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Madagascar, Malaysia, Morocco, Myanmar,
Nicaragua, Oman, Panama, Peru, Qatar, the Russian
Federation, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Singapore, the Sudan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Viet Nam.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
21-38474

09/12/2021

El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, North
Macedonia, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Armenia, Australia, Canada, India, New Zealand,
Norway, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uzbekistan
The draft resolution was adopted by 139 votes to 0,
with 9 abstentions (resolution 76/69).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States to explain our vote on resolution 76/69.
The EU is a strong supporter of freedom of
religion or belief and actively encourages and
supports interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace. We also
believe that no meaningful dialogue can take place
without proper guarantees for respect for the right

A/76/PV.48

to freedom of expression. The freedom of religion or
belief and the freedom of expression are interdependent
and interrelated. Those values are at the core of the
European Union.
We continue to regret that this resolution in many
ways duplicates and distorts the provisions of two
other draft resolutions recently adopted by the Third
Committee — soon to be considered by the General
Assembly. The first one, on freedom of religion or
belief (draft resolution A/C.3/76/L.36), and the second,
on combating intolerance, negative stereotyping,
stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence
and violence against persons, based on religion or
belief” (draft resolution A/C.3/76/L.48), were shaped
over the past two years with the involvement of the
main co-sponsors of the current resolution. We see
no need for this resolution to address and redefine the
same issues.
The resolution continues to include elements that
are problematic for the EU. That includes the lack of
stronger affirmation of the positive role that human
rights, including the freedom of expression, play in
furthering intercultural and interreligious dialogue.
The overall balance between the freedom of religion
or belief and the freedom of expression in particular
attempts to redefine or curtail the latter.
The reference to a statement by the spokesman
of the High Representative for the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations, which we believe is
misleading as regards the right of everyone to exercise
their freedom of expression, including with the right
to religion, in the mentioning of a further event with
yet unknown significance for this resolution, which
takes the focus away from tangible achievements and
adopted documents.
Throughout the negotiations, the proposals put
forward by the EU had the following objectives: to
enhance references to the full enjoyment of human
rights and to safeguard important human rights, such as
the freedom of expression and the freedom of religion
or belief, against attempts to curtail or redefine them;
to stress that the freedom of religion or belief, including
the right not to believe, and to change one’s religion
or belief belongs to the individual, who can exercise
that freedom alone or in community with others; and
to reject the idea that religious symbols, as such, carry
significance and stress that it is only individuals alone

21-384747/33

A/76/PV.48

or as a part of the community who can accord such
significance to any symbol.
While we thank the co-facilitators for
accommodating our main concerns, we still believe
that the balance of the text should have been further
improved, and we will continue to work on that in the
future. We welcome the co-facilitators’ decision to
biennualize this resolution, which subscribes to the
appeals for the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly and will give everyone ample time to reflect
on further improvements to the resolution. With that
understanding and those clarifications, the EU and its
member States voted in favour of resolution 76/69.
Ms. Lelek (United States of America): The United
States strongly believes in encouraging a culture of
peace through the promotion of justice, democracy,
human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as
by rejecting violence and addressing the root causes
of conflict. In recognition of those values, we support
resolution 76/68, on the follow-up to the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace. We
thank Bangladesh for its leadership on that text and for
its efforts to ensure that the text reflects the views of all
United Nations delegations.
In addition, the United States supports efforts to
promote interreligious and intercultural dialogue and
cooperation. We thank the Philippines and Pakistan
for their initiative in submitting resolution 76/69, on
an important topic of key interest to all United Nations
delegations. We would like to take this opportunity to
clarify our position on the following issues.
The United States strongly supports the freedoms
of expression and religion or belief. We oppose
any attempts to unduly limit the exercise of those
fundamental freedoms. In that context, we continue to
have strong reservations about paragraph 15, where the
text suggests that protections for freedoms of expression
and religion or belief are at odds with one another. We
strongly believe that protecting the freedom of religion
and the freedom of expression promotes mutual respect
and pluralism and is essential to human dignity and a
robust civil society. We firmly believe that all people
should be free to choose and practise their faith based
upon the persuasion of the heart and mind. Freedom of
religion plays an important societal role and is crucial
to the creation of tolerant and respectful societies.
Those two freedoms are mutually reinforcing, and
both must be respected in order to achieve meaningful
8/33

09/12/2021

interreligious and intercultural dialogue. Rather than
seek restrictions to expression to deal with intolerance
or hate speech, the United States advocates for robust
protections for speech, as well as the enforcement of
appropriate legal regimes that deal with discriminatory
acts and hate crimes. We remind Member States that,
as recognized in the Istanbul Process for Combating
Intolerance, Discrimination and Incitement to Hatred
and/or Violence on the Basis of Religion or Belief, the
open, constructive and respectful debate of ideas, as
well as interfaith and intercultural dialogue at the local,
national and international levels, can play a positive
role in combating religious hatred and violence.
Regarding the invocation of “moderation” in
paragraph 14, we are concerned that the implementation
of moderation-focused programmes and policies could
be subject to abuse. In particular, we are concerned
that such programmes and policies could undermine
the enjoyment of freedoms of expression and thought,
conscience and religion or belief.
With respect to the twenty-fourth preambular
paragraph and paragraph 15, the United States notes its
reservations to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights.
Nevertheless, we reiterate our appreciation for the
efforts of the Philippines and Pakistan in submitting
this resolution on interreligious dialogue. The United
States remains committed to working with Member
States to promote tolerance and understanding.
Mr. Dvornyk (Ukraine): The delegation of Ukraine
would like to make an explanation of vote with regard to
resolution 76/69, entitled “Promotion of interreligious
and intercultural dialogue, understanding and
cooperation for peace”. We thank the Philippines and
Pakistan for presenting the text on this important topic.
Ukraine acknowledges the importance of interreligious
and intercultural dialogue for the purposes of peace and
has always been a part of international efforts to that
end. Ukraine supports all steps to promote tolerance and
respect for cultural diversity and religious pluralism. At
the same time, it is critical to ensure the freedom of
expression and the freedom to hold opinions, including
on religion.
In that regard, Ukraine does not support the
idea of the inclusion in the text of the resolution the
reference to the intentions of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union to hold the World Conference on Intercultural
and Interreligious Dialogue in the Russian Federation.
21-38474

09/12/2021

A/76/PV.48

Regrettably, the Russian Federation attempts to
make all international events that it hosts serve the
goal of whitewashing its aggressive policies against
States and repressive practices in the occupied areas,
including in the religious and cultural dimensions. The
ongoing pressure exerted upon religious communities
remains a daily routine for people in the temporarily
occupied Autonomous Republic of Crimea, the city of
Sevastopol and the territories in Donetsk and Luhansk
regions of Ukraine. The occupying Power’s toolbox
includes frequent police raids, the demolition of, and
eviction from, buildings dedicated to religion, undue
registration requirements that have affected legal
statutes and property rights and threats against, and the
persecution of those belonging to the Orthodox Church
of Ukraine, mosques, Muslim religious schools and
Jehovah’s Witnesses. Dozens of peaceful Muslims have
been convicted under trumped-up charges of allegedly
belonging to Islamic organizations. The adoption of
this resolution should not be interpreted as toleration
of flagrant human rights violations by the Russian
Federation, including the right to freedom of religion
or belief.

when addressing the tensions between the freedom of
expression and the freedom of religion or belief.

Mr. Alvarez (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina voted in favour of resolution 76/69, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”, because we
believe that dialogue among religions and cultures
can make a significant contribution to the goals of the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace.

Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): Azerbaijan would
like to offer the following explanation of vote on
resolution 76/69, entitled “Promotion of interreligious
and intercultural dialogue, understanding and
cooperation for peace”, which was just adopted with
the overwhelming support of the States Members of the
United Nations.

Argentina has the greatest respect for religious
freedoms and has adopted an approach that goes above
and beyond mere tolerance and promotes understanding
and mutual respect among those with theistic beliefs,
non-theistic beliefs, such as those of some indigenous
people, and atheistic beliefs. Religious freedom refers to
a broad range of beliefs, encompassing institutionalized
religions, cults, beliefs, popular observances and
specific world views.
The freedom of religion or belief, the freedom
of opinion and expression, the right to peaceful
assembly and the right to freedom of association
are interdependent and mutually reinforcing. They
therefore play an important role in combating all forms
of intolerance and discrimination based on religion or
belief. In that regard, the Special Rapporteur on freedom
of religion or belief indicated that international human
rights law compels States to adopt a moderate approach

That approach must be based on limitation criteria
that recognize the rights of all persons to the freedom
of expression and the freedom of religion or belief,
regardless of whether they are critical of opinions,
ideas, doctrines or beliefs or whether such expression
shocks, offends or disturbs others, provided that it does
not extend to promoting religious hatred or incitement
to discrimination, hostility or violence. That is why
we note with concern that, despite the efforts made,
the draft resolution continues to place an unnecessary
and counterproductive emphasis on limitations to the
right to freedom of expression. Therefore, we note
with concern the fact that resolution 76/69 places an
unnecessary and counterproductive emphasis on
restrictions of the right to freedom of expression.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation to the resolution’s facilitators, Pakistan
and the Philippines, for their efforts aimed at bringing
us closer together, and we look forward to continuing to
work to that end in future sessions.

Azerbaijan shares the main objectives of the
resolution and voted in favour of it. We are grateful
to the delegations of Pakistan and the Philippines for
their leadership and strong commitment to promoting
interreligious and intercultural dialogue. Azerbaijan
attaches great importance to the promotion of a culture
of peace, paying particular attention to encouraging
intercultural and interreligious dialogue at the national,
regional and international levels.
In that regard, we note that the resolution welcomes
the declarations adopted by the Global Forums of the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, which include
the declaration made by the seventh Global Forum of
the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, held
in Baku in April 2016. Furthermore, the resolution
just adopted is the fifth to refer to the World Forum
on Intercultural Dialogue as a key global platform for
promoting intercultural dialogue, which since 2011 has
been organized biennially by Azerbaijan, in cooperation

21-384749/33

A/76/PV.48

with UNESCO, the Alliance of Civilizations, the
World Tourism Organization, the Council of Europe
and the Islamic Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization. We welcome the international recognition
of the World Forum, the leading role and important
contribution of which were also emphasized in three
earlier reports of the Secretary-General (A/72/488,
A/74/476 and A/74/212), in the United Nations Plan
of Action to Safeguard Religious Sites, as well as in a
number of other international documents.
Against
this
background,
irrelevant
and
unacceptable comments made by the representative
of Armenia, at the core of which are undoubtedly
deeply rooted racial hatred and attempts to disguise
his country’s own flagrant violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
run counter to the very spirit, as well as the object and
purpose, of the resolution. By presenting its standard
set of insinuations, Armenia has once again eloquently
confirmed that its narrow and short-sighted political
agenda is incompatible with such notions as “culture”,
“peace” and “dialogue”.
Azerbaijan regrets that, this year, again, the hostile
position of Armenia has prevented the General Assembly
from adopting this important resolution by consensus.
We also regret that it could not join other Member States
in co-sponsoring the resolution. Our position on the
event and its highly controversial outcome document
referred to in the thirtieth preambular paragraph of
the resolution was explained in detail in the statement
delivered by the delegation of Azerbaijan at the plenary
meeting of the General Assembly held on 15 April 2018
(see A/73/PV.75).
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
Before giving the floor to speakers in the exercise
of right of reply, I remind members that statements
in the exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10
minutes for the first intervention and to five minutes
for the second and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): I take the floor in
exercise of Armenia’s right of reply to the delegation
of Azerbaijan.
Positioning itself as an example of multiculturalism
and tolerance, Azerbaijan is investing significant
10/33

09/12/2021

resources in an attempt to conceal and whitewash its
responsibility for the State policy of dehumanizing the
Armenian people, instigating identity-based hatred and
violence, glorifying perpetrators of anti-Armenian hate
crimes and committing atrocity crimes. The real intent
of such window-dressing exercises as the so-called
World Forum on Intercultural Dialogue is to draw the
attention of the international community away from
the decades-long systematic destruction, desecration
and misappropriation of the millennia-old Armenian
civilizational heritage in the territories currently under
the control of Azerbaijan. The World Forum is held in
a city hosting a military trophy park, the opening of
which was condemned by international organizations as
a manifestation of hate and intolerance — in a city that
has twice been the scene of anti-Armenian atrocities,
in 1918 and 1919.
In the twenty-first century, the opening of the socalled military trophy park stands as an example of
medieval barbarism, which has nothing in common
with the Charter of the United Nations, international
law or values of the culture of peace. The Government
of the country organizing such international events for
decades has demonized Armenians as useful enemies
and sought legitimacy by instigating anti-Armenian
hatred. State-sponsored propaganda at the highest
level and indoctrination of Azerbaijani society into
Armenophobia, starting from school desks, have
created grounds conducive to committing numerous
war crimes, atrocities and other gross violations of
human rights and humanitarian law against the people
of Nagorno-Karabakh. Azerbaijani media and social
networks have widely disseminated and celebrated
the torture and inhuman treatment and extrajudicial
executions of Armenian prisoners of war and civilian
hostages at the highest political levels.
The grave crimes committed by Azerbaijan against
the people of Nagorno-Karabakh, including in recent
days, and the prevailing atmosphere of impunity in
Azerbaijani society, encouraged by the incendiary
and warmongering speeches of the country’s leaders,
have once again come forth to prove that, under
Azerbaijani jurisdiction, it is impossible to guarantee
the physical security and right to life of Armenians in
Nagorno-Karabakh.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): I have asked for the floor
in the exercise of the right of reply in connection with
the comments by the representative of Armenia. I
would like to make the following points.
21-38474

09/12/2021

No matter how many international events
Azerbaijan hosts and how many initiatives it puts
forward, that is its sovereign right, as it is the right of
any State or international organization to participate
in or contribute to them or not. Armenia’s attempts
to challenge the resolutions of the General Assembly
simply because they mention Azerbaijan as a host
country of international events are irresponsible and
unethical, although the question in this context is
whether it is appropriate at all to talk about ethics in
relation to Armenia.
Persistently trying to portray itself as the nearcentre of civilization with traditions of coexistence,
Armenia, unlike other countries in the South Caucuses
and across the globe, is uniquely monoethnic, having
achieved its homogenous composition as a result of
a deliberate policy and practice of ethnic cleansing
and cultural erasure against other peoples, including
Azerbaijanis, who were once the largest national
minority in Armenia. Armenia has also applied the
same policy of creating a monoethnic culture in the
formerly occupied territories of Azerbaijan. Indeed,
what can be the weight of Armenia’s allegations if it is
not only liable for destroying, looting and vandalizing
numerous cultural monuments and religious sites,
but also for using mosques in the formerly occupied
territories as pigsties, cow sheds and animal pens?
Armenia has never deplored such outrageous acts
and instead stubbornly refrains from investigating
and prosecuting numerous hate crimes committed by
its nationals and other persons and groups under its
direction or control. Moreover, continued attempts
by Armenian officials to deny the existence of an
Azerbaijani ethnicity or identity and to dehumanize
Azerbaijanis as inferior, calling them “rootless nomads”
with no historical or cultural ties to their lands, are
illustrative of the deeply rooted racist prejudices
in Armenia.
Azerbaijan has not unleashed aggression against
anyone. A contrary assertion is absurd not only because
the place names to which the representative of Armenia
has referred as alleged objects of aggression or
occupation are fictional and do not exist on a world map,
but also because the assertion contradicts international
law and numerous resolutions and instruments adopted
by international organizations. Azerbaijan seriously
suffered from the aggression unleashed against it
by Armenia in the early 1990s. A significant part of
the sovereign territory of my country was seized and

A/76/PV.48

has remained under occupation for nearly 30 years,
in flagrant violation of international law and relevant
Security Council resolutions. In response to Armenia’s
armed attacks last fall, Azerbaijan used a counterforce
to protect its people and end the occupation of its
territories, acting exclusively on its sovereign soil, in
full conformity with the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. Azerbaijan’s military actions
were carried out in accordance with international
humanitarian law. Suffice it to mention that the 44-day
war resulted in more civilian casualties in Azerbaijanipopulated settlements far outside the theatre of active
hostilities than within it, in Armenian-populated areas.
We resolutely reject Armenia’s allegations about
the so-called anti-Armenian hatred and the destruction
of Armenian cultural heritage. I would recommend
that the representative of Armenia not waste time
lecturing others about the principles, values and norms
that his Government has consistently disregarded
and opposed. Post-conflict realities pave the way for
Armenia to release itself from its mythology and racist
prejudices. Compliance with international law and
good-neighbourly relations are the main objectives to
which Armenia should finally begin aspiring.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): I would like to
exercise my second right of reply. I will not dignify
the representative of Azerbaijan’s statement with a
response, bearing in mind that he attempted to deflect
the attention of those present in the Hall from the topic of
our discussion, namely, the culture of peace, by referring
to its so-called counteroffensive and right to defence
in the context of the pre-planned and well-prepared
aggression of Azerbaijan against Nagorno-Karabakh
in the fall of last year. I will refute the allegations just
made by the delegation of Azerbaijan and would like to
make several short comments.
The outrageous statement that we just heard does
not come as a surprise. A simple look at the social
media accounts of the delegation of Azerbaijan and its
members would indicate the level of Armenophobic
indoctrination in Azerbaijani society, especially
young people. The glorification of masterminds of the
Armenian genocide and their portrayal as saviours of
Armenians is just one example of this ill-mindedness.
We heard allegations about being monoethnic.
When it comes to the protection of national minorities,
our point of reference is the protection of their rights,
rather than using them for window-dressing exercises.

21-3847411/33

A/76/PV.48

The gross violations of the rights of national minorities
in Azerbaijan are documented in the reports on the
implementation of the Council of Europe Framework
Convention for the Protection of National Minorities.
In stark contrast with Azerbaijan, Armenia’s protection
of ethnic and religious minorities is an indisputable
priority, both domestically and internationally. National
minorities are part of the vibrant political and public
life in Armenia, including in Armenia’s parliament and
in local-community leadership. They are able to freely
exercise their human rights and fundamental freedoms,
profess their religion and exercise their linguistic rights,
which is not in the case in Azerbaijan.
I will confine myself to quoting some reports
of organizations on what is called Azerbaijani
multiculturalism. In a report, the Council of Europe’s
European Commission against Racism and Intolerance
states that
“Political leaders, educational institutions and
media have continued using hate speech against
Armenians; an entire generation of Azerbaijanis
has now grown up listening to this hateful rhetoric.”
It seems to me that one representative of this generation
is now present in this Hall. The report further stressed
that, in 2012, the authorities pardoned, released and
promoted Ramil Safarov, who had been sentenced in
Budapest to life imprisonment for the murder of an
Armenian army officer, without taking into account
the risk of cultivating a sense of impunity for the
perpetrators of racist crime.
Azerbaijani society follows its leaders and heroes,
such as Ramil Safarov, whose warmongering and hate
speech and aggressive military actions leave no doubt
as to the genocidal intent of Azerbaijan. The country’s
leaders bear full responsibility for the consequences of
the use of force, violence, destruction, war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed during and in the
aftermath of its aggression in the fall of last year.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): Instead of replying to the
specific points in our statement, as is customary, the
representative of Armenia preferred to rely on a set of
standard fabrications and distortions. As a result, we
have heard irrelevant and out-of-context comments that
apparently fail to respond to our arguments.
Attacks against a State Member of the United
Nations demonstrate not only the ill-breeding of the
authors and perpetrators of such acts, but also their
12/33

09/12/2021

Government’s irresponsibility and inadequacy vis-à-vis
commonly agreed norms and values. Indeed, it would
be unrealistic to expect the adherence to these norms
and values by Armenia, whose leaders, without any
remorse, have declared Armenians and Azerbaijanis
ethnically incompatible and repeatedly ordered the
brutal killings of thousands of Azerbaijani civilians,
including children, women and the elderly.
The representative of Armenia said that the
protection of national minorities is a priority for
Armenia. But I want to quote a portion of the
Government of Armenia’s fourth periodic report under
the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination, in which it stated
that “Armenia is a monoethnic State”. The question in
this regard is how Armenia protects minorities if they
are non-existent in the country. It is of course ironic
that Armenia — a country that unleashed aggression
against Azerbaijan, committed heinous crimes during
the conflict, carried out ethnic cleansing on a massive
scale and methodically and systematically pursued
a policy of destroying any traces of other cultures in
the territories under its control, and a country where
international terrorists, war criminals and even Nazi
collaborators are national heroes — tries to portray
itself as a staunch defender of human rights and a
fighter against discrimination.
In conclusion, I would like once again to express the
hope that, instead of sowing dissension and instilling
enmity, Armenia will seize the historic opportunity to
normalize its relations with neighbouring countries,
finally realize that diversity, dialogue and mutual
understanding and respect are an enrichment, not a
threat, and join the participants at the next World Forum
on Intercultural Dialogue in Baku.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 16.
Agenda item 35
Prevention of armed conflict
(a) Prevention of armed conflict
Draft resolution (A/76.L.22)
The President: I would like to remind members that
the debate on this sub-item will be scheduled during the
resumed part of the session on a date to be announced.
21-38474

09/12/2021

I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): We have just adopted
resolution 76/68, on the culture of peace, and agreed
to promote a culture of peace at the national, regional
and international levels and to ensure that peace and
non-violence are fostered at all levels. And now, almost
immediately, we have the chance to prove the worth of
that resolution.
I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.22, which focuses on the progressive
militarization by the Russian Federation of the
temporarily occupied territory of Ukraine, the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, as well as parts of the Black Sea and the Sea
of Azov. By occupying the peninsula and transforming
it into a powerful military base in the region, the
Russian Federation has violated fundamental norms
and principles of international law, primarily the United
Nations Charter.
As of today, the territory of Crimea continues to
be the host of a disproportionate number of weapons.
Russia is conducting regular military exercises
combined with intensive “snap” exercises in the
territory that destabilize the military-political situation
in the region. Today, Ukraine faces an even greater
threat than before, since Russia’s military build-up near
the State borders with Ukraine has reached at least 40
battalion tactical groups standing by to be deployed as
part of a potential offensive operation.
On 5 December, we commemorated the twentyseventh anniversary of the signing of the Budapest
Memorandum on security assurances in connection
with Ukraine’s accession to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, by three
nuclear-weapon States, including Russia. Two decades
later, my country has had to confront aggression
launched by a nuclear-weapon State that had provided
assurances of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. It is alarming that Russia has seized former
Soviet-era nuclear-weapon storage sites in Crimea and
deploys carriers and other means of delivering nuclear
weapons in the peninsula.
Since the beginning of the occupation of Crimea,
Russia has engaged in numerous flagrant violations of
Ukraine’s rights under the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea and other relevant rules of
international law. It has unlawfully excluded Ukraine
from exercising its maritime rights in the Black Sea, the

A/76/PV.48

Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait. Russia also continues
to disrupt international navigation in the Black Sea
and the Sea of Azov by blocking the passage of ships
through the Kerch Strait. A closure of unprecedented
duration took place between the end of April and
the end of October 2021. All of these challenges
bear witness to the need for the establishment of the
International Crimea Platform, the inaugural summit of
which was held on 23 August 2021, in Kyiv, and which
concluded its work by adopting the Joint Declaration of
the International Crimea Platform Participants.
Given the current volatile situation, Ukraine,
together with Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, North Macedonia,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey,
the United Kingdom, the United States of America, the
Federated States of Micronesia and Palau, has submitted
the updated draft resolution entitled “Problem of the
militarization of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea
and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well as parts of
the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov”.
This year’s draft resolution contains a number of
important elements, including those focusing on the
unprovoked build-up of forces in and around Ukraine;
the ongoing inflow of weapons; the support of efforts
within the Crimea Platform to address challenges
stemming from the progressive militarization of the
peninsula and parts of the Black Sea and the Sea of
Azov; the need for Russia to ensure transparency
as to its military activity in occupied Crimea, which
undermines stability, military predictability and trust in
the region; the interference and blocking of navigation
of both commercial vessels and Government ships
sailing under various flags; the expansion of naval bases
for the Russian Federation’s Black Sea fleet; and the
seizure of Ukraine’s oil platforms. The main purpose of
the draft resolution remains unchanged: to ensure that
Russia withdraws its military forces from Crimea and
ends the temporary occupation of Ukraine’s territory.
One day, but not today, delegations may come to this
Hall and cast their votes to amend the Charter, pursuant
to its Article 108. Today is not that day, nor, in fact, has it
been the day at any point over the last 30 years in which
the Russian Federation has bedevilled its neighbours

21-3847413/33

A/76/PV.48

and the countries beyond, kept its unwelcome troops
on foreign territories, subsequently occupied and tried
to illegally annex them, waged military aggressions,
shot down civilian aircraft, committed gross human
rights violations on the occupied territories and killed
thousands of foreign military and civilians — starting
with wars against its own people, in Chechnya, and
moving outwards towards neighbouring countries.
Indeed, through all these long and bloody decades,
Russia has never dared to legitimize its presence in the
Security Council.
Not by accident, Article 23 of the Charter continues
to read that it is the Soviet Union, not the Russian
Federation, that is a permanent member of the Security
Council. Being a legitimate member of the Security
Council does not mean asking the Secretariat to put
a piece of plastic with your name on it in front of
you; it means much more than that. In fact, it means
undertaking obligations, respecting them and behaving
accordingly. It means stopping aggressive militaristic
policies, the occupation of foreign territories and the
killing of foreign citizens. It means waging no wars.
Then, and only then, the United Nations may gather
in this Hall and cast the two-thirds majority vote to
make the de facto presence of Russia in the Security
Council a de jure membership. Only if that happens,
I say to the members of the Russian delegation, will
their grandchildren be able to go to the United Nations
bookstore and buy a little blue book, open it and read
in Article 23 that it is the Russian Federation, not
the Soviet Union, that is a permanent member of the
Security Council.
That is not the case today. Today we are voting
to stop the Russian delegation from doing exactly
the opposite of what a permanent member — or any
member of the United Nations Organization — pledges
to do. To vote in favour of draft resolution A/76/L.22
means to make an effort to stop the madness of
bloodthirsty warmongering. To vote in favour means to
respect the Charter. In its essence, today’s vote is about
the purposes and principles of the United Nations. It is
about being on the right side of history. It is the General
Assembly’s choice, and the Assembly’s choice alone.
The President: We shall proceed to consider
draft resolution A/76/L.22. Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote before the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
14/33

09/12/2021

Ms. Mustafa (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation wishes to explain our
vote before the voting with respect to the draft resolution
contained in document A/76/L.22, entitled “Problem
of the militarization of the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well as
parts of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov”.
My country’s delegation continues to note the
negative practices carried out by some States Members
of the United Nations. These are practices that misuse
and undermine sub-agenda item (a) of agenda item
34, entitled, “Prevention of armed conflict”, by
putting forward politicized and non-consensual draft
resolutions that follow an approach based on exclusion
and unilateralism. The draft resolution before us today
clearly reflects the practices of political and financial
polarization. It is a direct cause of spreading a policy
of division and disagreement among States. It therefore
cannot be considered an attempt by its sponsors and
supporters to achieve security, peace and development.
The position of the Syrian Arab Republic with
respect to the situation in Crimea is based on the results
of the referendum held there on 16 March 2014, in which
the people of Crimea reaffirmed their willingness to
remain an integral part of the territory of the Russian
Federation. We call upon Western Governments, which
exploit the slogans of democracy and human rights so
as to interfere in the affairs of other Member States
and destabilize their security and stability, to end such
policies and respect the will of the people of Crimea,
which was expressed by more than 82 per cent of the
participants in the popular referendum, who voted for
self-determination, in line with international law, their
right to self-determination and democratic practices.
The results of the referendum, where more than 99.6 per
cent voted in favour of reintegration into the Russian
Federation, are clear and unequivocal.
Our position today is that we oppose politicization
in the work of the General Assembly. This proceeds
from our respect for the United Nations Charter and
international treaties. We are committed to maintaining
the rules and procedures of the General Assembly, and
we are eager not to involve the Assembly in politicized
issues or overwhelm its agenda with non-consensual
draft resolutions, especially when such draft resolutions
do not help resolve international disputes or maintain
security and peace in a region or throughout the world.
My country’s delegation therefore will vote against
the draft resolution contained in document A/76/L.22.
21-38474

09/12/2021

We encourage all States to vote against it or to abstain
from voting.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): In document A/76/L.22, the Russian
delegation is seeing the General Assembly putting to
a vote a politicized Ukrainian draft resolution. We
call upon all reasonable and constructively minded
delegations to join us in voting against it.
I will not speak at length because I see no point
in doing so. Everything is crystal clear. For the fourth
consecutive year, Ukraine, with support from a wellknown group of States, has been forcing the General
Assembly to consider a patently politicized and
completely unrealistic draft document that in no way
helps to resolve the internal conflict in that country.
Furthermore, it merely sets us back in terms of settling
the conflict insofar as it fuels the sick fantasies spread
by the Maidan regime about the situation in Russian
Crimea. The patently false nature of this is clear to
any visitor to this completely open and prosperous
Russian region.
Every year our Ukrainian colleagues rely on the
objectionable and non-persuasive results of a vote, in
an attempt to, contrary to facts and common sense,
make it appear as if Kyiv’s strategies and approaches
enjoy broad international support. We are relatively
unmoved in the face of these false narratives.
Ultimately, this near self-hypnosis or self-persuasion
might keep the Kyiv authorities from unleashing new
military misadventures against the civilian population,
but, putting it succinctly, the Assembly would be, to
rephrase a Russian aphorism, giving the baby what he
wants so that it keeps him away from the machine gun.
Appealing to the hopelessly blinded and reckless
Maidan madness of the Ukrainian authorities is
something that we have long viewed as pointless.
Based on the completely unsubstantiated statement of
the Ukrainian representative today, the paranoia that
has seized his country is completely obvious. For this
reason, I turn to our European and American colleagues
and ask them to finally bring their heedless progeny to
reason before he ignites yet another war in Europe. I
say to them:
“Bring up this child. Teach him good manners.
Take away his matches. Matches are not a toy for
children.”

A/76/PV.48

They must compel him to resolve the issues that have
amassed in Ukraine instead of shifting responsibility
for all of the country’s woes on external factors.
Blaming Russia for all of Ukraine’s misfortunes is
clearly becoming increasingly difficult for them. so
egregious are the failures of the grotesque, nationalistic,
oligarchical anarchy that has taken shape in our
neighbour with their help.
I ask those of my colleagues who are not bound by
esprit de corps, as well as those who do not wish to
indulge Ukrainian madness, to be courageous and join
us in reject the phantasmagorical text that is being put
to the vote. Those Ukrainians who love their country
and who strive to see it that it once again may become a
normal State will thank them for it.
In conclusion, I wish once again, as is now
customary, to very genuinely invite members to
visit Russian Crimea, which became the way it is
now by throwing off the shackles of the nationalistic
licentiousness of the Maidan authorities following
the referendum in March 2014. Upon arrival they will
realize our Ukrainian colleagues’ worst nightmare, in
that they will see with their own eyes how shamelessly
they are misleading the international community by
concocting tales and chilling myths about Russian
Crimea. I invite members to come visit — they will
not regret it — for they will relax, like millions of
tourists, including those from Ukraine, do every year.
Meanwhile, I ask my colleagues to press the red button
and help facilitate an end to this exceedingly protracted
theatre of the absurd into which the Kyiv authorities are
yet again attempting to drag us all.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/76/L.22, entitled “Problem of the
militarization of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea
and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well as parts of
the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov”. Before proceeding
further, I would like to inform the Assembly that draft
amendment A/76/L.22 has closed for e-sponsorship.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution,
and in addition to the delegations already listed in

21-3847415/33

A/76/PV.48

document A/76/L.22, the following countries have also
become sponsors: Costa Rica, the Federated States of
Micronesia, New Zealand and Palau.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States, Vanuatu
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Cambodia, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Mali, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Philippines,
Russian Federation, Serbia, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab
Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Guinea,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mexico, Mongolia, Namibia,
Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, Suriname,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen
Draft resolution A/76/L.22 was adopted by 62 votes
to 22, with 55 abstentions (resolution 76/70).
16/33

09/12/2021

[Subsequently, the delegations of Guinea-Bissau
and Mozambique informed the Secretariat that they
had intended to abstain; the delegation of Japan
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor to those
wishing to speak in explanation of vote after the voting,
I would like to remind delegations that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Ms. Chua (Singapore): I am taking the floor to
explain my delegation’s vote in favour of resolution 76/70,
which was just adopted. Singapore is a small country.
As such, we are deeply committed to multilateralism
firmly grounded in respect for international law. We
have always supported the principles of respect for
territorial integrity, non-interference in the domestic
affairs of sovereign States, respect for sovereignty
and the rule of law. Singapore has taken a consistent
position in opposing the annexation of any country or
territory, as that is a clear violation of the principles of
international law. For this reason, we continue to vote
in favour of this resolution.
Mr. Situmorang (Indonesia): Allow me to take this
opportunity to deliver Indonesia’s explanation of vote
on the resolution entitled “Problem of the militarization
of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well as parts of the Black Sea
and the Sea of Azov” (resolution 76/70), which was
just adopted.
Indonesia’s principled position remains unchanged.
We opposed annexation and illegal territorial occupation
of any sovereign country or territory, which is a flagrant
violation of the august principles of United Nations
Charter and international law. Indonesia attaches the
greatest importance to upholding and respecting the
principles of non-interference and the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all countries within their
internationally recognized borders, including those
of Ukraine.
There is no military solution to this issue. We are of
the view that dialogue and diplomacy among concerned
States remain the best avenues for resolving this
issue. In this regard, we abstained from the voting on
resolution 76/70, as some of the elements contained in
the draft document may undermine the environment for
dialogue. Indonesia’s commitment to multilateralism
and international peace remains unchanged.
21-38474

09/12/2021

A/76/PV.48

Finally, Indonesia encourages concerned States to
take any measures necessary to de-escalate tensions
in order to open the way for negotiations. We call
on all parties and the international community to
support diplomatic efforts that would contribute
positively towards the political settlement of this
issue. Furthermore, we reiterate the importance of
respecting constitutional processes and the principles
of democracy in paving the way towards lasting peace.

We believe that a resolution of this nature could
benefit from the contributions of the members of the
Organization, but at the end of the day, the General
Assembly had to vote on the draft presented to us by
the delegation of Ukraine. We regret that this resolution
was not subject to wide consultation, nor was it open
to comments from the General Assembly that would
urge, above all, that a peaceful solution to this conflict
be found.

Mr. Assadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I take the
floor to explain my delegation’s vote on resolution
76/70 and to reiterate its position on the RussianUkrainian dispute.

Mexico will always promote diplomatic dialogue
as the only means to resolve conflicts and, in strict
adherence to the United Nations Charter, rejects the
use or threat of use of force. In this regard, we reiterate
our call to all parties involved to respect the territorial
unity of Ukraine, in accordance with resolution 68/262.

We are of the view that the parties concerned should
pursue the peaceful resolution of disputes through
direct political dialogue to further efforts aimed at
achieving a workable solution to the issue, on which
agreements were reached in Minsk in 2015 and endorsed
by the Security Council in resolution 2202 (2015).
My delegation strongly opposes the politicization of
United Nations mechanisms and the unconstructive
interference of third parties in bilateral issues. While
there is an accurate international mechanism in place
that is supported by the Security Council, referring the
issue to the General Assembly could bring out existing
differences and sow division among the Member
States rather than achieve a solution. As a prestigious
representative organ, the General Assembly should not
prematurely engage itself in a debate that has been on
the Security Council agenda since the occurrence of the
events that prompted it. Addressing such multifaceted
issues of a highly political and controversial nature
within the setting of the General Assembly will have
little, if any, utility in furthering efforts to achieve a
workable solution in this conflict.

Mr. Evseenko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus voted against resolution 76/70.
It continues to have a consistent position vis-à-vis
the inadmissibility of bringing before the General
Assembly and its subsidiary organs country-specific
draft resolutions that are used exclusively as tools for
political accusations. As has been repeatedly noted,
the adoption of such documents backfires and only
escalates confrontation. By no means does it help to
resolve contentious issues.
Resolution 76/70 is one-sided and politicized in
nature, merely cherry-picking issues from a whole gamut
of destabilizing factors in the region. Additionally, the
resolution undermines opportunities to seek a peaceful
solution to the situation. It does not refer to the key, in
our view, Minsk agreements, which play a crucial role
in the peaceful resolution of the crisis within Ukraine.

Once again, my delegation emphasizes the
importance of dialogue and diplomacy between the
States concerned and strongly supports achieving
a peaceful solution to the ongoing problem. Our
principled position is to support a peaceful solution to
the Ukraine-Russia dispute. We firmly believe that the
issue must be resolved by the States concerned; any
solution outside of that framework will not work unless
endorsed by both the Russians and the Ukrainians.

We believe that the negotiations process under the
Trilateral Contact Group and the full implementation
of the agreements in the conflict area will help to put
the peace process in Ukraine on a sustained positive
trajectory. We stand ready to continue to do everything
possible to help facilitate a resolution to the conflict in
Ukraine, including by creating acceptable conditions
for the activities of the Trilateral Contact group and
negotiations in any other format. We are eager to
promptly resolve this crisis on the sole basis of dialogue
and mutual respect, which remain the critical conditions
for that to be achieved.

Ms. Jáquez Huacuja (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I am taking the floor today to explain the Mexican
delegation’s decision to abstain from the voting on
resolution 76/70.

Ms. Pyo Jisu (Republic of Korea): My delegation
would like to note that our abstaining from the voting
on resolution 76/70 does not constitute a departure from
our position adopted in 2014, when we voted in favour of

21-3847417/33

A/76/PV.48

resolution 68/262 and draft Security Council resolution
S/2014/189. The Republic of Korea reaffirms its
commitment to the sovereignty, political independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders. In addition, we
hope that the situation in the Russia-Ukraine border
region does not escalate further.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting. We will now hear
statements after the adoption of the resolution.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the adoption of resolution
76/70, entitled, “Problem of the militarization of
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well as parts of the Black Sea
and the Sea of Azov”.
We thank all of the States Members of the
United Nations that joined us in voting in favour
of this resolution. By adopting this resolution, the
international community has once again affirmed its
commitment to the sovereignty, political independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders, in the face of
continued Russian aggression.
Nearly eight years into its occupation of Ukraine’s
Crimean peninsula, Russia’s increasing militarization
continues to pose a serious and growing threat to
our common security. The United States is gravely
concerned by evidence that Russia has developed plans
to make further and more significantly aggressive
moves against Ukraine. The plans include efforts to
destabilize Ukraine from within, as well as large-scale
military operations.
We have also observed an intensification of
Russia’s disinformation campaign against Ukraine.
Make no mistake: Russian media is currently pushing
a false narrative alleging that it is Ukraine that
is seeking to provoke a conflict with Russia. Over
the past several weeks, we have observed a massive
spike — more than tenfold — in social media activity
pushing anti-Ukrainian propaganda, approaching the
levels last seen in the lead-up to Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine in 2014. And this, of course, is a well-worn
Russian tactic. Moscow falsely paints a target country
as the aggressor in order to justify preplanned military
action against that target.
18/33

09/12/2021

The United States remains unwavering in
support of Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity. We support Ukraine’s efforts
to use the Crimea Platform to focus international
attention and action on the humanitarian and security
costs of Russia’s occupation of Crimea, with the aim
of peacefully restoring Ukraine’s control over this
territory in accordance with international law.
Let me conclude by affirming that the United States
does not and will not ever recognize Russia’s purported
annexation of Crimea. Crimea is Ukraine.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of eight Nordic and Baltic countries:
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Norway,
Sweden and my own country, Lithuania.
Let me reiterate our support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. We continue to condemn in the
strongest possible terms Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine and the illegal annexation of Crimea.
Our policy of non-recognition remains firm.
We support the diplomatic efforts aimed at restoring
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
its internationally recognized borders. We welcome
the establishment of the International Crimea Platform
launched at the inaugural summit that took place on
23 August and support its aim to peacefully end Russia’s
temporary occupation and restore control of Ukraine
over Crimea in full accordance with international law.
As stated in resolution 76/70, we are deeply
concerned about the increased militarization of the
Crimean peninsula by the Russian Federation, which
includes in particular the transfers of highly destabilizing
weapons systems and military personnel to Crimea,
multiple military exercises, the construction of vessels,
closure of parts of the Black Sea to non-Russian military
and government ships, and restrictions on international
shipping in the Kerch Strait, including interfering
and blocking navigation both for commercial vessels
going to and from ports of Ukraine and for government
ships sailing under various flags. All this exacerbates
tensions in the region and beyond. We urge the Russian
Federation to stop such activity and to refrain from
impeding the lawful exercise of navigational rights and
freedoms in accordance with international law.
In addition, the escalatory nature of Russia’s
military build-up around the Ukrainian borders — with
21-38474

09/12/2021

over 100,000 troops, military equipment, air and naval
units — is deeply worrying. We urge the Russian
Federation to de-escalate tensions by withdrawing
forces. We also call on the international community to
stay focused on this issue.
Furthermore, we are concerned about the human
rights violations in Crimea, primarily targeting
the Crimean Tatars. We condemn the continuing
persecution by the Russian Federation of the Crimean
Tatars and their leaders and call for the immediate
release of those illegally detained and imprisoned.
We repeat the calls of the international community
for unhindered access to the areas currently not under
Ukraine’s control, including the Crimean peninsula,
for international organizations and human rights
monitoring bodies.
As we have stated on numerous occasions, Russia
must withdraw its military forces from Crimea and end
its illegal annexation of Crimea without delay. We do
not and will not recognize the illegal annexation of
Crimea by Russia. It has detrimental consequences and
constitutes a direct challenge to international security
with grave implications for multilateralism and the
global order that protects the territorial integrity, unity
and sovereignty of all States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries the Republic
of North Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, and the
European Free Trade Association country Liechtenstein,
member of the European Economic Area, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
As reaffirmed by its endorsement of the
International Crimea Platform Declaration adopted in
Kyiv on 23 August 2021, the EU does not and will not
recognize the illegal annexation of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol by the
Russian Federation. The European Union remains
steadfast in its commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity within its internationally
recognized borders. Furthermore, the European Union
and its member States reaffirm the universal and
unified character of the United Nations Convention on

A/76/PV.48

the Law of the Sea, which sets out the legal framework
within which all activities in the oceans and seas must
be carried out.
Russia’s actions are in blatant breach of international
law and key principles of international order. They
are a violation of the United Nations Charter, which
prohibits the use of force against the sovereignty,
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State. Moreover, Russia’s actions violate the country’s
international and bilateral commitments and the
principles of regional European security and stability
enshrined in the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter
of Paris for a New Europe — foundations of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) — as well as the Budapest Memorandum
of 1994.
As stated in the resolution 68/262, which was
supported by the vast majority of the General Assembly,
the so-called referendum organized by Russia on the
peninsula in March 2014 has no legal validity, as it was
a breach of Ukraine’s Constitution and therefore cannot
form the basis for alteration of the status of Crimea and
Sevastopol. The European Union calls on all States
Members of the United Nations to remain steadfast
in their policy of non-recognition of Russia’s illegal
annexation, in line with resolution 68/262. For the same
reason, the European Union does not recognize the
Russian presidential decree, which entered into force on
20 March 2021, adding most of Crimea and Sevastopol
to the list of border territories of the Russian Federation
that prohibit non-Russian citizens from owning land.
Since the illegal annexation, the militarization of
the peninsula by Russia has had a negative impact on the
security situation in the Black Sea region as a whole. The
building of the Kerch Strait bridge without Ukraine’s
consent and the subsequent arbitrary inspection regime
at the Kerch Strait limits the navigation to and from
Ukrainian ports, with negative economic consequences
for Ukraine’s economy and ports in the Azov Sea as
well as for third countries.
We are seriously concerned about transfers by the
Russian Federation of highly destabilizing weapons
systems and military personnel to the peninsula since
March 2014. Multiple military exercises of Russian
armed forces have been held in Crimea. These exercises
undermine regional security and entail considerable
long-term negative environmental consequences in
the region.

21-3847419/33

A/76/PV.48

As documented in the reports by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Russian
citizenship and conscription in the armed forces of the
Russian Federation have been imposed on Crimean
residents in violation of international humanitarian law.
Russian legislative elections have been illegally held in
the illegally annexed Crimea, and a population census
was conducted in an attempt to legitimize the illegal
annexation of Crimea and to further undermine the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders.
As the EU has repeatedly urged, and as stated in the
previous General Assembly resolutions on this topic, it
is crucial that Russia withdraw its military forces from
Crimea and end its illegal annexation of Crimea without
delay. We call upon all Member States to cooperate
with the United Nations to encourage and support
efforts to that end and to refrain from any dealings
with the Russian Federation in relation to Crimea that
are inconsistent with this aim or could be seen as an
implicit approval of its violation of international law. In
this regard, we urge the Russian Federation to ensure
safe, secure, unconditional and unimpeded access of
all international monitoring mechanisms, including
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, to the illegally
annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city
of Sevastopol.
The European Union remains committed to fully
implementing its policy of non-recognition of the
illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol, which
is based on the obligation not to recognize as lawful
a situation created by a serious breach of international
law, including through sanctions.
Mr. Dvali (Georgia) My delegation aligns itself
with the statement made on behalf of the European
Union and its member States. I would like to add few
remarks in my national capacity.
Georgia strongly condemns the illegal annexation
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol by Russia and
the continuous violation of sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine, including the instigation of
conflict in eastern Ukraine. Russia’s massive military
build-up in Crimea and the Black and Azov Seas and
at the borders of Ukraine significantly undermines the
security of the wider Black Sea region and has serious
global implications.
Russia’s overall illegal and provocative actions
in Ukraine are a great challenge to the international
20/33

09/12/2021

community. Its actions to change borders of sovereign
nations by force directly contradict international law
and the rules-based order, as well as the United Nations
Charter and the Helsinki Final Act. In addition, the
continuous occupation and militarization of sovereign
territories in my country, Georgia, is yet another
example of Russia’s illegal and reckless behaviour in
the Black Sea region.
We call on the international community to take
prompt and resolute action to make Russia abide by the
principles and norms of international law and to deter
its further aggressions. With resolution 76/70, adopted
today, the international community once again sends a
strong message to Russia that the annexation of Crimea,
and its illegal actions in the occupied territories of
Ukraine, including massive militarization, will never
be accepted.
Mr. Roberts (United Kingdom): I am taking the
floor to reaffirm the United Kingdom’s unwavering
support for the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. Russia’s illegal annexation of
Crimea in March 2014 was a flagrant violation of
Russia’s international commitments and demonstrated
a clear disregard for the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the rules-based international
order. Since then, Russia’s actions in Crimea have
remained a direct challenge to international security,
with grave implications for the international legal order
that protects the unity and sovereignty of all States. We
reiterate that we do not and will not recognize Russia’s
illegal annexation of Crimea, which remains an integral
part of Ukraine.
The United Kingdom condemns Russia’s ongoing
militarization of Crimea, which includes the transfer of
weapons systems into the territory of Ukraine, including
nuclear-capable aircraft missiles, weapons, ammunition
and military support. The extension of Russia’s
Black Sea fleet’s naval bases and the strengthening
of its coastal missile brigades are a concern for all
countries in the Black Sea region, as are the seizure
of former nuclear-weapon storage sites in Crimea,
the conscription of over 31,000 Crimean residents
into the Russian armed forces since 2014, including
assignment to military bases in the Russian Federation,
and Russian education policies in Crimea, which aim to
indoctrinate children into joining the Russian military
forces. We must stand together and respond robustly
to such actions. We welcome the establishment of the
21-38474

09/12/2021

International Crimea Platform as a mechanism through
which we can work with Ukraine and the international
community to address the aforementioned challenges.
The United Kingdom is also deeply concerned
about Russia’s continued pattern of destabilizing
action and military build-ups on Ukraine’s border
and in the illegally annexed Crimea. These pose a
threat to the entire international community. We urge
Russia to uphold the principles and commitments
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) that it freely signed up to and which
it continues to violate through its ongoing aggression
against Ukraine.
The adoption of resolution 76/70 today sends a
strong signal that the international community finds
Russia’s threatening and destabilizing behaviour
unacceptable and that it must cease its troubling
campaign of aggression towards Ukraine and its
militarization of the illegally annexed peninsula and
the region.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Poland aligns itself with
the statement of the European Union, and I now wish to
deliver a statement in my national capacity.
Poland unwaveringly condemns the illegal
annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation. We
continue to deem it contrary to the key principles
of the rules-based international order and illegal in
the light of international law. We would like to take
this opportunity to reiterate our strong support for
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
its internationally recognized borders.
Russia’s aggression against our eastern neighbour
constitutes a part of a much bigger problem, and today
we wish to draw the General Assembly’s attention once
again to the very upsetting reality of the series of frozen
conflicts in the post-Soviet space. The continuing
and recurrent stand-offs in Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia — just to name a few, and
together with the situation in Belarus — make it one
of the most problematic regions in the world. It should
be noted that behind all of them stands a hegemon that,
unrestricted in its actions by any sort of democratic
scrutiny, never came to terms with the long-overdue
collapse of the Soviet Union.
Poland deeply believes in the power of law and
completely discards the law of power in international
relations. Leaving cases of violations of international

A/76/PV.48

law, including interference with the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, without a firm response
from the international community will always be a
factor that encourages the replication of such negative
behaviour. This is what we have indeed witnessed
time and time again, with thousands of victims and a
dramatic deterioration of humanitarian situation.
In this context, we are very concerned with the
ongoing Russian military build-up along the Ukrainian
border. Twice this year, thousands of Russian military
personnel with hundreds of tanks, artillery systems
and other advanced weaponry have gathered there. A
realistic de-escalation of the situation can be achieved
only after the Russian troops have been withdrawn. In
the light of insufficient transparency and predictability
on the aggressor’s side, most countries of the region have
no choice but to enhance their resiliency and deterrence.
Along with our partners in the region, Poland is fully
convinced that peace should be protected by law, but
the law needs to be supported by effective resilience
and deterrence capabilities.
Poland believes that efforts to resolve the RussianUkrainian conflict need to include all stakeholders.
On the eve of assuming the Chairmanship in the
Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), we commit ourselves to being open to all
initiatives that could lead to reaching a solution to the
conflict, including through the activities of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission. But a solution can only be
achieved based upon the rule of international law.
The President: We have heard the last speaker on
this agenda item.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 35.
Agenda item 78 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Report of the Secretary-General (A/76/311 and
A/76/311/Add.1)
Report on the work of the United Nations
Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on

21-3847421/33

A/76/PV.48

Oceans and the Law of the Sea at its twentyfirst meeting (A/76/171)
Report on work of the Ad Hoc Working Group
of the Whole on the Regular Process (A/76/391)
Draft resolution (A/76/L.20), as orally revised.
(b) Sustainable fisheries, including through the
1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating
to the Conservation and Management of
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, and related instruments;
Draft resolution (A/76/L.18)
Mr. Blanco Conde (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank Singapore
and Norway for successfully facilitating the negotiating
process to underscore our shared mandate to care for
and protect the oceans.
As we stand on the threshold of the fortieth
anniversary of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, we congratulate ourselves for having
understood at that time that the ocean must be protected
and that, despite mistakes made along the way, our
actions had to be aimed at safeguarding the ocean and
the entire planet. We must admit, however, that, despite
the many agreements, declarations and efforts made,
the sea and all that it contains remain fragile and still
in need of our commitment. Accordingly, to effectively
defend them, we must recognize some sad truths, such
as the fact that our coral reefs and their biodiversity
are dying as a consequence of ocean acidification
derived from global warming and pollution produced
by maritime transport. Likewise, hundreds of millions
of fish, including sharks, are fished every year, mostly
illegally.
The Dominican Republic appreciates the
importance of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/311 and S/2021/311/Add.1) and the efforts made
through the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea (UNCLOS) in terms of the Commission on
the Limits of the Continental Shelf, the International
Seabed Authority and the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea.
Of particular importance for our country will
be the United Nations Ocean Conference, organized
by the Governments of Kenya and Portugal, which
22/33

09/12/2021

will take place in Lisbon in June 2022. We are
confident that the Conference will create momentum
to promote solutions and achieve the implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14 by 2030, while
proposing science-based solutions in favour of new
global initiatives. We are hopeful that the fourth
session of the Conference on Biodiversity Beyond
National Jurisdiction will finally achieve a legally
binding instrument for the conservation and sustainable
use of marine biodiversity in areas beyond national
jurisdiction.
In spite of all the difficulties, we are pleased to
have understood that this is a time for action and not
words. It is a time for peace with nature, where we must
make every effort to live with nature and enjoy all the
benefits it offers. We therefore welcome the imminent
adoption of the two important draft resolutions before
us — on oceans and the law of the sea (A/76/L.20, as
orally revised) and on sustainable fisheries (A/76/L.18).
Ms. Ioannou (Cyprus): We fully subscribe to
the statement delivered by the representative of the
European Union earlier in this debate (see A/76/PV.46).
We thank Singapore and Norway for their hard work
facilitating the draft resolutions before us (A/76/L.20,
as orally revised, and A/76/L.18, respectively), and we
look forward to resuming regular negotiations thereon
in the next session.
Cyprus has co-sponsored both draft resolutions,
and we look forward to their unanimous adoption. Draft
resolutions of this kind should not be questioned by
being subjected to a vote, in a futile attempt to question
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS) as the Constitution of the Oceans and the
indisputable legal framework for all activities in our
oceans and seas. The Convention represents a carefully
crafted balance among the rights and interests of all
States irrespective of their specific characteristics. It
reflects customary international law, enforceable by and
against nations that are not a party to the Convention.
This entails, inter alia, a responsibility on the part of all
States to ensure that all inter-State arrangements they
enter into, including maritime delimitations, are in line
with general international law.
Given the opportunity of this debate, my delegation
wishes to underline the following. First, no State
should demand special treatment or encroach on the
rights of other States or engage in practices that aim
to deconstruct the clear legal regime established by the
21-38474

09/12/2021

Convention, including in respect of island States and
States comprising islands.
Secondly, no State should disrespect the
sovereignty and sovereign rights of other littoral States
by conducting unlawful activities in the maritime zones
of adjacent coastal States and by preventing Member
States from exercising their sovereignty and sovereign
rights in their maritime zones.
Thirdly, no State should attempt to create faits
accomplis based on outlandish maritime claims,
irredentist and expansionist strategies or a distorted
perception of international law simply because its
might allows it to, and no State should endanger peace
and security in the pursuit of gunboat diplomacy.
Fourthly, no State should enter into dubious bilateral
arrangements that contravene the Convention. Such
arrangements have no legal effect, nor do they affect
the status of UNCLOS as the sole pertinent universal
legal framework on the delimitation of maritime zones,
codifying international law. Upholding the integrity
of the Convention is the collective responsibility of all
of us.
Fifthly, the principles of good-neighbourly
relations and the sovereignty and sovereign rights over
the maritime zones of all neighbouring coastal States
need to be respected in delimiting maritime zones,
along with the primacy of the peaceful settlement of
disputes in international relations.
Sixthly, UNCLOS provides the stability,
predictability and security we all sought when
concluding the Convention after long and difficult
negotiations. It is now up to all of us to comply with
the rules-based order at sea, as that is well established
by UNCLOS.
Before concluding, I wish to add a word on sealevel rise, as one of the urgent climate-change-induced
consequences that particularly affects island States like
mine. The existential nature of this threat requires us
not only to curb emissions and take practical remedial
measures, but also to seek legal clarification as to the
possible effects of rising sea levels. My delegation
cannot overstate the indispensability of fully complying
with UNCLOS — and fully respecting its letter and
spirit — in the clarification of any legal aspect of sealevel rise and its consequences, taking into account the
customary nature of the Convention and, in particular,
Article 121, on the regime of islands.

A/76/PV.48

The President: I now call on His Excellency
Mr. Albert Hoffmann, President of the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.
Mr. Hoffmann (International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea): I am grateful for the opportunity to make
this statement to the General Assembly on behalf of the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea as part
of the Assembly’s consideration of the agenda item
“Oceans and the law of the sea”.
As a result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, I was prevented from addressing the
Assembly last year. I therefore wish to report on some
organizational and judicial developments at the Tribunal
during the last two sessions of the General Assembly.
These developments have taken place against the
backdrop of COVID-19, and I will also outline how the
Tribunal has responded to the challenges created by the
pandemic.
The Tribunal, like all other international
organizations, has felt the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic. Therefore, the fiftieth session of the
Tribunal, in autumn 2020, and the fifty-first session,
last spring, were held in hybrid format, with some
judges present in Hamburg and those unable to travel
attending via video link from their places of residence.
In the light of the experience of the pandemic, on
25 September 2020, the Tribunal amended its rules of
procedure to provide that, as an exceptional measure,
for public health, security or other compelling reasons,
hearings, readings of judgments or meetings of the
Tribunal can be held entirely or in part by video link.
Subsequently, from 13 to 19 October 2020, the Special
Chamber of the Tribunal dealing with the Dispute
concerning delimitation of the maritime boundary
between Mauritius and Maldives in the Indian Ocean
held a hearing in hybrid format, combining physical
and virtual participation of members of the Special
Chamber and representatives of the Parties. Let me add
that, at its fifty-first session, on 25 March 2021, the
Tribunal also decided to amend its rules, which were
initially adopted on 28 October 1997, with a view to
rendering them gender neutral.
With the Assembly’s permission, I will now turn to
the judicial work of the Tribunal. I am happy to report
that, despite the impact of the pandemic, the Tribunal has
continued to carry out its judicial mandate throughout
the years 2020 and 2021, dealing with the two cases
currently on its docket. Let me first address the Dispute

21-3847423/33

A/76/PV.48

09/12/2021

concerning delimitation of the maritime boundary
between Mauritius and Maldives in the Indian Ocean,
to which I have already referred. Members may recall
that, in relation to this dispute, Mauritius had initially,
in June 2019, instituted annex VII arbitral proceedings
against the Maldives and that the parties later, in
September 2019, had agreed to transfer the dispute to
a special chamber of the Tribunal. On 18 December
2019, the Maldives filed written preliminary objections
to the jurisdiction of the Special Chamber and the
admissibility of Mauritius’ claims. On 28 January 2021,
the Special Chamber delivered its judgment on the
preliminary objections. Let me briefly highlight some
important aspects of the Special Chamber’s findings.

As to the Chagos advisory opinion, the Special
Chamber found that

The Maldives presented five preliminary
objections. As its first preliminary objection, the
Maldives contended that the United Kingdom was an
indispensable third party to the proceedings, but as the
United Kingdom was not a party to those proceedings,
the Special Chamber lacked jurisdiction over the
alleged dispute. In its second preliminary objection,
the Maldives submitted that the Special Chamber
had no jurisdiction to determine the disputed issue
of sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago, which it
would necessarily have to do if it were to determine
Mauritius’ claims in these proceedings.

“while the process of decolonization has yet to be
completed, Mauritius’ sovereignty over the Chagos
Archipelago can be inferred from the [Court’s]
determinations”.

The Special Chamber, which examined these two
objections together, first addressed the relevance of an
award that had been rendered on 18 March 2015 by an
arbitral tribunal in the Chagos Marine Protected Area
Arbitration (Mauritius v. United Kingdom). In the view
of the Special Chamber, this award demonstrated that,
“aside from the question of sovereignty, the Chagos
Archipelago has been subject to a special regime,
according to which Mauritius is entitled to certain
maritime rights”.
It may be of particular interest to the General
Assembly that the Special Chamber, in its
considerations, also dealt with an advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice rendered in response
to questions submitted by the General Assembly
and with a resolution subsequently adopted by the
Assembly. I refer here to the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice of 25 February 2019 on
the Legal Consequences of the Separation of the Chagos
Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 and to resolution
73/295 of the General Assembly of 22 May 2019.
24/33

“[t]he determinations made by the [International
Court of Justice] with respect to the issues of the
decolonization of Mauritius in the Chagos advisory
opinion have legal effect and clear implications for
the legal status of the Chagos Archipelago”
and that
“[t]he United Kingdom’s continued claim to
sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago is
contrary to those determinations”.
The Special Chamber also found that,

With respect to resolution 73/295, the Special
Chamber noted that this resolution demanded that the
United Kingdom withdraw its administration over the
Chagos Archipelago within six months of its adoption.
In the view of the Special Chamber,
“[t]he fact that the time limit set by the General
Assembly has passed without the United Kingdom
complying with this demand further strengthens
the Special Chamber’s finding that its claim
to sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago is
contrary to the authoritative determinations made
in the advisory opinion”.
On this basis, the Special Chamber rejected both the
first and the second preliminary objections of the
Maldives. It found that,
“whatever interests the United Kingdom may still
have with respect to the Chagos Archipelago,
they would not render the United Kingdom a
State with sufficient legal interests, let alone an
indispensable third party, that would be affected by
the delimitation of the maritime boundary around
the Chagos Archipelago”.
The Special Chamber also considered that its
findings as a whole provide it with sufficient basis to
conclude that Mauritius can be regarded as the coastal
State in respect of the Chagos Archipelago for the
purpose of the delimitation of a maritime boundary even
before the process of the decolonization of Mauritius is
completed.
21-38474

09/12/2021

Time does not permit me to go into detail with
regard to the Maldives’ other objections. Let me just
say that the Special Chamber also rejected these
objections, after it had found that the parties’ obligation
under article 74, paragraph 1, and article 83, paragraph
1, of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea (“the Convention”) “to effect the delimitation of
the exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf
by agreement” had been fulfilled, that “a dispute
existed between the parties concerning the delimitation
of their maritime boundary” at the time of filing of
the notification, and that Mauritius’ claims did not
constitute an abuse of process.
The Special Chamber concluded that it had
jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the dispute concerning
the delimitation of the maritime boundary between the
parties in the Indian Ocean and that the claim submitted
by Mauritius in this regard was admissible. The Special
Chamber found it appropriate, however, to defer some
matters on the proceedings to the merits phase.
After the judgment on preliminary objections, the
merits phase of the case, which had previously been
suspended, resumed. Meanwhile, the parties had filed
a memorial and a counter-memorial, respectively, in
accordance with time limits fixed by an order of the
President of the Special Chamber dated 3 February 2021.
The second case on the docket of the Tribunal is
the M/T “San Padre Pio” (No. 2) Case (Switzerland/
Nigeria). On 6 May 2019, Switzerland instituted
arbitral proceedings under annex VII to the Convention
against Nigeria in a dispute concerning the arrest and
detention of the M/T “San Padre Pio”, its crew and
cargo. On 17 December 2019, the parties agreed to
transfer the dispute to the Tribunal. On 7 January 2020,
the President adopted an order fixing 6 July 2020 as the
time limit for the filing of the memorial of Switzerland
and 6 January 2021 as the time limit for the filing of
the counter-memorial of Nigeria. Switzerland filed the
memorial within the time limit. By order of 5 January
2021, the time limit for the submission of the countermemorial of Nigeria was extended to 6 April 2021.
No counter-memorial was filed by Nigeria within the
extended time limit.
By order of 18 June 2021, having ascertained the
views of the parties, the President fixed 9 September
2021 as the date for the opening of the hearing.
However, by letter of 30 July 2021, Switzerland
requested that the opening of the oral proceedings

A/76/PV.48

be postponed until a later date towards the end of
fall 2021 and referred in this respect to the ongoing
implementation of a memorandum of understanding
concluded by Switzerland and Nigeria on 20 May 2021
with regard to the issue of the M/T “San Padre Pio”.
By order of 10 August 2021, with regard to the special
circumstances of the case and having sought the views
of the parties, the President decided to postpone the
opening of the oral proceedings until a later date to be
fixed after consultations with the parties.
Earlier this year, on 1 October, the Tribunal
celebrated its twenty-fifth anniversary. To mark the
event, I gave a live address, which was broadcast on the
Tribunal’s website. In addition, a reception was held at
the premises of the Tribunal, which was attended by the
judges, the First Mayor of the Free and Hanseatic City of
Hamburg, and members of the diplomatic and consular
corps. The Tribunal also released an anniversary film
and published a fully updated version of its Digest
of Jurisprudence, both of which are available on the
Tribunal’s website.
During the 25 years of its history, the Tribunal has
established itself as the primary judicial body to which
States parties to the Convention turn when seeking
peaceful settlement of their disputes concerning the
interpretation or application of the Convention. At this
juncture, allow me to add some more general remarks
about the Tribunal’s work as well as about the future
prospects of dispute settlement in the law of the sea.
One of the reasons for its privileged role in dispute
settlement is the availability of efficient and fair
procedures before the Tribunal that respond to the needs
of States parties. By way of example, let me draw the
Assembly’s attention to a procedure that is unique to
the Tribunal and has been used frequently, in particular
during the Tribunal’s initial years.
I am referring in this regard to applications pursuant
to article 292 of the Convention by a flag State or an
entity acting on its behalf for the prompt release of a
vessel or its crew detained by the authorities of a State
on account of fisheries or marine pollution offences.
The arrest and detention of a vessel and its crew raise
humanitarian and economic concerns, which worsen the
longer detention continues. In such situations, prompt
release proceedings offer an efficient means to secure
the release of a vessel or its crew upon the posting of
a reasonable bond or other financial guarantee without
prejudice to the consideration of the merits of the case.

21-3847425/33

A/76/PV.48

09/12/2021

The Tribunal has entertained a number of
applications pursuant to article 292 of the Convention
and has demonstrated its capacity to render judgments
in such cases in a remarkably efficient and expeditious
manner, within a time frame of not more than 30 days
from the receipt of the application. Those cases have
also provided the Tribunal with the opportunity to
develop well-established jurisprudence, with regard to,
among other matters, the reasonableness of a bond or
other financial security.

to as a “framework convention”, a characteristic that
allows it to stay up to date in accordance with evolving
international standards while maintaining its status as
the central legal framework for ocean governance.

The arrest of vessels and crews continues to be
a frequent occurrence in international navigation.
The Tribunal remains available to entertain future
applications for prompt release, thereby ensuring that
the delicate balance between the rights and obligations
of coastal and flag States, as enshrined in the
Convention, is upheld.

The Tribunal’s contributions in this respect are
notable and date back to its earliest jurisprudence. The
case law of the Tribunal has also left a lasting mark
on how marine environmental considerations are to be
factored into the application and interpretation of the
Convention. In this regard, the Tribunal and a special
chamber of the Tribunal have confirmed the duty of
States to protect and preserve the marine environment
enshrined in articles 192 and 193 of the Convention.
The Tribunal also linked that duty to the conservation
of the living resources of the sea, which it considered to
be an element in the protection and preservation of the
marine environment.

As confident as I am that the Tribunal will
continue to resolve disputes in areas for which it has an
established track record, I am equally optimistic about
its prospects for handling new challenges in the law of
the sea. The future of ocean governance is currently
high on the agenda. The international community is
becoming increasingly aware of the harmful effects of
climate change on the sea, including ocean warming,
ocean acidification and sea-level rise. Other challenges,
such as the guarantee of basic human rights at sea, add
to the complexity.
The question has therefore been raised whether the
Convention is still fit for purpose in the contemporary
era. I am confident to say that this question can be
answered in the affirmative. In this regard, it is worth
recalling the Convention’s preamble, which specifies
that the States parties were
“[p]rompted by the desire to settle, in a spirit of
mutual understanding and cooperation, all issues
relating to the law of the sea”.
This aspiration culminated in a comprehensive treaty
text dealing with a vast array of subject matter.
Of course, the drafters of the Convention could
not predict all future uses of the oceans or oceanspecific risks. Nonetheless, they made the Convention
“future-proof”. Its resilient quality is plain to see in
its many “rules of reference”, which require States
parties to observe provisions contained in other treaties
or standards adopted by competent international
organizations. The Convention is therefore often referred
26/33

The adaptability of the Convention is also achieved
through the work of international courts and tribunals.
With some regularity, they are required to interpret
broadly phrased terms or address matters not expressly
stipulated in the Convention and thereby promote the
progressive development of international law.

Moreover, the Seabed Disputes Chamber, in its
2011 advisory opinion on the Responsibilities and
obligations of States with respect to activities in
the Area, referred to the obligations relating to the
preservation of the environment of the high seas and in
the Area as having an erga omnes character. In several
cases dealing with matters relating to the marine
environment, the Tribunal also emphasized that States
should act with prudence and caution.
Building on this notion, in its 2011 advisory
opinion, the Seabed Disputes Chamber made a
significant contribution to strengthening the status of
the precautionary approach in international law. The
Chamber, inter alia, held that the precautionary approach
is an integral part of the general obligation of due
diligence of sponsoring States under the Convention’s
regime for the exploitation of the resources of the Area.
The Chamber also recognized that a trend had been
initiated towards making the precautionary approach
part of customary international law.
I am confident that this brief jurisprudential survey
makes apparent that the Tribunal, whether in the exercise
of its contentious or of its advisory jurisdiction, has
the ability and willingness to retain its leading role in
ensuring the harmonious application of the Convention
21-38474

09/12/2021

as the law of the sea faces new conundrums in the
future.
Before I conclude, let me give the General
Assembly a brief update on the Tribunal’s activities
in the field of capacity-building. Unfortunately, some
of these activities have also been affected by the
COVID-19 pandemic. For example, the Tribunal could
not continue its established practice of holding regional
workshops on the settlement of disputes related to the
law of the sea. I would nevertheless wish to thank the
Government of Cyprus for its financial support towards
the organization of a future regional workshop in the
Mediterranean. Similarly, the Summer Academy, which
is normally organized annually by the International
Foundation for the Law of the Sea on the premises
of the Tribunal, could not take place in 2020 or 2021.
Instead, a compact online course on the law of the sea
and maritime law was organized by the Foundation.
However, I am pleased to report that the Tribunal
continued to host interns in its internship programme
throughout this period. I also wish to recall that
the trust fund set up by the Tribunal is available to
support interns from developing countries, and several
grants have been made to this fund over the years.
In this regard, I wish to express my sincere gratitude
to the Korea Maritime Institute and the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China for
their support.

A/76/PV.48

Finally, I wish to draw the Assembly’s attention
to the Tribunal’s new Junior Professional Officer
Programme, which was established on 30 September
2021. It is designed for young professionals to serve
in the Legal Office or in other departments of the
Tribunal’s Registry. States parties were informed of the
new programme by note verbale, and information has
also been made available on the website of the Tribunal.
Having come to the end of my statement, I would
like to underscore that the Tribunal benefits from the
excellent cooperation of the United Nations. In this
respect, I wish to express our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral, the Legal Counsel and the Director of the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for
their support and cooperation.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Observer for the International Seabed Authority.
Ms. Navoti (International Seabed Authority): It is
my honour to deliver this statement on behalf of His
Excellency Mr. Michael W. Lodge, Secretary-General
of the International Seabed Authority. Regrettably,
the Secretary-General cannot be in this Hall in person
today because the Council of the Authority is meeting
in person in Kingston this week.

The Tribunal also continued its capacity-building
and training programme in international dispute
settlement in the law of the sea, which has been
organized annually since 2007. Since its establishment,
this programme has been run with the financial
support of the Nippon Foundation. I wish to take this
opportunity to express my sincere gratitude to the
Nippon Foundation for its enduring commitment to
the programme.

“Today, the General Assembly will reaffirm
once again that the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and its two
implementing agreements set out the legal
framework within which all activities in the oceans
and seas must be carried out. The International
Seabed Authority plays a crucial role within that
framework. As the international organization
assigned to organize and control activities in the
area, protect the marine environment and promote
and encourage marine scientific research for the
benefit of all, the Authority is a critical part of the
governance architecture for the global ocean.

The Tribunal has also taken steps to expand its
capacity-building activities. Accordingly, in 2020, the
Tribunal received a grant from the Republic of Korea to
fund a workshop aimed at legal advisers, in particular
from developing countries, to familiarize them with the
Convention’s dispute-settlement mechanisms. I wish to
thank the Republic of Korea for this generous grant.
Unfortunately, the workshop could not take place this
year owing to the prevailing restrictions. However,
we are confident that we will be able to organize the
workshop in the coming year.

“I wish to thank the General Assembly for
the many positive references to the work of the
Authority contained in the draft resolution before
the Assembly (A/76/L.20, as orally revised). In
these difficult times, the ongoing support of States
Members of the United Nations for the work of the
Authority is very much appreciated. As always,
I also wish to acknowledge the extraordinary
support and cooperation we have received from
the Office of the Legal Counsel and the Division of
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea. We continue

21-3847427/33

A/76/PV.48

09/12/2021

to work closely together in a spirit of cooperation to
respond to and support the needs of Member States,
including in the context of UN-Oceans.

initiatives implemented by the Authority, including
through workshops. An increasing number of these
individuals are women.

“I am particularly encouraged by the
overwhelming support of Member States for the
swift resumption of in-person meetings of the
Authority after almost two years. While all the
organs of the Authority worked creatively and
relentlessly throughout that period, the resumption
of in-person meetings will allow us to conclude the
business of the twenty-sixth session, which began
in 2020, and lay the groundwork for the twentyseventh session.

“Thirdly, the efforts of the Authority have also
been directed to expand tangible and meaningful
capacity-building
and
capacity-development
opportunities for nationals of developing States
in marine scientific research. We are particularly
proud of our collective action towards the
empowerment and leadership of women scientists
from least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries and small island developing
States. The overwhelming support received from
members, partner organizations, contractors,
research institutions and international and regional
organizations and non-governmental organizations
in the implementation of our Women in Deep-Sea
Research project has been and still is decisive in
this regard.

“The regime for the deep seabed under
UNCLOS is one of the few international governance
regimes that has been designed in such a way that
the interests and needs of developing States are
fully integrated into the regime. I wish to take this
opportunity to highlight three ways in which the
Authority has responded to this mandate over the
past year.
“First, the secretariat had recently issued a series
of three publications on the relevance of UNCLOS
and the 1994 Agreement for the Least Developed
Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and
Small Island Developing States. We were pleased to
launch these reports with the support of the Office
of the High Representative for the Least Developed
Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and
Small Island Developing States. The objective is to
assist these groups of States to ensure ownership
through informed decision-making processes that
can support the development of new opportunities
for socioeconomic development. In this spirit,
I would take this opportunity to reiterate the
importance for these States and particularly the
landlocked developing States, to join UNCLOS
and take full advantage of the legal regime for
the oceans.
“Secondly, we have focused on revitalizing
capacity-development programmes and initiatives
to address the needs that were identified by
developing States themselves through the survey
circulated by the secretariat in 2020. We are proud
to say that in only a year and despite significant
challenges due to travel restrictions, more than
600 individuals from developing States have
benefited from at least one of the capacity-building
28/33

“Another key priority for the Authority has
been to implement the action plan in support of
the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for
Sustainable Development that was unanimously
adopted by the Assembly of the Authority in
December 2020. Significant progress has been made
this year, and a report detailing the progress made
will be discussed by the Assembly of the Authority
next week in Jamaica. It is my hope that through
this action plan, the international momentum
towards advancing the scientific knowledge and
understanding of deep-sea ecosystems, including
biodiversity and ecosystems of the Area, will be
further reinforced.
“The plan also emphasizes the need to promote
the dissemination and sharing of scientific data and
the outputs of research with a view to better-informed
decision-making processes and increased deep-sea
literacy to support inclusive participation. The full
implementation of the action plan is essential to the
effective application of the precautionary approach
that already governs all aspects of the work of the
Authority as it serves to advance the scientific basis
for continuous, improved assessment of the impacts
and risks related to deep-seabed exploration and
future exploitation activities.
“In 2022, we will mark the fortieth anniversary
of the adoption of the Convention. This will be an
occasion for celebration, but also an opportunity to
21-38474

09/12/2021

renew our collective commitment to UNCLOS as
an instrument for peace, security and equity.
“I am pleased to announce that in 2022, as
part of the global celebration of the Convention,
the secretariat of the Authority will organize the
first-ever conference on women in the law of the
sea. This conference is intended to celebrate the
contribution of women to the development of the
law of the sea, their participation in the institutions
created by UNCLOS and related regional and
subregional organizations, and the pathways to
enhancing the potential for women to contribute to
the law of the sea in future.
“We have recently issued a call for expressions
of interest from potential speakers. Responses from
women from developing States — and in particular
least developed countries, landlocked developing
countries and small island developing States — are
especially encouraged.
“The legal regime for the Area reflects a vision
of a fairer and more equal society. The unique
mandate assigned to the Authority is to give life
to this ideal of equity and economic and social
solidarity in access to and sustainable management
of the mineral wealth of the deep seabed for the
benefit of all humankind. Through the Authority,
access to these resources is assured to both
developed and developing States, rich and poor,
large and small. At the same time, strict regulation
ensures that we use these resources sustainably and
in a way that provides long-term benefits for all.
“However, the achievement of this vision
requires international cooperation and the
commitment of all States. The urgent need for this
level of cooperation and commitment has recently
been highlighted by the Secretary-General in his
report entitled Our Common Agenda. In that report,
the Secretary-General emphasized the need to
strengthen and accelerate multilateral cooperation
to achieve the goals and targets of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and make a
tangible difference in people’s lives. That is why
it is encouraging that an independent report on the
contribution of the Authority to the 2030 Agenda,
commissioned by the secretariat of the Authority
and released last week concluded that the work of
the Authority already contributes to 12 of the 17
Sustainable Development Goals.

A/76/PV.48

“I wish to take this opportunity to commend
the recommendations of the report to the General
Assembly and encourage all Member States
to continue to work collaboratively within the
framework of the Convention to achieve our common
objective, namely, to strengthen global governance
for the sake of present and future generations.”
The President: We have heard the last speaker in the
debate on agenda item 78 and its sub-items (a) and (b).
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/76/L.18 and A/74/L.20, as orally revised.
We turn first to draft resolution A/76/L.18, entitled
“Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat to make an oral statement.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly. Under the terms of
paragraphs 57, 58 and 60 of draft resolution A/76/L.18,
the General Assembly would take the following actions.
Pursuant to operative paragraph 57, the Assembly
would recall that the resumed Review Conference
agreed to keep the Agreement under review through
the resumption of the Review Conference at a date
not earlier than 2020, and note the agreement at the
fourteenth round of informal consultations of States
parties to the Agreement that the Review Conference
should be resumed in 2021, take note of the decision of
States parties to the Agreement through a consultation
by correspondence among States parties to the
Agreement to postpone the resumption of the Review
Conference on the Agreement to 2023, invite the
General Assembly to take note of the decision and take
any appropriate subsequent steps.
Pursuant to paragraph 58, the Assembly would
request the Secretary-General to resume the Review
Conference, convened pursuant to article 36 of the
Agreement, in New York for one week in the first part
of 2023, with a view to assessing the effectiveness
of the Agreement in securing the conservation and
management of straddling fish stocks and highly

21-3847429/33

A/76/PV.48

migratory fish stocks, to render the necessary assistance
and provide such services as may be required for the
resumption of the Review Conference, and to recall
its request in paragraph 60 of resolution 74/18 that
the Secretary-General submit to the resumed Review
Conference an updated report prepared in cooperation
with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and with the assistance of an expert
consultant to be hired by the Division to provide
information and analysis on relevant technical and
scientific issues to be covered in the report, to assist the
Review Conference in discharging its mandate under
article 36, paragraph 2, of the Agreement, and also in
this regard reiterate its request to the Secretary-General
to develop and circulate to States and to regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements
in a timely manner a voluntary questionnaire regarding
the recommendations made by the Review Conference
in 2016, taking into account the specific guidance to be
proposed at the fifteenth round of informal consultations
of States parties to the Agreement in 2022.
It should be recalled that in operative paragraphs
57 and 58 of its resolution 75/89, the General Assembly
took note of the decision of States parties to the
Agreement through a consultation by correspondence
conducted by the Chair of the fifteenth round of informal
consultations of States parties to the Agreement to
postpone the resumption of the Review Conference on
the Agreement to 2022 and requested the SecretaryGeneral to resume the Review Conference convened
pursuant to article 36 of the Agreement in New York for
one week in the first part of 2022. Accordingly, additional
resource requirements in the amount of $316,600 were
included in the proposed programme budget for 2022,
under section 2, “General Assembly and Economic and
Social Council Affairs and Conference Management”,
and section 8, “Legal Affairs”.
Pursuant to the request contained in operative
paragraphs 57 and 58 of the draft resolution, it is now
envisaged that the Review Conference would resume
in New York for one week in the first part of 2023
comprising 10 meetings, one in the morning and one
in the afternoon for five days, with interpretation in
all six languages. This would constitute an addition to
the meetings workload for the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management in 2023 and
entail additional, non-recurrent resource requirements
in the amount of $78,000 in 2023, under section 2,
“General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
30/33

09/12/2021

Affairs and Conference Management”. The date for
the Conference would be determined in consultation
with the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management.
Furthermore, the implementation of the mandate
would entail an addition to the documentation
workload of the Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management in New York of seven
pre-session documents with a total word count of
44,300 words, three in-session documents with a
total word count of 2,200 words, and one post-session
document with a word count of 21,000 words, in all
six languages, in 2023. Additional non-recurrent
requirements for documentation would arise in 2023
in the amount of $216,600, under section 2, “General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council Affairs
and Conference Management”.
In addition, pursuant to the request contained
in operative paragraph 60, it is estimated that a
non-recurrent amount of $22,000 for consultancy
services would be required under section 8, “Legal
Affairs”, in 2023. The expert consultant would assist
in the preparation of the report to the resumed Review
Conference, in particular by providing information and
analysis on the relevant scientific and technical issues
to be covered in the report.
Should the General Assembly adopt draft resolution
A/76/L.18, additional resource requirements estimated
in the amount of $316,600, comprising $294,600 under
section 2, “General Assembly and Economic and Social
Council Affairs and Conference Management”, and
$22,000, under section 8, “Legal Affairs”, would be
included in the proposed programme budget for 2023
for the consideration of the General Assembly at its
seventy-seventh session.
Additional resource requirements in the amount of
$35,400 would be included in the proposed programme
budget for 2023 under section 36, “Staff Assessment”,
which would be offset by an equivalent increase of
$35,400 under income section 1, “Income from Staff
Assessment”. Provisions included in the budget as
approved for 2022 will be surrendered in the context
of the financial performance report for 2022, to be
presented at the main part of the seventy-eighth session
of the General Assembly.
The President: Before proceeding further, I would
like to inform the Assembly that draft resolution
A/76/L.18 has closed for e-sponsorship.
21-38474

09/12/2021

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/76/L.18, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Angola,
Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Cuba, Denmark, Fiji, France, Georgia, Indonesia, Italy,
Kiribati, Latvia, Malawi, Maldives, Marshall Islands,
Federated States of Micronesia, Montenegro, Nauru,
Netherlands, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Poland, Romania, Thailand, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
United States of America.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.18?
Draft resolution A/76/L.18 was adopted (resolution
76/71).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
A/74/L.20, as orally revised, entitled “Oceans and the
law of the sea”.
I would like to inform the Assembly that draft
resolution A/76/L.20, as orally revised, has closed for
e-sponsorship.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/76/L.20, as orally revised, the following
countries have become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Albania, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Cameroon, Cuba, Dominican Republic,
France, Georgia, Guyana, Indonesia, Italy, Jamaica,
Latvia, Lebanon, Malawi, Maldives, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Federated States of Micronesia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Namibia, Nauru, North Macedonia, Norway,
Oman, Poland, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Solomon
Islands, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
States of America and Zimbabwe.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.

A/76/PV.48

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Turkey
Abstaining:
Colombia, El Salvador,
(Bolivarian Republic of)

Nigeria,

Venezuela

Draft resolution A/76/L.20, as orally revised,
was adopted by 131 votes to 1, with 4 abstentions
(resolution 76/72).
[Subsequently, the delegations of India, Nigeria,
Pakistan and Seychelles informed the Secretariat
that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, I would remind

21-3847431/33

A/76/PV.48

delegations that explanations of vote about are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Mainero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Although Argentina joined the consensus on resolution
76/71, on sustainable fisheries, it wishes to once again
stress that no recommendations in the resolution can be
interpreted as signifying that the provisions contained
in the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks and related
instruments can be considered to be obligatory by those
States that have yet to explicitly express their consent to
being bound under this Agreement. The resolution that
we have just adopted contains paragraphs related to the
implementation of the recommendations of the Review
Conference on the Agreement. Argentina reiterates
that those recommendations cannot be considered to be
enforceable, even as recommendations for States that
are not parties to the Agreement.
At the same time, Argentina reaffirms that existing
international law does not empower regional fisheries
management organizations or their member States to
adopt measures of any kind against vessels whose flag
States are not members of those organizations or party
to those arrangements or have not explicitly consented
to such measures being applicable to vessels flying their
flags. Nothing in the General Assembly’s resolutions,
including resolution 76/71, can be interpreted as
running contrary to this conclusion.
On the other hand, I would like to recall once
again that the application of conservation measures,
the conduct of scientific research or any other activity
recommended in General Assembly resolutions,
in particular, resolution 61/105 and its successors,
come necessarily under the legal framework of the
international law of the sea in force, as reflected in
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
including its article 77.
Consequently, compliance with these resolutions
cannot be construed as justification for ignoring or
denying the rights established in the Convention, and
nothing in the resolutions of the General Assembly
provides for curtailment of the sovereign rights of
coastal States over the continental shelf or the exercise
32/33

09/12/2021

of jurisdiction of coastal States with respect to their
continental shelf in accordance with international law.
Finally, I wish to point out that paragraph 196
of the resolution we have just adopted contains a
highly relevant reminder in this regard, as reflected
in resolution 64/72 and subsequent resolutions.
Accordingly, and as at previous sessions, paragraph
197 notes the adoption by coastal States, including
Argentina, of measures relating to the impact of bottom
fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems in the entire
area of their continental shelf, as well as their efforts to
ensure compliance with those measures.
Mr. Yakut (Turkey): My country asked for a vote
and voted against resolution 76/72, entitled “Oceans
and the law of the sea” under sub-item (a) of agenda
item 78.
Turkey agrees in principle with the general content of
the resolution, whose scope has expanded significantly
over the years to include a wide range of developments
and issues relating to the oceans and the seas. Many
of these issues are tackled in a more holistic manner
in the related annual reports of the Secretary-General,
the latest one of which addresses topics such as the
human dimension of migration by sea, maritime safety
and security, and the ocean-climate nexus (A/76/311
and A/76/311/Add.1). We appreciate that this resolution
recognizes the importance of the conservation and
sustainable use of the oceans, seas and their resources
in achieving the goals set forth in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
In line with the foregoing, we would like to thank
the coordinator, the Division of Ocean Affairs and the
Law of the Sea of the United Nations Secretariat, and
the Member States for their efforts in updating selected
parts of the resolution, as agreed upon this year in view
of the continuing challenges related to the coronavirus
disease pandemic. However, owing to the nature of the
references to UNCLOS in the resolution, Turkey was
obliged once again to call for a vote on it.
Turkey is not a party to UNCLOS and has
consistently expressed that it does not agree with the
view that the Convention has a universal and unified
character. We also maintain that UNCLOS is not the
only legal framework that regulates all activities in the
oceans and seas. Those concerns and objections have
been raised by a number of other States throughout the
years. Turkey remains ready and willing to continue
working with Member States to ensure that the
21-38474

09/12/2021

resolution is adopted by consensus in the future. Until
then, the UNCLOS-related language in the resolution
cannot and should not set a precedent for other United
Nations resolutions.
We would also like to take this opportunity to note
that the reasons that have prevented Turkey from being
a party to UNCLOS remain valid. Turkey supports
international efforts to establish a regime for the seas
that is based on the principle of equity and is acceptable
to all States. However, in our opinion, the Convention
does not provide sufficient safeguards for particular
geographical situations and, as a consequence, does
not take into consideration conflicting interests and
sensitivities resulting from special circumstances.
Furthermore, the Convention does not allow States to
register reservations to its articles. As a result, although
we agree with the Convention in its general intent and
with most of its provisions, we are unable to become a
party to it, owing to those prominent shortcomings.
In that regard, Turkey also wishes to draw attention
to the risks posed by one-sided interpretations of
international law and the invocation of UNCLOS to
justify maximalist claims, especially with regard to the
delimitation of maritime jurisdiction areas. Although
Turkey is not a party to the Convention, we support the
resolution of maritime disputes on the basis of equity
and in accordance with international law, as applicable.

A/76/PV.48

We hope that all relevant actors will adopt a similar
approach in order to promote regional and international
peace and stability.
Turkey joined the consensus on resolution 76/71,
on sustainable fisheries, under sub-item (b) of agenda
item 78, as it is fully committed to the conservation,
management and sustainable use of marine resources
and attaches great importance to regional cooperation
to that end. However, Turkey disassociates itself from
references to UNCLOS and the Agreement for the
Implementation of the UNCLOS provisions relating
to the conservation and management of straddling fish
stocks and highly migratory fish stocks, to which it
is not party. Those references therefore should not be
interpreted to imply any change in the legal position of
Turkey with regard to the instruments mentioned.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting at this meeting. We
will hear the remaining speakers this afternoon in this
Hall after the consideration of the reports of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) and of the Sixth Committee, respectively.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 78.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

21-3847433/33
