S/2008/602

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 September 2008
English
Original: French

Letter dated 11 September 2008 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to bring to your attention the attached report of the United
Nations fact-finding mission on the prevailing situation between Djibouti and
Eritrea.
The fact-finding mission visited Djibouti and Ethiopia from 28 July to
6 August 2008, in accordance with the consultations held by the Security Council on
24 June 2008 on the situation between Djibouti and Eritrea. The mission did not
obtain approval from the Eritrean authorities to visit Eritrea.
I should be grateful if you could bring this report and its annexes to the
attention of the Security Council members.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

08-50174 (E) 150908 160908

*0850174*

S/2008/602

[Original: English]

Report of the United Nations fact-finding mission on the
Djibouti-Eritrea crisis
28 July-6 August 2008

I. Introduction
1.
Between 10 and 12 June 2008, serious clashes were reported between the
Djibouti Armed Forces (DAF) and the Eritrean Defence Forces (EDF) along the
undemarcated border between Djibouti and Eritrea, in an area known as Doumeira. 1
The clashes reportedly caused over 35 deaths and left dozens wounded on both
sides, as well as some internal displacement at least on the Djibouti side. The
clashes at Doumeira followed several weeks of military build-up and growing
tension between DAF and EDF (which were in close proximity to each other) since
April 2008. Following contacts with the Permanent Representatives of both
countries, and at its request, the Security Council was briefed on the crisis between
Djibouti and Eritrea by the Department of Political Affairs at three meetings, on
14 May and 12 and 24 June 2008.
2.
In the aftermath of communications from Djibouti and Eritrea to the President
of the Security Council, and pursuant to the statement issued by the President of the
Council on 12 June (S/PRST/2008/20), in which the Council encouraged the
Secretary-General “urgently to use his good offices and reach out to both parties …
to facilitate bilateral discussions to determine arrangements for decreasing the
military presence along the border and to develop confidence-building measures to
resolve the border situation”, the Secretary-General directed the Department of
Political Affairs to dispatch a fact-finding mission to the two countries to assess the
political, security and humanitarian situation in the area. The mission was initially
scheduled to visit Djibouti and Eritrea, as well as Ethiopia: Ethiopia shares a
common border with both countries in the area of Mount Musa Ali and is also the
current Chair of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).
However, it was not possible for the fact-finding mission to visit Asmara or the
Eritrean side of the border to ascertain the prevailing situation. In spite of several
discussions and requests in New York and Asmara, the Eritrean authorities refused
to issue visas to the mission.
3.
As a result, the terms of reference of the mission were amended to include
only visits to Addis Ababa — for consultations, including with the African Union,
the League of Arab States and relevant Ethiopian Government officials — and
Djibouti — for consultations with the Djibouti authorities. It was also envisaged that
the mission would undertake a field visit to Doumeira and meet with the United
Nations country team in Djibouti. The mission was led by Sam Ibok, Deputy
Director, Africa II Division, Department of Political Affairs, and comprised the
following members: Arnaud Huannou, Political Affairs Officer in the Department of
Political Affairs; Douglas Langrehr, Military Planner in the Department of
__________________
1 The Doumeira area comprises a mountain, Ras Doumeira, and the nearby Doumeira Island.

2

08-50174

S/2008/602

Peacekeeping Operations; and Laurent Dufour, Humanitarian Affairs Officer in the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

II. Organization of work
Addis Ababa (28-31 July and 4-6 August)
4.
The fact-finding mission visited Addis Ababa from 28 to 31 July and 4 to
6 August. In keeping with its terms of reference, the mission discussed the situation
between Djibouti and Eritrea with several key interlocutors from the African Union,
the League of Arab States and the Ethiopian Ministries of Defence and Foreign
Affairs. 2
Djibouti (1-4 August)
5.
While in Djibouti, the mission met with several members of the Government,
some key members of the diplomatic corps, the United Nations Resident
Coordinator for Djibouti and several colleagues representing various United Nations
programmes and agencies. 3 The mission was received in audience by the President
of Djibouti, Ismail Omar Guelleh, on the last day of its visit.
6.
Throughout its activities in Addis Ababa and Djibouti, the mission sought to
organize its work and the execution of its terms of reference to, inter alia, achieve a
better understanding of the following critical aspects: (a) the state of relations
between Djibouti and Eritrea (both past and present), including an appreciation of
the series of conventions, treaties and protocols that defined the frontier between the
two territories at different points in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries; (b) the
chronology of events that led to the clashes of 10 to 12 June; (c) developments in
the border area since the clashes occurred; (d) the current military, security and
humanitarian situation in the border area; and (e) the efforts undertaken by the
African Union, the League of Arab States and the African, Caribbean and Pacific
Group of States to defuse the tension and create an enabling environment for
dialogue between the two States.
7.
In addition to its meetings and the visit to Ras Doumeira, the mission was able
to review a number of reports and other documents describing and analysing the
current situation between Djibouti and Eritrea. A better appreciation of the history
of the border between the two countries was particularly useful in trying to
understand the possible motives behind what had been widely reported as an
Eritrean occupation of Djibouti territory in Doumeira since March 2008. As would
be expected, such an appreciation was possible only with the full cooperation and
facilitation of the authorities in Djibouti.

III. Highlight of the mission
8.
The main highlight of the mission’s visit to Djibouti was the field trip to Ras
Doumeira, along the border with Eritrea, where fighting took place between 10 and
12 June. Prior to driving by road to Ras Doumeira, the mission visited the
__________________
2 See annex II.
3 See annex III.

08-50174

3

S/2008/602

headquarters of DAF in Moulhoule, where it received a briefing on the situation at
the border, under the auspices of the Djibouti Chief of Staff, General Zakaria
Cheikh Ibrahim.
9.
The visit to Ras Doumeira was particularly useful in that it allowed the factfinding mission to (a) be informed about the nature and magnitude of the
deployment of the two armies and (b) assess the potential for and the possible
impact of a resumption of hostilities in the short and medium terms.

IV. History of the Djibouti-Eritrea border and implications for
the status of Doumeira
10. Most of the border between Djibouti and Eritrea was never officially
demarcated. An 1897 treaty between France (the colonial power) and King Menelik
II of Ethiopia 4 defined the north-eastern section of the border between Djibouti and
Eritrea from the northernmost tip of Ras Doumeira to Bissidirou. However, that
particular section of the border was never demarcated on the ground. The exact
position of the land boundary in Ras Doumeira is critical for establishing whether
Eritrea has actually occupied Djibouti territory since March, as claimed by the
Djibouti authorities. The position of the borderline would also be critical if the two
States were to negotiate their maritime boundary on the Red Sea.
11. The status of Doumeira Island is also yet to be determined. The France-Italy
protocols of 1900 and 1901 gave France and Italy joint sovereignty over the island,
which the two colonial powers undertook to keep free of occupation, be it by one of
them or by third parties. The Djibouti authorities estimate that the protocols reduced
the territory of Djibouti by some 2,000 square kilometres by repositioning the land
boundary with Eritrea about 40 kilometres below its position under the 1897 treaty.
12. A 1935 agreement between France and Italy allocated Doumeira Island to the
then Italian-ruled Eritrea. That agreement also moved the continental frontier further
south into territories previously considered to belong to Djibouti under the 1897
treaty and the protocols of 1900 and 1901. Under the 1935 agreement, Ras
Doumeira and Doumeira Island, both of which were “seized” by EDF in March
2008, form part of Eritrean territory, by Eritrean reasoning. However, that
agreement was never ratified, which is why Djiboutians have all along assumed that
the protocols still apply.
13. In January 1954, France and Ethiopia signed a protocol to demarcate the
frontier between the French territory of Djibouti and Ethiopia (which then included
Eritrea). However, the on-ground demarcation was done only between Dirko Koma
(near Mount Musa Ali) and Daddato, leaving the long section of the border that goes
from Daddato to the Red Sea undemarcated.
14. From the contacts that the mission had in Djibouti, it emerged that although
most of the border was never demarcated, there seemed to be a general consensus
(both inside and outside the region) that the borderline between Djibouti and Eritrea
should be as stipulated in the protocols of 1900 and 1901. This, the mission was
__________________
4 The 1897 treaty, the 1900 and 1901 protocols, the 1935 agreement and the 1954 protocol are

reproduced in annex I below.

4

08-50174

S/2008/602

informed, was the general understanding of Djiboutians and the basis for their
bilateral and fraternal relations with Eritrea.
15. The mission was able to establish that there are major divergences in the views
of both countries. For instance, in spite of the general understanding of Djiboutians
referred to above, Eritrea made an attempt in 1996 to seize control of Ras Doumeira,
including by publishing a border map based on the 1935 agreement. The ensuing
dispute between the two countries was short-lived and was resolved through
bilateral mechanisms, but the question of the borderline remained unresolved.
16. Some interlocutors of the mission felt that the current tensions could have been
avoided if the two countries had reached a final ruling on the position of their
border after their 1996 dispute.

V. Chronology of developments leading to the clashes of
10 to 12 June
17. The refusal of Eritrea to receive the United Nations fact-finding mission to
ascertain the facts on the ground meant that only the Djibouti version and
chronology of events was made available to the mission. During its visit to Djibouti,
the mission was given the following chronology of events by the authorities of that
country:
(a) 4 February 2008: administrative officials in the Obock region (Djibouti)
alert their national authorities to civil engineering works taking place on the Eritrean
side of the border. When approached by the Obock administration, the Eritrean
workers affirm that the works in question are part of a road construction project that
would link Obock to Assab in Eritrea. Since the two countries had previously agreed
that Eritrea could construct such a road, the Obock administration presumed that the
Eritrean Government would notify the Djibouti authorities before the construction
team crossed the border into Djibouti territory;
(b) 10 February: Eritrean road construction machines and personnel cross the
border and start construction works in Ras Doumeira without any communication
between the authorities of the two countries. Over the period from 15 February to
30 March, the local authorities of Obock make several approaches to their Eritrean
counterparts but fail to elicit an explanation for the unauthorized incursion into
Djibouti;
(c) Mid-March: EDF elements cross the border in large numbers, occupy Ras
Doumeira and Doumeira Island, and proceed to dig trenches and fortifications in the
occupied areas;
(d) 7 April: the Prefect of Obock and a Djibouti military officer who
intended to visit Ras Doumeira to investigate the situation are turned back by EDF;
(e) 17 April: DAF personnel deploy in Ras Doumeira and position
themselves in close proximity to the EDF presence;
(f) 18 April: the Government of Djibouti initiates bilateral diplomatic
contacts with Eritrea to obtain the withdrawal of EDF from its territory. The
contacts include (i) a diplomatic note to the Eritrean Government, (ii) a telephone
conversation between the two Heads of State on 20 April at the initiative of the

08-50174

5

S/2008/602

President of Djibouti and (iii) a meeting between the two Foreign Ministers on
21 April in Djibouti;
(g) 22 April: the President of Djibouti visits the border area, ostensibly at the
suggestion or direct request of the President of Eritrea made on 20 April 2008, when
the two leaders engaged in a telephone conversation (the rationale for the request of
the President of Eritrea to his Djibouti counterpart was that the capital of Djibouti is
closer to the area/border than Asmara). On the ground, the President of Djibouti
establishes the fact that EDF has completely occupied Ras Doumeira and erected
camps and fortifications, while fast, armed patrol boats and another patrol vessel
have docked at the creek adjacent to Ras Doumeira. Following the visit of the
President of Djibouti to the border, subsequent efforts to contact his Eritrean
counterpart, to share his findings with him, are unsuccessful. The President of
Djibouti is repeatedly told that his Eritrean counterpart is unavailable to take his
calls;
(h) 23 April: Eritrean authorities refuse to receive the Foreign Minister of
Djibouti, who was dispatched by his President to visit Asmara. The Foreign Minister
was carrying a letter from the President of Djibouti to his Eritrean counterpart;
(i) 23 to 28 April: the Djibouti Ambassador to Eritrea tries unsuccessfully to
engage the host Government on the growing dispute;
(j) 24 April: a meeting between two high-level military officers of the two
countries is held in Ras Doumeira to discuss the situation. A Joint Military
Committee comprising senior officers of the two countries is established to monitor
the military situation and create a buffer between the positions of the two armies.
Unfortunately, this is the first and last meeting of the Committee. All subsequent
attempts by DAF to re-establish contact with EDF fail. The General who led the
EDF delegation to the meeting of 24 April is never to be seen or heard from again;
(k) Mid-April to 10 June: while EDF and DAF are positioned at the border
within a few metres of each other, over 50 Eritrean soldiers of various ranks (the
exact number is yet to be established) desert their army and seek asylum on the
Djibouti side. The deserters receive the protection of DAF, which refuses to heed
appeals from EDF to return them. EDF issues several ultimatums and threatens
reprisals if the deserters are not returned;
(l) 10 June, 1215 hours: another EDF officer deserts and crosses the border
into Djibouti. DAF again offers protection, as had been the case with the previous
deserters. Again, EDF commanders demand the return of the deserter, this time
within an hour. DAF ignores the ultimatum;
(m) 10 June, 1840 hours: EDF opens fire at DAF while the majority of
Djibouti soldiers are busy praying. The ensuing clashes last more than 24 hours.
About 44 DAF soldiers are believed killed, 19 are missing in action. The number of
casualties on the Eritrean side is unknown, but unconfirmed reports indicate that
Eritrean losses are not considerable;
(n) After 10 to 12 June: following the growing expressions of international
concern and the deliberations of the Security Council, which, inter alia, called for a
pullback of the forces to their previous positions, DAF withdraws to about 4 or 5
kilometres from the Eritrean positions. The fact-finding mission was able to confirm
the pullback on the ground. For its part, EDF ignores the calls for a withdrawal from

6

08-50174

S/2008/602

its positions on the heights of Ras Doumeira, or at least the mission was not able to
ascertain the reactions of EDF to the Security Council’s call for withdrawal from the
newly occupied positions.

VI. Initiatives by the African Union and other organizations and
efforts by bilateral actors
African Union
18. On 24 April 2008, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Djibouti addressed a letter to the Chairperson of the African Union
Peace and Security Council to inform him that Eritrea had been occupying part of
the Djibouti territory in Doumeira since 16 April 2008. He requested the Peace and
Security Council to send a fact-finding mission to assess the situation. He also
recalled that in 1996, Eritrea had made a “military incursion in the area and
published a map where the borderline between the two countries had been
modified”.
19. The 121st, 125th and 130th meetings of the African Union Peace and Security
Council, held on 24 April and 2 and 26 May, respectively, reviewed the situation and
underscored the urgent need to dispatch a fact-finding mission, as requested by
Djibouti. Thereafter, the African Union Commission sent messages to the authorities
of Djibouti and Eritrea, informing them that it intended to dispatch the envisaged
mission from 5 to 9 June. On 2 June, Djibouti indicated its readiness to receive the
mission on the dates communicated. Accordingly, a mission from the African Union
Commission visited Djibouti during the aforementioned period. The mission went to
Doumeira, where it noted “a very tense situation”, with the two armies positioned at
“less than three metres facing each other”. The African Union mission was also able
to observe “important civil engineering works and long trenches dug on the sides of
the [Ras Doumeira] mountain”. The mission did not receive the approval of the
authorities in Asmara to visit Eritrea.
20. At its 136th meeting, on 12 June, the African Union Peace and Security
Council received the report of the African Union fact-finding mission and issued a
communiqué in which it “noted with regret that the Eritrean authorities had not yet
accepted to receive the mission” and “urged the two countries to show utmost
restraint” and “resort to dialogue to resolve any bilateral dispute”. The Peace and
Security Council further “called for the immediate return to the situation prevailing
at the common border between the two countries, including the withdrawal from the
border of all forces that have been positioned there since 4 February 2008”.
21. Up to the time of finalizing the present report, the African Union was still
waiting for Eritrean officials to receive its mission. The African Union remains
hopeful that, following preliminary contacts between the President of Eritrea and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission on the margins of the Tokyo
International Conference on African Development, as well as contacts with the
Foreign Minister of Eritrea on the margins of the African Union summit in Sharm
el-Sheikh, a long-awaited invitation to Chairperson Ping to visit Asmara and hold
consultations with the Eritrean authorities may still be a possibility. However, the
African Union also acknowledged its limitations, especially since Eritrea does not
attend African Union meetings in Addis Ababa because of its dispute with Ethiopia.

08-50174

7

S/2008/602

League of Arab States
22. Before the African Union mission, the League of Arab States had dispatched
its own fact-finding mission to Djibouti and Eritrea, in early May. The mission was
received in Djibouti and benefited from the full cooperation of the Djibouti
authorities. The mission also sought to meet with Eritrean officials but was not
issued visas to Eritrea. Further to its mission, the League of Arab States urged
dialogue between the two countries to resolve the crisis and called on Eritrea to
withdraw its troops from Doumeira.
Intergovernmental Authority on Development
23. The 12th IGAD Summit, held in Addis Ababa on 14 June 2008, also discussed
the situation between Djibouti and Eritrea. In its final communiqué, the Summit
expressed concern over “the recent military attack by Eritrean troops” in
Ras Doumeira and “called upon both parties, in particular Eritrea, to accept
mediation to resolve the crisis through peaceful means and return to the status quo
ante”.
24. During the fact-finding mission’s discussion with senior officials of IGAD in
Djibouti, the subregional body also acknowledged its limitations in dealing with the
crisis, considering that Eritrea had suspended its membership in IGAD in April
2007. There are ongoing efforts to encourage Eritrea to return to IGAD. Should
those efforts succeed, IGAD could conceivably be positioned to play a role in
efforts to defuse the tension between Djibouti and Eritrea.
African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States
25. A fact-finding mission mandated by the Committee of Ambassadors of the
African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States in Brussels visited Djibouti in late
July 2008. The mission met with the President of Djibouti and other Government
officials and undertook a field visit to Doumeira. The mission was not, however,
able to visit Eritrea, nor was it able to discuss the situation at the Djibouti-Eritrea
border with any Eritrean official.
European Commission
26. The European Commissioner for Development and Humanitarian Aid, Louis
Michel, seems to be the only publicly known international official who visited
Asmara in the immediate aftermath of the clashes of 10 to 12 June. He is reported to
have visited Eritrea on 14 and 15 June and conferred with the President of Eritrea,
including on the crisis with Djibouti. The United Nations fact-finding mission was
unable to meet with Commissioner Michel due to time constraints and scheduling
difficulties.
Bilateral efforts
27. Since the outbreak of the crisis between Djibouti and Eritrea, a number of
friends and neighbouring countries have offered their assistance to facilitate a
peaceful resolution of the dispute. The best known of these offers of facilitation
include those from Qatar and Yemen. The outcome of such offers was not disclosed
to the fact-finding mission during its visits to Addis Ababa and Djibouti.

8

08-50174

S/2008/602

VII. Key findings of the United Nations fact-finding mission
A.

Military situation in Doumeira
28. From photographs provided by the Government of Djibouti and confirmed
during the mission’s visit, Ras Doumeira is a barren, rocky feature jutting out into
the Red Sea, in an area between Djibouti and Eritrea. On the northern side of
Ras Doumeira is a small inlet that has reportedly been improved by EDF in order to
construct a harbour (some interlocutors of the mission claimed that it was a small
naval facility) and to gain access to the top of the feature from the Eritrean side.
Until that work was done, the only access to the summit of Ras Doumeira was from
the Djibouti side to the south. East of Ras Doumeira lies Doumeira Island, which
appears to have once been an extension of Ras Doumeira.
29. According to a 1954 map shown to the mission by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Djibouti, both the eastern section of
Ras Doumeira and Doumeira Island belong to Djibouti, although that section of the
border remains to be formally demarcated. Both Ras Doumeira and Doumeira Island
overlook the Bab el-Mandeb Strait, which is between the Djiboutian coast and
Yemen about 35 kilometres north-west of the proposed location where the recently
announced multi-million dollar bridge between Djibouti and Yemen (a massive
investment and engineering works bringing together consortiums of Arab
industrialists and Gulf countries) will be constructed. From the summit of
Ras Doumeira, a force can observe and dominate the land approaches to Eritrea
from the south, as the remainder of the border follows the course of the Weima
River, which may be an obstacle to armoured and wheeled vehicles.
30. The fact-finding mission was able to visit the area on 3 August 2008 and
viewed the disputed site from a distance with binoculars. It was difficult to assess
the defensive earthworks (photographic evidence produced by Djibouti) that had
reportedly been constructed on Ras Doumeira by EDF. The Djibouti military
provided a very good situation brief to the mission with details and photographs of
the background, military build-up and repositioning of DAF. According to that brief,
EDF had undertaken extensive development of its positions, making stone-pitched
communication trenches that encircled the eastern tip of Ras Doumeira and
fortifications at intervals along the trenches.
31. The mission found that the Djibouti military had withdrawn four to five
kilometres from the disputed area, in accordance with the Security Council’s
presidential statement of 12 June 2008 (S/PRST/2008/20), in which the Council
urged “both parties ... to show maximum restraint and withdraw forces to the status
quo ante”. DAF, supported logistically by the French military (in accordance with a
1977 defence treaty between France and Djibouti) has adopted a defensive posture
beyond the mortar range of EDF. From the position where the mission observed the
developments on Ras Doumeira, it was not obvious whether the Eritrean military
were still developing what a number of interlocutors referred to as their “defensive
positions” on the mountain. Some interlocutors claimed that EDF had deployed
anti-aircraft weapons as part of their fortifications, although the mission was unable
to clearly identify those or any other weapon systems from its observation point
south of the disputed zone. Also, the mission was not in a position to determine
whether EDF had already accomplished its mission (deployment) in the area, nor

08-50174

9

S/2008/602

was it able to definitely conclude that the new facts that had been established on the
ground would become the new reality in Ras Doumeira.
32. Some military interlocutors consulted by the mission suggested that the EDF
presence on Ras Doumeira consists of about one battalion, supported by a platoon of
artillery and a platoon of armour and engineers who are constructing the
fortifications and the small naval facility. In total, it was alleged that the Eritrean
forces might number between 500 and 600 troops, although they could be quickly
reinforced with troops from the port of Assab or other locations close to the border.
33. The Djiboutian military, on the other hand, has approximately one battalion
each of infantry, artillery and armour corps deployed forward for area defence under
very harsh conditions. Beyond the deployment of men and armour, there are
requirements for close air support, attack aviation, artillery and possible naval
gunfire support for any offensive military action against Ras Doumeira. The
Djibouti military is unable to field such a force without significant support. In
addition, it would be difficult for DAF to sustain a force of about 1,000 troops in the
field for much longer, as its total force averages 4,400, including the gendarmerie,
which comprises about 800 personnel.
34. Presently, the security situation on the ground could be described as stable but
tense, exacerbated by extreme conditions in the area at this time of year. It is not
clear how long EDF are prepared to hold the disputed sites. Djibouti seems prepared
to defend its territory, although it continues to pursue diplomatic and political
channels to peacefully resolve the issue. As the mission was unable to consult with
the Eritrean authorities, it is difficult to determine the exact reasons why Eritrea has
undertaken this venture and what future actions can be expected from the Eritrean
side. However, it is unlikely, both from the mission’s observation and from the
perspectives of military experts familiar with the region, that EDF will undertake
further advances into Djibouti territory.
35. An incontestable fact established by the fact-finding mission was that a
stalemate situation has developed between Djibouti and Eritrea and that it can be
resolved only through diplomatic means, especially because the current levels of
military deployment are unsustainable and place an unfair burden on the peoples of
both Djibouti and Eritrea.

B.

Impact of the crisis on relations between the two States
36. Until June 2008, Djibouti and Eritrea had maintained fairly good bilateral
relations. During the fact-finding mission, the point was routinely made that
Djibouti is the one neighbouring country (apart from Saudi Arabia and possibly the
Sudan) with which Eritrea had enjoyed good relations until the outbreak of the
current dispute. By the account of the Djibouti authorities, it was out of such
considerations that Djibouti tried in the first place to resolve the current crisis at the
leadership level and through existing bilateral mechanisms between the two
countries. Key among those mechanisms are a July 2006 agreement between the
Ministries of Defence of the two countries, based on a treaty of friendship and
cooperation between Eritrea and Djibouti, and an agreement on security matters
signed in December 1995.

10

08-50174

S/2008/602

37. The mission was informed that, under the 2006 agreement, the two countries
undertook to respect their respective borders and agreed to set up a Joint Military
and Technical Committee, which would meet every six months or as requested by
either party. It was further agreed that the Committee would meet once a year at
both the ministerial and the military command levels. At this critical time in the
history of relations between the two countries, all the aforementioned mechanisms
seem to have become inoperable, a situation that the Djibouti authorities attribute to
the lack of political will of the Eritrean leadership and its non-transparency as far as
its real intentions are concerned.
38. Since the beginning of the current tensions, relations between Djibouti and
Eritrea have significantly deteriorated, prompting Djibouti to recall its Ambassador
to Eritrea and to expel Eritrea’s Ambassador to Djibouti in June 2008. All
diplomatic relations between the two countries are currently suspended, as Eritrea
continues to downplay the gravity of the situation and to rebuff all attempts by
regional and international organizations, including the United Nations, to help both
countries defuse the tension.
39. Considering the scale of the current crisis, which has already led to significant
loss of human life, and given the disruption of bilateral relations between the two
States, only a high-level political intervention accepted by Eritrea can bring about a
de-escalation of the tension and persuade the parties to demilitarize their common
border and return to the status quo ante. The mission would strongly advise against
further military action by either party, as there is definitely no military solution to
the ongoing dispute. On the contrary, the mission felt a great need for rebuilding
confidence between the two States and for healing the wounds that the crisis is
creating on a daily basis.

C.

Humanitarian impact of the crisis
Impact on the local population in Obock district
40. The border dispute takes place in the most arid and least populated district of
Djibouti. It is only recently that its main town, Obock, was connected to the rest of
the country by an asphalted road. According to the Obock district doctor, about
60,000 people, mostly pastoralists, live in this region of Djibouti. The pastoralists
regularly cross borders in search of better pasture and water sources, depending on
the season. Most of those living near the borders with Eritrea and Ethiopia are
nomads who do not carry any national identification documents and who move
freely with their livestock from one territory to the other. The current drought has
particularly affected the northern and eastern parts of Obock district. Malnutrition
rates have reached alarming levels and a significant percentage of the population
depends on food aid and/or water trucking.
41. The clashes of 10 to 12 June 2008 and the subsequent militarization of
Doumeira and Moulhoule have reportedly caused the displacement of some 207
families, which were temporarily relocated to two sites in the Obock district, called
Andoli and Khor Angar. All the displaced families are current beneficiaries of the
World Food Programme food aid and those in Khor Angar receive water trucking
organized by the national authorities with assistance from the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) for fuel supply and maintenance. The fact-finding

08-50174

11

S/2008/602

mission was not able to visit the displaced families, as the aforementioned
relocation sites were both quite far from Doumeira.
42. Although the number of displaced persons is relatively low, the militarization
of the border area has had a negative impact on the population of the area in many
ways. First, the sudden influx into the area of hundreds of armed forces personnel
has further overstretched the scarce resources available, water and pasture in
particular; UNICEF is concerned that one of the few boreholes in the area is now
exclusively used to supply water to the Djibouti military. Second, the closure of
some 80 kilometres of border between Djibouti and Eritrea disrupts traditional
migrations and threatens the livelihood of pastoralists in both countries, as well as
in Ethiopia. Third, the closure of the Djibouti-Eritrea border has caused several
families to split, with some family members left on the Djibouti side while others
are on Eritrean-controlled territory. Most of the affected families are without
information on the whereabouts of their separated members.
Protection issues
43. Currently, the most serious concerns are related to protection. Nineteen
Djiboutian combatants have reportedly been missing in action since the clashes of
10 to 12 June. The list of missing Djibouti personnel was forwarded to the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) during its recent ad hoc mission
to Djibouti. ICRC was also able to visit 19 Eritrean combatants detained as
prisoners by the Djibouti authorities since the clashes. Another ICRC visit to
Djibouti was scheduled for mid-August.
44. ICRC has a presence in Eritrea, but authorities there have so far denied the
occurrence of the border incidents of 10 to 12 June. Consequently, it has been
impossible for ICRC to ascertain the presence of Djibouti prisoners of war in Eritrea
as a result of those incidents.
45. As stated above, a number of Eritrean soldiers and officers have deserted EDF
and crossed over into Djibouti since the beginning of the crisis. According to the
Secretary-General of the Djibouti Ministry of Interior, 36 Eritrean deserters are
currently under the responsibility of the Djibouti authorities of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has received
unconfirmed reports that up to 100 Eritrean deserters are now in Djibouti and more
continue to arrive, some of them high-ranking EDF officers). The Djibouti Ministry
of Interior has approached UNHCR with a request that it shelter and assist the
deserters, as well as help determine their status.
46. UNHCR has a strict policy for dealing with combatants and ex-combatants:
deserters are considered separately from other refugees or asylum-seekers. They are
placed under the protection of the host Government, and no direct UNHCR
assistance can be provided to them without the approval of the Deputy High
Commissioner. In order to determine whether deserters qualify for refugee status,
proof has to be established that they renounced any military activity long before
claiming the status of refugees. Strict exclusion clauses also apply to individuals
who have committed serious human rights violations or war crimes. The mission
was assured that UNHCR will support the Djibouti authorities in determining the
status of the Eritrean deserters currently on Djibouti soil.

12

08-50174

S/2008/602

47. Resettlement to a third country is possible for EDF deserters who obtain the
status of refugees. This could be a confidence-building measure and could
potentially ease tensions on this sensitive issue. The future of those who will not be
granted refugee status will have to be clarified as well, particularly whether the
Djibouti authorities should treat them as prisoners of war. However, a more detailed
consideration of this issue was considered to be outside the scope of this factfinding mission .
Treatment of the wounded
48. Following the clashes of 10 to 12 June, about 55 Djibouti combatants were
evacuated and treated by the French military. If needed, the French military, ICRC
and the non-governmental organization Médecins sans frontières (each of which has
a small presence in Djibouti) could provide additional supplies for the treatment of
war-wounded combatants and civilians.

VIII.

Observations
49. An important fact established by the mission is that the Djibouti authorities
find it intolerable that a neighbour should attack their country, occupy their
sovereign territory and, worse still, refuse to engage in dialogue or explain its
actions. The fact-finding mission found the situation at the border to be very tense
and the attitude of the people of Djibouti one of heightened expectations, especially
in respect of the United Nations. Throughout the mission’s visit to Djibouti, the
authorities of the country strongly expressed their disappointment at being betrayed
by a neighbour, Eritrea. Among the limited constituents of the population that the
mission came into contact with, there was frustration and indignation at the fact that
Djibouti is being unfairly targeted and drawn into a senseless crisis as a way of
diverting the country’s attention from its developmental efforts and its endeavour to
improve the living conditions of its population.
50. Within the Djibouti military, there was anger over the actions of EDF and the
studied silence of the Eritrean leadership, as if it were normal behaviour to occupy
parts of the sovereign territory of another country. Many senior officers expressed to
the mission, in very strong terms, their discomfort with having to accept the fact that
the Djibouti army was made to withdraw from its territory after Eritrea had forcibly
occupied Doumeira. While they claimed that they had withdrawn in response to the
calls made by the Security Council, they contrasted their action with that of Eritrea,
which not only occupied sovereign Djiboutian territory, but refused to engage with
Djibouti or cooperate with efforts by the international community to defuse the
crisis. By so doing, Eritrea could deliberately or unwittingly provoke Djibouti into
another senseless war in the Horn of Africa.
51. Having exhaustively examined all the facts at its disposal, the mission wishes
to highlight the following specific observations:
(a) Recent developments at the Djibouti-Eritrea border, especially the
militarization of Doumeira, constitute a threat to the stability and socio-economic
development of Djibouti. The ongoing tension poses a considerable risk to the
country’s internal peace and security, as it could potentially expose the
democratically elected Government of Djibouti to undue pressure from an indignant
Djibouti military, eager to reclaim Doumeira from EDF by force. Should the

08-50174

13

S/2008/602

Eritrean occupation of Doumeira be allowed to prevail as a fait accompli, it is
possible that the Djibouti military could begin to perceive the country’s political
leadership as weak and unable to deal with the ongoing occupation of Djibouti
territory. Such a scenario could easily bring about political instability. Besides, the
mobilization of the Djibouti army at the border is clearly unsustainable and would
constitute a huge haemorrhage on the limited resources of the country;
(b) If not addressed in a timely and comprehensive manner, the DjiboutiEritrea issue could have a major negative impact on the entire region and the wider
international community. The possible destabilization of Djibouti and the
militarization of the Bab el-Mandeb Strait do not augur well for peace in the region
or for international shipping and investment. Solutions must therefore be found, as a
matter of the utmost priority;
(c) The mission has identified an interrelation between the Ethiopia-Eritrea
conflict and the Djibouti-Eritrea crisis. Even though this issue was never discussed
extensively during the mission, it is almost certain that a breakthrough in the
Ethiopia-Eritrea peace process will go a long way towards securing the cooperation
of Eritrea in efforts to demilitarize its border with Djibouti. Any progress in
resolving the Ethiopia-Eritrea issue would also be likely to encourage Eritrea to
accept an international arbitration process that would lead to a mutually accepted
demarcation of the Djibouti-Eritrea border. One should not underrate the formidable
impact of the protracted Ethiopia-Eritrea dispute on peace and stability in the entire
Horn of Africa, given especially the frustration of Ethiopia and Eritrea at the lack of
progress on this issue since the Ethiopia-Eritrea Boundary Commission ruling in
April 2002. The members of the fact-finding mission share the increasingly accepted
view that much of the instability in that region is related to unfinished business and
the unresolved Ethiopia-Eritrea dispute, particularly their efforts to counter each
other’s (real or perceived) interests and actions in the region, be it in Djibouti or in
Somalia;
(d) Eritrea has good experience in judicial processes and arbitration for
resolving border disputes, including those with Ethiopia and Yemen. If it believes it
has a border dispute with Djibouti, Eritrea should be encouraged to state so publicly
and submit a case to a political and/or judicial process or arbitration to resolve it;
(e) In the short term, there may be no satisfactory resolution of the dispute
without the full cooperation of both countries, especially Eritrea. Yet the situation
must not be allowed to become another endless border dispute where facts are
changed on the ground and two neighbours get dragged into endless disputes over
how to deal with that new reality on the ground. Eritrea cannot continue saying that
it has no issue with Djibouti when there is so much overwhelming evidence to
confirm that there is a problem. Given that its actions are adversely affecting
another country, Eritrea has an obligation to engage in dialogue over the situation
that prevails in Doumeira.

IX. Recommendations
52. Through the present report, the fact-finding mission wishes to underscore the
need for urgent political action to end the crisis between Djibouti and Eritrea. It
seems obvious (even without knowing the true intentions of the Eritrean authorities)
that neither side wants further deterioration in their relations or an escalation in the

14

08-50174

S/2008/602

mobilization of forces or hostile rhetoric. The United Nations seems best placed to
help defuse the tension, if there is political will to resolve the crisis peacefully on
both sides. Set out below are the key (interim, pending a visit to Eritrea)
recommendations of the mission.

A.

Conclusion of the work of the fact-finding mission
53. The offer of the good offices of the Secretary-General to defuse the tension
between Djibouti and Eritrea should be renewed as a matter of the utmost priority.
To provide momentum for such a political process, both countries must be made to
believe that it is in their vested interest to have a balanced fact-finding mission,
which would reach conclusions only after hearing from both sides. The Djibouti
authorities have so far cooperated and facilitated the work of the fact-finding
mission; the onus is now on the Eritrean leadership. If Eritrea alleges an invasion by
Ethiopia or aggression by Djibouti, as it has done, then it has an international
obligation and responsibility to cooperate with the United Nations to establish the
facts. To convey the importance that the Secretary-General and the Security Council
attach to an early solution to the crisis, and to enhance the confidence of the Eritrean
authorities in the process, the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, who
undertook an earlier successful mission to Asmara, could return to the Eritrean
capital in the coming weeks to consult with the Eritrean leadership.
54. The grace period for the Eritreans must not be open-ended. The engagement
must be prepared in such a way that it does not draw the United Nations into any
polemical arguments and political rhetoric. The Eritreans should be given a specific
time frame to issue the necessary visas and facilitate the work of the mission,
including on-the-spot visits to the Eritrean side of the deployment in Doumeira.
55. There are high expectations, and even demands, placed on the United Nations
to deploy the maximum efforts to get the two countries out of the quagmire in which
they find themselves. The current situation between Djibouti and Eritrea, notably
the crisis at the border and the breakdown in diplomatic relations, should not be
allowed to fester, even if on the surface the area seems “calm and quiet”, as some
have indicated.

B.

Confidence-building through demilitarization and better
treatment for deserters
56. A major priority for the United Nations and all international actors should be
to persuade the two parties, Eritrea in particular, to demilitarize the border and
return to the status quo ante as at February 2008. Not much would be achieved in
terms of a negotiated political solution with the current state of mobilization of
forces in the affected area. The Djibouti army has since pulled back. It is only
logical that the Eritrean forces do the same, as was demanded by the Security
Council. No country should be allowed to disregard the decisions of the Security
Council with impunity, as this would not augur well for peace and security in the
region and globally.
57. The mission recalls that the clashes of 10 to 12 June came after weeks of
growing tension at the border and were partly the result of disagreements between

08-50174

15

S/2008/602

DAF and EDF over the treatment to be applied to EDF deserters who crossed into
Djibouti between April and June 2008. It is therefore likely that any effort by the
United Nations to facilitate dialogue between the two countries on the future of the
deserters would be welcomed by Eritrea and could consequently serve as an
important confidence-building measure. There are indications that ICRC is in
contact with the authorities of both Djibouti and Eritrea on the issue of prisoners of
war and those missing in action, as well as, to a certain extent, the reported
deserters. The nature and exact substance of that engagement or its outcomes are not
immediately known to the fact-finding mission. If the indications are true, ICRC and
both countries should be encouraged to pursue that humanitarian initiative, quietly
and away from the political limelight. At this point, more than any other action, this
could encourage dialogue, generate political space and create an entry point for
defusing the tension.

C.

Political and judicial frameworks (arbitration)
58. Even if Eritrea and Djibouti have so far refrained from saying so, there is an
undemarcated and possibly disputed border between the two countries. The
existence of several colonial treaties and protocols, as well as at least three different
maps and borderlines, indicates that the border inherited at independence could be
under contention.
59. Reaching a final ruling on the position of the Djibouti-Eritrea border is
arguably the ultimate and most rational solution to the current crisis. It is also the
best insurance for preventing similar crises from erupting in the future. Long-term
efforts to maintain peace between Djibouti and Eritrea should therefore focus on the
initiation of a new political process or the reactivation of existing bilateral
mechanisms for dealing with such problems. Where such a process does not deliver
on the expected outcomes, both parties could seek recourse in an arbitration process
that would culminate in a border demarcation ruling.
60. There is definitely a need for both countries to agree on which of the colonial
treaties and protocols should be accepted as the basis for defining their common
border (1897 Abyssinia-France treaty, 1900-1901 France-Italy protocols, 1935
France-Italy treaty). It is tragic that the two countries have been on the verge of war
over treaties and protocols negotiated when they did not exist as independent States.
Beyond the Organization of African Unity Cairo Declaration on the sanctity of
borders inherited by African Sates as at independence, recent experience of disputes,
such as that of Chad and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya over the Aouzou Strip, could
be instructive in this regard.
61. In view of the above, United Nations efforts at resolving the Djibouti-Eritrea
crisis should focus on providing the two countries with a platform to discuss their
common border and agree on a fair process that would lead to the demarcation of
their frontier. In this respect, the Secretary-General may wish to explore with the
parties the possibility of availing them of his good offices to facilitate such
discussion. The Department of Political Affairs seems best placed to facilitate
dialogue between the two countries on demilitarizing the border and initiating a
political process. Such a process should preferably take place under the leadership
of a special envoy who would take over after the proposed visit of the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs to Asmara.

16

08-50174

S/2008/602

X. Conclusion
62. This is only a partial report by the fact-finding mission. Despite this limitation,
it offers insight into the state of the relations between Djibouti and Eritrea.
Hopefully, the authorities in Eritrea will respond positively and in a timely manner
to the offer of good offices by the Secretary-General. The situation remains fragile,
volatile and urgent. The uneasy calm that prevails should not lull the United Nations
into complacency. In the event that the offer by the United Nations is again rebuffed
by Eritrea, the matter should be referred to the Security Council for appropriate
action. A sovereign country is being drawn into a crippling and unaffordable
military mobilization, to deal with a situation that may ultimately threaten national,
regional and international peace. For now, the fact-finding mission’s conclusion is
that there is still some scope for further political engagements, especially with
Eritrea.

08-50174

17

S/2008/602

Annex I
Protocols and treaties

18

08-50174

S/2008/602

08-50174

19

S/2008/602

20

08-50174

S/2008/602

08-50174

21

S/2008/602

22

08-50174

S/2008/602

08-50174

23

S/2008/602

24

08-50174

S/2008/602

08-50174

25

S/2008/602

26

08-50174

S/2008/602

08-50174

27

S/2008/602

28

08-50174

S/2008/602

08-50174

29

S/2008/602

Annex II

30

08-50174

S/2008/602

Annex III

08-50174

31

S/2008/602

32

08-50174
