A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/S-22/2
12 June 2000

Twenty-second special session
Agenda item 8
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/S-22/9/Rev.1)]
S-22/2. Declaration and state of progress and initiatives for the future
implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States
The General Assembly
Adopts the Declaration and the text entitled “State of progress and initiatives for the future
implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States” contained in the annex to the present resolution.
5th plenary meeting
28 September 1999
ANNEX
Declaration and state of progress and initiatives for the future implementation
of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States
Declaration
We, the States participating in the special session of the General Assembly for the review and appraisal
of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States,
Having met at United Nations Headquarters on 27 and 28 September 1999,

00 42412

/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 2

Reaffirming the principles of and commitments to sustainable development embodied in the Rio
Declaration on Environment and Development,1 Agenda 21,2 the Declaration of Barbados3 and the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,4
Recalling resolution S-19/2 of 28 June 1997, adopted by the General Assembly at its nineteenth special
session, as well as the decisions adopted by the Commission on Sustainable Development at its fourth,5 sixth6
and seventh sessions,7
Recognizing that small island developing States share a common aspiration for economic development
and improved living standards and remain strongly committed to conserving the natural and cultural heritage
upon which their future depends, and considering that the review of the further implementation of the
Programme of Action aims to build on agreements already reached by the small island developing States and
the international community concerning sustainable development, and that it provides a measure of progress
towards sustainable development among those States and their regions and identifies where special attention
is required to advance further the implementation of sustainable development,
Recalling that small island developing States are recognized as a special case for both environment and
development because they are ecologically fragile and economically vulnerable, they face particular
constraints in their efforts to achieve sustainable development and their specific physical circumstances often
make it difficult for them to benefit from global economic development and thus achieve sustainable
development,
Reaffirming that the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States translated Agenda 21 into specific policies, actions and measures to be taken at the international,
national and regional levels to enable small island developing States to address those constraints and achieve
sustainable development,8
Recognizing that communities of small island developing States are custodians of large areas of the
world’s oceans and have a high share of global biodiversity, that they are at the forefront in the fight against
1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June
1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex I.

2

Ibid., annex II.

3

Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April-6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.

4

Ibid., annex II.

5

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1996, Supplement No. 8 (E/1996/28).

6

Ibid., 1998, Supplement No. 9 (E/1998/29).
Ibid., 1999, Supplement No. 9 (E/1999/29).
8
See Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April-6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda).
7

/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 3

climate change and that their exposure and predicament underline the urgent need to take action to implement
the Programme of Action,
Recognizing also that solutions found in this regard may provide examples beneficial to other countries
around the world,
Recognizing further that considerable efforts have been made at all levels to implement the Programme
of Action, and that there is a need for these efforts to be further supplemented by effective support from the
international community, including financial support, by institutional strengthening and improved
coordination, by targeted capacity-building and by facilitating the transfer of environmentally sound
technologies in accordance with paragraph 34.14 (b) of Agenda 21,
Having considered progress reports on the implementation of the Programme of Action and the views
expressed by delegations at the special session,
Convinced that the implementation of the Programme of Action must be accelerated by progress in the
cross-cutting and interlinked areas of capacity-building, financing and technology transfer, and that
institutional arrangements should be strengthened for its successful implementation,
1. Welcome the efforts by small island developing States to implement the commitments of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States4 and the support
of the international community, and note that these efforts have been affected by financial and other resource
constraints and by global economic and environmental factors;
2. Welcome also the continued efforts of small island developing States to formulate national
sustainable development strategies;
3. Encourage the efforts of all parties to foster an enabling environment to assist small island
developing States in addressing overarching issues so as to achieve sustainable development;
4. Call upon the international community to provide effective means, including adequate, predictable,
new and additional financial resources, in accordance with chapter 33 of Agenda 21 and paragraphs 91 to
95 of the Programme of Action, to support efforts to achieve the full implementation of the Programme of
Action, particularly in tackling complex issues, such as poverty, as highlighted in paragraph 6 of the text
entitled “State of progress and initiatives for the future implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States”, which appears below;
5. Also call upon the international community to provide support for capacity- and institution-building
programmes and projects in small island developing States and, where appropriate, to support the
establishment of training centres and other relevant capacity-building efforts;
6. Call for increased efforts to assist small island developing States in obtaining the transfer of
environmentally sound technology, as set forth in the Programme of Action, needed for them to achieve
sustainable development and implement the Programme of Action;
7. Call upon the Secretary-General to improve the existing institutional arrangements in the United
Nations effectively to support small island developing States so that the United Nations system becomes
more proactive in promoting and assisting sustainable development in those States;
/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 4

8. Welcome the continued efforts of the Alliance of Small Island States in promoting the interests and
concerns of small island developing States, including in the implementation of the Programme of Action;
9. Endorse the series of broad initiatives for the further implementation of the Programme of Action
as outlined in the recommendations of the Commission on Sustainable Development acting as the preparatory
body for the twenty-second special session, as set forth below.
State of progress and initiatives for the future implementation of the Programme
of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States
I. INTRODUCTION
1. Since its adoption in 1994 at the Global Conference for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States, all chapters of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States,4 which contain an integrated and comprehensive basis for the sustainable development
of small island developing States, have been reviewed by the Commission on Sustainable Development at
its fourth session, in 1996, and at its sixth session, in 1998. At its seventh session, in 1999, the Commission,
in preparation for the special session of the General Assembly for the review and appraisal of the
implementation of the Programme of Action, further reviewed the progress made in the implementation of
the Programme of Action and identified the following areas for priority action, including the means for their
implementation: climate change, including climate variability and sea level rise; natural disasters; freshwater
resources; coastal and marine resources; energy; and tourism. The Commission recognized that the sectoral
focus of its review should not detract from the need for a full and comprehensive implementation of all
chapters of the Programme of Action. The Commission emphasized that the Programme of Action remained
a valuable and living framework for the sustainable development efforts being undertaken by small island
developing States, and noted the actions taken by Governments, regional commissions and organizations,
organizations of the United Nations system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations in
support of activities relating to its implementation. The special session of the General Assembly reaffirms
the commitment of the international community to the continued implementation of the Programme of
Action.
2. The Commission on Sustainable Development, at its seventh session, also took note of the results of the
meeting of representatives of donors and small island developing States, from 24 to 26 February 1999, which,
inter alia, considered a compendium of national and regional project proposals. The meeting underscored
the strong sense of commitment to and ownership of the Programme of Action by small island developing
States, and was welcomed as contributing towards strengthening and enriching the partnership between small
island developing States and the international community. It also noted that, in accordance with their
responsibility, considerable efforts had been made by small island developing States at the national and
regional levels to meet the priorities and objectives of the Programme of Action, especially the elaboration
of national sustainable development strategies. Consistent with their special concerns, and bearing in mind
that small island developing States are custodians of a significant portion of the world’s oceans and seas and
their resources, small island developing States have been actively and constructively engaged in international
negotiations in pursuing integrated approaches in such areas as climate change, biodiversity, law of the sea,
sustainable fisheries and marine pollution, and have undertaken efforts to meet their commitments under
related international agreements.
3. At the nineteenth special session of the General Assembly, held in 1997, the international community
reiterated its recognition of the specific constraints faced by small island developing States and the need for
/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 5

particular support in their efforts to advance sustainable development owing to their small size and
remoteness, ecological fragility, vulnerability to climate change and economic vulnerabilities. Small island
developing States share many concerns and constraints with regard to sustainable development and are
affected by them in varying degrees. The specificity of the situation and needs of small island developing
States in relation to sustainable development were acknowledged in Agenda 21 and further articulated in the
Programme of Action. Constraints to the sustainable development of small island developing States include
a narrow resource base, which does not allow those States to benefit from economies of scale; small domestic
markets and heavy dependence on a few external and remote markets; high costs of energy, infrastructure,
transportation, communication and servicing; long distances from export markets and import sources; low
and irregular international traffic volumes; little resilience to natural disasters; rising populations; high
volatility of economic growth; limited opportunities for the private sector and a disproportionately large
reliance of their economies on the public sector; and fragile natural environments.
4. At its seventh session, the Commission on Sustainable Development also noted that since the holding
of the Global Conference in 1994, the pace of globalization and trade liberalization had affected the
economies of small island developing States by presenting new problems and opportunities for them and
increasing the need for focused implementation of the Programme of Action. As a result of globalization,
national policy frameworks and external factors, including trade impacts, have become critical in determining
the success or failure of small island developing States in their national efforts. These States are particularly
concerned that the specific problems and vulnerabilities confronting them exacerbate the difficulties
encountered in their efforts to integrate into the world economy, particularly in the areas of trade, investment,
commodities and capital markets. In order to address these challenges, small island developing States are
undertaking domestic reforms in the area of macroeconomic policy to facilitate integration into the global
economy. At the regional level, they have also begun to put in place appropriate policy frameworks and
arrangements to integrate their economic, social and environmental approaches to sustainable development
in order to maximize opportunities available to them and minimize the constraints they face. A mutually
supportive balance between the international and national environment is needed so as to achieve sustainable
development.
5. The General Assembly recognizes that, while it is up to small island developing States to pursue
sustainable development and all partners should foster an enabling environment, the international community
is committed to taking further measures to support those States in this regard. The Commission on
Sustainable Development recognized that the further successful implementation of the Programme of Action
would require action by all partners in the following areas: fostering of an enabling environment for
investment and external assistance; resource mobilization and financing; transfer of environmentally sound
technologies as set forth in the Programme of Action; and capacity-building, including education, training,
awareness-raising and institutional development. The Commission assessed the progress made since the
Global Conference by the international community in responding to the financial provisions of the
Programme of Action, including through mobilization of resources, initiation of discussions on financing for
development, work on a vulnerability index, donor coordination, strengthened and expanded partnerships,
mainstreaming sustainable development activities and working to ensure a better response from institutions
to efforts of small island developing States to achieve sustainable development, especially through capacitybuilding. The Commission reiterated the need for more focused action at all levels, including the
international level, to strengthen support, including financial support from all sources, to small island
developing States for programmes and projects targeted towards capacity- and institution-building,
facilitating the access of those States to, and the transfer and use of, environmentally sound technology, as
set forth in the Programme of Action. In order to facilitate targeted action in these areas, there is a need for

/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 6

Governments of small island developing States to develop or strengthen an effective policy framework along
with national and regional sustainable development strategies or plans of action.
6. Poverty remains a major problem affecting the capacity of many small island developing States to
achieve sustainable development. The complexity, pervasiveness and persistence of poverty has
compromised the ability of States to provide basic social services, including basic education, health care,
nutrition, clean water and sanitation, and to undertake effective land and coastal area management and urban
planning and development. Poverty in small island developing States has been exacerbated by increasing
levels of unemployment; the two problems need to be addressed in tandem in order to deal effectively with
the crippling effect of poverty on sustainable development capacity. Eradication of poverty is therefore a
serious issue and an objective of high priority for small island developing States, and requires the integration
of economic, environmental and social components of action to achieve sustainable development.
7. At its seventh session, the Commission on Sustainable Development concluded that, among other things,
the full, effective, and long-term implementation of the Programme of Action required a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community. The
Commission encouraged the continuation and strengthening of the partnership between small island
developing States and their private sector. It also encouraged the private sector of other countries to develop
further partnerships with small island developing States.
II. SECTORAL AREAS REQUIRING URGENT ACTION
A. CLIMATE CHANGE
8. Small island developing States are among those States most at risk from the adverse effects of climate
change. The capacities and means to adapt to this phenomenon are an absolute necessity for them. The
involvement and committed support of the international community are critical complements to small island
developing States’ own efforts in any response and long-term planning by those States. International support
is particularly required for identifying adaptation options and linking efforts to reduce vulnerability with the
best available information.
9. In the context of actions being undertaken to address these issues and on the basis of a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community, the
international community and small island developing States should pursue and support the following goals,
objectives and activities, including through specific modalities, to assist in the continued implementation of
the Programme of Action:
(a) Improvement of the capacity of small island developing States to respond adequately and adapt to
climate change and to participate in and make the necessary linkages to other international activities, such
as the study of climate variability;
(b) Improvement of work on capabilities for climate prediction;
(c) Closer collaboration between the Small Island Developing States Unit of the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat and the secretariat of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change so that information can be readily incorporated into the overall planning for
long-term adaptation.

/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 7

B. NATURAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL DISASTERS AND CLIMATE VARIABILITY
10. Small island developing States are prone to extremely damaging natural disasters, primarily in the form
of cyclones, volcanic eruptions and earthquakes, and are subject to effects of climate variability. In some
islands, the range of these disasters and phenomena includes storm surges, landslides, extended droughts and
extensive floods. During 1997-1998, the El Niño phenomenon had its strongest impact on record on the
sustainable development of many small island developing States.
11. In the context of actions being undertaken to address these issues and on the basis of a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community, the
international community and small island developing States should pursue and support the following goals,
objectives and activities, including through specific modalities, to assist in the continued implementation of
the Programme of Action:
(a) Greater effort to improve the scientific understanding of severe weather events, such as those
associated with the El Niño/Southern Oscillation phenomenon, and the development of long-term strategies
for prediction and reduction of their impact;
(b) Improvement of work on capabilities for natural disaster reduction and early warning systems,
including in-depth assessment and consideration of effective means of natural disaster reduction;
(c) Development of partnerships between small island developing States and the private sector
consistent with responsible business practices to implement schemes that spread out risks, reduce insurance
premiums, expand insurance coverage and thereby increase financing for post-disaster reconstruction and
rehabilitation.
C. FRESHWATER RESOURCES
12. The issue of freshwater availability is crucial for small island developing States in all regions. Surface
water and groundwater resources are limited by the small watershed and aquifer-recharge areas, and urban
expansion has further affected the availability and quality of water resources. The geophysical characteristics
of many small islands leave them vulnerable to extreme climatological, seismic and volcanic events and,
more critically, to periods of drought, low recharge and adverse environmental impacts, including pollution,
saline intrusion and soil erosion, among others, and they require increased attention to watershed
management and land and water use planning.
13. In the context of actions being undertaken to address these issues and on the basis of a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community, the
international community and small island developing States should pursue and support the following goals,
objectives and activities, including through specific modalities, to assist in the continued implementation of
the Programme of Action:
(a) Implementation of Commission on Sustainable Development decision 6/1, relating to its
programme of work on freshwater issues in the special context of small island developing States;9
9

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 9 (E/1998/29), chap. I,
sect. B.
/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 8

(b) Improvement of assessment, planning and integrated management of freshwater resources in the
special context of small island developing States;
(c) Coordination and refocusing of aid and other programmes and projects designed to assist small
island developing States, as and where appropriate, in developing or implementing national policies,
strategies and legal frameworks, as well as coherent plans and actions, within an integrated water resources
management approach.
D. COASTAL AND MARINE RESOURCES
14. The health, protection and preservation of coastal and marine resources are fundamental to the wellbeing and sustainable development of small island developing States. Improved coastal and ocean
management as well as conservation of the coasts, oceans and seas and the sustainable use of coastal and
marine resources and arrangements and initiatives, including efforts aimed at reducing land- and sea-based
pollution, are critical both in support of regional fisheries organizations and in maintaining the oceans as a
source of food and a principal factor in tourism development.
15. In the context of actions being undertaken to address these issues and on the basis of a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community, the
international community and small island developing States should pursue and support the following goals,
objectives and activities, including through specific modalities, to assist in the continued implementation of
the Programme of Action:
(a) Establishment and/or strengthening of programmes to build capacity and assess and manage the
vast oceanic resources of small island developing States, and establishment and/or strengthening of specific
regional or subregional arrangements for addressing issues concerning oceans and small island developing
States;
(b) Establishment and/or strengthening of programmes within the framework of the Global Programme
of Action for the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities10 and the regional seas
programme to assess the impact of planning and development on the coastal environment, including coastal
communities, wetlands, coral reef habitats and the areas under the sovereignty or national jurisdiction of
small island developing States and to implement the Programme of Action;
(c) Strengthening of national capacity for the development of a methodology or guidelines for sound
practices and techniques suitable for small island developing States, for achieving the integrated management
and sustainable development of the coastal and marine areas under the sovereignty or national jurisdiction
of small island developing States, building on existing experience in that area;
(d) Scientific research and analysis relevant to the conservation and management of highly migratory
and straddling fish stocks on the high seas and in the marine areas under the sovereignty or national
jurisdiction of small island developing States;

10

See UNEP (OCA)/LBA/IG.2/7.
/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 9

(e) Enhancement of the conservation and sustainable management and utilization of coastal zone
ecosystems and resources of the marine areas under the sovereignty or national jurisdiction of small island
developing States;
(f) Ratification of or accession by States to the 1995 United Nations Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks,11 and the 1993 Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management
Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas,12 of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, and active participation by small island developing States in emerging and existing regional fisheries
management organizations in order for these agreements to be fully implemented;
(g) Formulation of policies, strategies and measures to address the needs of fisheries, including the
urgent need to address illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing in the marine areas under the sovereignty
or national jurisdiction of small island developing States, to ensure essential sources of food supplies for
island populations and economic development;
(h) Strengthening of national, regional and subregional capacity for negotiating fishing agreements;
(i) Strengthening of national, regional and subregional capacity for the promotion, assessment and
monitoring of commercial investment in sustainable fisheries, including in catching, processing and
marketing, as well as, where appropriate, in environmentally sound methods of aquaculture to increase
ownership and improve management of commercial fisheries by communities within small island developing
States and to promote national activities in the context of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries,13
keeping in mind the International Plan of Action on Management of Fishing Capacity adopted in 1999 by
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
(j) Greater regional coordination in management and monitoring, control and surveillance, including
vessel monitoring systems and enforcement, consistent with international agreements between coastal
countries and fishing countries, in the marine areas under the sovereignty or national jurisdiction of small
island developing States, including the management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish
stocks;
(k) Assistance to small island developing States in assessing the impact of land-based sources of
marine pollution, in developing mechanisms to eliminate or minimize pollution sources and in participating
in the implementation of the Programme of Action;
(l) Recalling the provisions of paragraph 24 C (iii) of the Programme of Action, and reaffirming that
the implementation of that paragraph shall be consistent with international law, including the United Nations

11

See International Fisheries Instruments (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.98.V.11), sect. I; see also
A/CONF.164/37.
12

Ibid., sect. II.

13

Ibid., sect. III.
/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 10

Convention on the Law of the Sea14 and other relevant existing international legal instruments, in particular
those mentioned in paragraph 67 of the Programme of Action;
(m) Taking into account the views and concerns of small island developing States that the
transboundary movement of hazardous and radioactive wastes is not adequately covered in the existing
international legal regimes, in particular regarding safety measures, disclosure, liability and compensation
in relation to accidents and remedial measures in relation to contamination from such wastes, calling upon
States and relevant international organizations to continue to address these concerns in a specific and
comprehensive manner, and calling upon the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly no later
than at its fifty-sixth session on the efforts and measures undertaken and progress achieved;
(n) Continuation of efforts to implement the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary
Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal.15
16. Action is needed to sustain healthy reefs. Such action will build on the International Coral Reef
Initiative16 and global reef assessments to ensure food security and fish stock replenishment, and will provide
a focus for implementation of the Jakarta Mandate on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine and
Coastal Biological Diversity,17 including in marine-protected areas, and the Global Programme of Action for
the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities.
17. In the context of actions being undertaken to address these issues and on the basis of a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community, the
international community and small island developing States should pursue and support the following goals,
objectives and activities, including through specific modalities, to assist in the continued implementation of
the Programme of Action:
(a) Encouragement of national and regional community-based reef conservation and management;
(b) Initiatives related to alternative livelihoods, such as aquaculture and ecotourism;
(c) Post-harvest technology and management initiatives;
(d) Integrated reef management initiatives;
(e) Research, monitoring and transfer of technology, as set forth in the Programme of Action, to assess
the impact of the exploration of non-living resources on the coastal and marine environments;
(f) Further implementation of coral reef action plans as part of the International Coral Reef Initiative
and its “call to action”, “renewed call to action” and “framework for action”.
14

Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3), document A/CONF.62/122.
15

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1673, No. 28911.

16

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/52/25),
chap. IV, paras. 103-105.
17

See A/51/312, annex II, decision II/10.
/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 11

E. ENERGY
18. In view of the dependency of small island developing States on conventional energy sources, there is
a need for mobilization of resources from all sources, including from the private sector, for the provision of
technical, financial and technological assistance, as appropriate, to small island developing States, in order
to encourage energy efficiency and to accelerate and maximize the development and utilization of
environmentally sound renewable energy sources.
19. In the context of actions being undertaken to address these issues and on the basis of a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community, the
international community and small island developing States should pursue and support the following goals,
objectives and activities, including through specific modalities, to assist in the continued implementation of
the Programme of Action:
(a) Establishment of renewable energy initiatives at the regional level so as to avoid duplication of
efforts and to achieve economies of scale;
(b) Development of human resources for the planning and sustainable management needs of a
renewable energy sector;
(c) Promotion of research and development and private sector investment in priority renewable energy
projects;
(d) Financing of renewable energy applications, including standards and guidelines for energy
efficiency and conservation;
(e) Implementation in small island developing States of the best practices to achieve clean, sustainable
energy resources and encouragement of private sector involvement in the utilization of renewable energy
resources and innovative financing schemes with a view to longer-term self-sufficiency in energy resources.
F. TOURISM
20. The development and promotion of sustainable tourism will require efforts by small island developing
States undertaken at the national and regional levels. In this regard, there is a need for continued international
support and cooperation. Particular attention will be required to coordinate ecotourism ventures at the
regional level and to facilitate the sharing of information and experiences and the integration of the private
sector within official development assistance-supported ecotourism projects. Specific actions have been
identified in the report of the United Nations Environment Programme and the World Tourism Organization
on sustainable tourism development for small island developing States.18 In this regard, the special session
took note of decision 7/3 on tourism and sustainable development adopted by the Commission on Sustainable
Development at its seventh session,19 and called for its application, as appropriate, to small island developing
States.

18

E/CN.17/1999/5 and Add.1-5.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1999, Supplement No. 9 (E/1999/29), chap. I,
sect. C.
19

/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 12

21. In the context of actions being undertaken to address these issues and on the basis of a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community, the
international community and small island developing States should pursue and support the following goals,
objectives and activities, including through specific modalities, to assist in the continued implementation of
the Programme of Action:
(a) Establishment of regional and national environmental assessment programmes to address the
carrying capacity of natural resources, including the social, economic and cultural implications of tourism
development;
(b) Strengthening of institutional capacity-building in the tourism sector and promotion of
environmental protection and the preservation of cultural heritage through local community awareness and
participation;
(c) Encouragement of the use of modern technologies and communications systems that effectively
maximize the use of global, regional and national information in support of sustainable tourism development;
(d) Improvement of the collection and use of tourism data as a means to facilitate the development of
sustainable tourism;
(e) Establishment of partnerships for sustainable tourism to conserve and utilize limited resources
effectively, based on consumer and market demand and the development of community-based initiatives.
Destination marketing should preserve local culture and a healthy environment;
(f) Building of institutional capacity, further development of human resources at all levels of the
tourism industry, with particular emphasis on small- and medium-sized enterprises, and improvement of the
capacity to utilize modern technologies.
22. In the context of actions being undertaken to address these issues and on the basis of a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community, the
international community and small island developing States should pursue and support the following goals,
objectives and activities, including through specific modalities, to assist in the continued implementation of
the Programme of Action:
(a) Enhancement of sustainable tourism and sustainably managed tourism operations through the
adoption of appropriate regulations, a voluntary code of conduct, criteria for best practices and other
innovative measures;
(b) Mobilization of adequate resources from all sources to assist small island developing States in
strengthening institutional capacity, human resources and environmental protection;
(c) Improvement of the capacity of small island developing States to implement treaty requirements
of the International Civil Aviation Organization and the International Maritime Organization.
23. The linkages between sustainable tourism, energy and transport are of considerable importance to
developing countries, in particular the least developed countries and the small island developing States
among them. This should be borne in mind in preparation for the consideration of the agenda item on energy
and transport at the ninth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development.
/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 13

III. MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION
A. SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES
24. National and regional sustainable development strategies allow for a more effective use of national and
regional human, institutional, financial and natural resources, as well as cooperation at the regional and
interregional levels. Comprehensive and collaborative strategies can also provide a solid basis for the more
efficient and cost-effective implementation of donor-assisted programmes and projects. This is especially
the case if these strategies are conceived as action-oriented, allowing for a process of step-by-step
improvements and adjustments, and as an instrument to promote broader participation of all relevant groups
and civil society.
25. In the context of actions being undertaken to address these issues and on the basis of a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community, the
international community and small island developing States should pursue and support the following goals,
objectives and activities, including through specific modalities, to assist in the continued implementation of
the Programme of Action:
(a) Renewed commitment by small island developing States to the completion of national sustainable
development strategies and, as appropriate, of regional and subregional strategies, ideally before the target
date of 2002 as agreed at the nineteenth special session of the General Assembly, so as to enable the earliest
possible implementation of those strategies;
(b) Exchange of experience among different island regions in the implementation of their national
sustainable development strategies;
(c) Formulation of sustainable development strategies through transparent and participatory approaches
and, to the extent possible, establishment of clear indicators and benchmarks of progress which, while
reflecting individual country circumstances, will also reflect wider goals, including regional objectives. Such
indicators should also provide a framework for measuring and evaluating the effectiveness of national
implementation strategies and international cooperation in this regard;
(d) Strengthening of national and regional statistical and analytical services so that they can adequately
record and measure progress, including changes in the vulnerability and fragility of the economic and
environmental conditions of small island developing States. Data collection should be gender- and agedisaggregated;
(e) Consistency with the goals of the programmes and plans of action of the international sustainable
development strategies, adopted at successive global conferences of the 1990s.
B. CAPACITY-BUILDING
26. Capacity-building remains critical to the long-term sustainable development of small island developing
States. Those States are determined to continue their efforts at capacity-building. Concern remains in respect
of the levels of external assistance for capacity-building. Mobilization of resources from all sources is
essential to enable small island developing States to continue their commitment to sustainable development
at all levels, in particular to build capacity for the implementation of the Programme of Action.

/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 14

27. In the context of actions being undertaken to address these issues and on the basis of a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community, the
international community and small island developing States should pursue and support the following goals,
objectives and activities, including through specific modalities, to assist in the continued implementation of
the Programme of Action:
(a) Continued development and implementation of sustainable development strategies to strengthen
institutional capacity;
(b) Promotion of education for sustainable development, including training in demographic issues and
gender balance in the delivery of all education and public-awareness programmes;
(c) Building, as appropriate, with international support to sectoral agencies, of the capacities of small
island developing States for operationalizing sustainable development management concepts, including,
where appropriate, the ecosystem approach;
(d) Increased use of traditional and indigenous skills-training and awareness-raising approaches, use
of local languages in the development and presentation of resource material and involvement of local
communities in education, training and awareness programmes;
(e) Continued development and strengthening of public-private partnerships involving the full range
of potential partners to promote and support sustainable development;
(f) Strengthening of regional technical training and scientific research centres, scientific research,
including the improvement of data and data collection, and centres of excellence in tourism and sustainable
development.
C. RESOURCE MOBILIZATION AND FINANCE
28. Resource mobilization is clearly one of the main challenges for small island developing States, and
while their concern with resource constraints is by no means new, small island developing States believe it
must be addressed with a new resolve by all partners if the special session is to provide the needed impetus
to implement the Programme of Action. Adequate financial resources at all levels remain crucial to the
continued implementation of the Programme of Action. Availability of and access to appropriate and current
technology and improved baseline information and environmental data to address technical issues are also
crucial. The successful implementation of the Programme of Action will thus require the provision of
effective means, including adequate, predictable, new and additional financial resources, in accordance with
chapter 33 of Agenda 21, paragraphs 91 to 95 of the Programme of Action and paragraphs 76 to 87 of the
Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21.20 The mobilization of resources will also be
necessary for the transfer of environmentally sound technology, as set forth in the Programme of Action, and
for science and technology and capacity-building, including education, awareness-raising and institutional
development.
29. Many small island developing States find it increasingly difficult to access concessional development
finance owing to the application of criteria by some members of the international community which focus
20

Resolution S-19/2, annex.
/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 15

on their relatively higher per capita gross national product levels without taking full account of their actual
levels of development, vulnerability or standard of living in real terms. Financial requirements and technical
support remain as critical as ever if the implementation of the Programme of Action is to progress further,
and will depend ultimately on the resources that small island developing States can mobilize from internal
and external sources to meet the great challenges of sustainable development in general and capacity-building
in particular. Recognizing that small island developing States are among the most environmentally
vulnerable, the Commission on Sustainable Development urged the international community to give special
priority to their situations and needs, including through access to grants and other concessional resources.
30. Statistics provided through the Commission on Sustainable Development indicate that the overall
decline in official development assistance has also affected small island developing States, for which net
bilateral and multilateral disbursements have decreased from US$ 2,366.2 million in 1994 to $1,966.2 million
in 1997.
31. It is recognized that financial resources for sustainable development need to be further mobilized at the
national level, in accordance with national priorities and capacity. Small island developing States must also
intensify their search for new modalities for resource mobilization, particularly for regional initiatives.
Donors and small island developing States should make more efficient use of existing resources, including
through better coordination. Action should be initiated to optimize the role of existing regional coordinating
mechanisms. Possibilities for encouraging private sector cooperation with partners in small island developing
States should be an area for further attention in the follow-up of the Programme of Action. Resources could
also be mobilized through the adoption of a regional approach to issues of policy, legislation and technical
development.
32. The responsiveness of such international funding sources as the Global Environment Facility to issues
concerning small island developing States has been welcomed, particularly in relation to the implementation
of the commitments of those States under the relevant conventions, and the Facility will remain an important
channel for financial resources to assist those States. Overall, access by small island developing States to
multilateral financial institutions and the responsiveness of those institutions should be improved.
33. In the context of actions being undertaken to address these issues and on the basis of a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community, the
international community and small island developing States should pursue and support the following goals,
objectives and activities, including through specific modalities, to assist in the continued implementation of
the Programme of Action:
(a) Identification of programmes and projects, with particular reference to the areas identified for
urgent action which could be financed by the Global Environment Facility and other multilateral financial
mechanisms;
(b) Improvement of the effectiveness of bilateral and multilateral development assistance, including
by streamlining and harmonizing procedures, indicators and reporting methods, and by promoting
coordination among donors;
(c) Building on the recent meeting of representatives of donors and small island developing States,
with special consideration from the international community for new and additional financial commitments
and disbursements of resources, as well as better and more efficient use of official development assistance

/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 16

and other existing external sources of finance, taking into account the specific development needs and
priorities of small island developing States;
(d) Evaluation of project proposals submitted by small island developing States by competent
authorities, taking into account the specific development needs and priorities of those States and paying
particular attention to the areas of the Programme of Action which have not yet received adequate resources;
(e) Inviting international financial institutions to continue their commitment to sustainable
development projects and programmes in small island developing States.
D. GLOBALIZATION AND TRADE LIBERALIZATION
34. Small island developing States face new challenges and opportunities from globalization and have
diverse capacities to adapt. Thus, the potential benefits to small island developing States from globalization
and trade liberalization will be severely constrained unless their limitations and vulnerabilities are further
recognized by the international community, including the relevant international organizations. There is
therefore an urgent need to facilitate the integration of the economies of those States into the world economy
in a sustainable manner, including through specific provisions and measures. This should be given due
consideration in the ongoing work being done by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
and by the World Trade Organization, taking into account, among other considerations, within the context
of trade liberalization, the effects on the economies of small island developing States of the erosion of trade
preferences, as well as difficulties faced with diversification and access markets.
35. In the context of actions being undertaken to address these issues and on the basis of a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community, the
international community and small island developing States should pursue and support the following goals,
objectives and activities, including through specific modalities, to assist in the continued implementation of
the Programme of Action:
(a) Addressing, as appropriate, the disadvantages and the vulnerabilities of small island developing
States in the context of international trade, including market access, taking into account the consequences,
positive and negative, of globalization and trade liberalization on small island developing States, and the need
to facilitate their integration into the global market;
(b) Addressing the adverse consequences and benefits, existing and potential, of globalization and
trade liberalization for the economies of small island developing States, and assisting those States, as
appropriate, in improving their competitiveness, including through provisions and specific measures. In this
regard the multilateral trading system is encouraged to consider, as appropriate, the grant of special and
differential treatment;
(c) Calling upon the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in consultation with small
island developing States, to address the economic situation and trading prospects of those States in its
ongoing comprehensive examination of the impact of globalization and trade liberalization on their
economies during the fifty-fourth session of the General Assembly;
(d) Calling upon the international community to provide support to small island developing States, as
necessary, towards the improvement and strengthening of their capabilities in trade policy, trade efficiency

/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 17

policies and trade in services, including in electronic commerce, to assist them in coping with the challenge
posed by the globalization of markets;
(e) Calling upon the international community to provide support and technical assistance, as necessary,
to small island developing States, including in capacity-building, to enhance their effective participation in
multilateral trade negotiations, activities and dispute settlement, including the dispute settlement mechanism
of the World Trade Organization, and formulating a positive agenda for future trade negotiations;
(f) Addressing, as appropriate, the difficulties of diversification in the economies of small island
developing States.
E. TRANSFER OF ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND TECHNOLOGY
36. Small island developing States have special characteristics and concerns in such areas as the
environment. The development and application of new approaches and technologies to mitigate greenhouse
gas emissions and to adapt to the effects of climate change are critical to them. In order to enhance their
effectiveness, these technologies should be modified, if necessary, to take into account the special needs of
small island developing States, and emphasis should be placed on technologies that are low in cost and
proven in terms of environmental benefit and security, such as renewable energy and conservation
technologies. Small island developing States have devoted considerable time, effort and resources to work
on technologies and technology information. Continued financial and technical support from all sources is
needed.
37. Small island developing States are at different stages in assessing nationally their vulnerabilities and
ways of adapting to climate change. They recognize that further study, research and analysis are required to
assess the effects of climate change. One particular urgency is to identify appropriate technology to meet the
needs of low-lying small island developing States whose national freshwater supplies are already
contaminated by saline intrusion. International efforts in studying the problems, conducting research and
developing adaptation technologies could usefully complement and strengthen the work begun by small
island developing States.
38. In the context of actions being undertaken to address these issues and on the basis of a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community, the
international community and small island developing States should pursue and support the following goals,
objectives and activities, including through specific modalities, to assist in the continued implementation of
the Programme of Action:
(a) Development, with the participation of small island developing States, of clean technology
initiatives, including the identification of investment opportunities in environmentally sound technologies
and environmental management practices;
(b) Promotion of access by small island developing States to information on the availability of
environmentally sound technologies and terms of their transfer, in particular in areas identified for priority
action;
(c) Capacity-building of small island developing States for science and technology needs assessment
and technology assessment;

/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 18

(d) Provision of support to small island developing States in the development of networking
technology-related institutional support structures, including information systems and sources, technology
centres, enterprise development centres and research and development institutions;
(e) Provision of multilateral and bilateral support to small island developing States and their
institutions involved in technologies and technology information;
(f) Encouragement of private sector participation, inter alia, through the use of partnership
arrangements, including public-private partnerships, in developing cooperation between small island
developing States and other countries in order to facilitate the transfer and use of environmentally sound
technology and environmentally sound technology-related investments to those States as set forth in the
Programme of Action;
(g) Encouragement of strategic alliances between research and development institutions and potential
technology users to harness the creative capabilities of the scientific communities in the development of new,
proven and innovative adaptation strategies and relevant technologies suitable to the particular circumstances
of small island developing States, for example, in the context of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change.21
F. VULNERABILITY INDEX
39. At its sixth session, the Commission on Sustainable Development recalled that a vulnerability index that
takes account of the constraints arising from small size and environmental fragility, as well as the incidence
of natural disasters on a national scale, and the consequent relationship of those constraints to economic
vulnerability, would assist in defining the vulnerability of small island developing States and in identifying
the challenges to their sustainable development. It has also been recognized that a vulnerability index of
environmental as well as socio-economic parameters, which takes fully into account the special
circumstances and vulnerabilities of small island developing States, could be useful. The widespread use of
a vulnerability index as a potential supplement to other criteria used in decision-making on cooperation with
small island developing States, including concessional treatment, is strongly encouraged.
40. The need for a vulnerability index of socio-economic and environmental parameters is highlighted in
the Programme of Action. Small island developing States have set a high priority on the development of the
vulnerability index and support the process of defining the concept of vulnerability as it applies to small
island developing States and the identification of common elements of vulnerability, which render them
susceptible to economic and ecological exogenous shocks. The coordination of efforts by the United Nations
and other international organizations to develop an index is essential.
41. In the context of actions being undertaken to address these issues and on the basis of a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community, the
international community and small island developing States should pursue and support the following goals,
objectives and activities, including through specific modalities, to assist in the continued implementation of
the Programme of Action:

21

A/AC.237/18 (Part II)/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex I.
/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 19

(a) Completion of the quantitative and analytic work on a vulnerability index for small island
developing States, preferably by the year 2000;
(b) Capacity-building at all levels for the long-term monitoring and evaluation of vulnerability;
(c) Welcoming of the inclusion of small island developing States in the global environment outlook
process, which will provide better environmental baseline data.
G. INFORMATION MANAGEMENT: SMALL ISLAND DEVELOPING STATES NETWORK
42. The Small Island Developing States Network is a tangible outcome of the Programme of Action. Along
with other information technology programmes, it holds significant potential for the effective and successful
implementation of the Programme of Action. In collaboration with the United Nations Development
Programme, small island developing States, through their Alliance of Small Island States, have been closely
involved in the development of the Network. In order to strengthen the Network concept, it is important that
small island developing States enhance their ownership of it.
43. In the context of actions being undertaken to address these issues and on the basis of a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community, the
international community and small island developing States should pursue and support the following goals,
objectives and activities, including through specific modalities, to assist in the continued implementation of
the Programme of Action:
(a) Facilitation of the transfer, as set forth in the Programme of Action, of modern technology and
communication systems in order to promote their use;
(b) Addressing the constraints to Internet connectivity;
(c) Improvement of information packaging in relation to sustainable development;
(d) Encouragement of private sector opportunities and involvement;
(e) Provision of necessary human resources support and training;
(f) Establishment of links to existing clearing house and similar network mechanisms and to relevant
conventions;
(g) Invitation of appropriate international cooperation for the aforementioned purposes;
(h) Strengthening of the Network as an important source of information on best practices in
environmental management.
H. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP
44. The effective implementation of the Programme of Action requires that the United Nations system make
more effective use of existing resources, seek possibilities for mobilizing new resources and improve
coordination mechanisms for the focused and harmonized delivery of support for priorities relevant to small
island developing States. In this respect, ongoing efforts undertaken by the United Nations system to enhance
/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 20

coordination could be useful. The existing institutional arrangements within the United Nations system would
also require strengthening in order for the Programme of Action to be implemented fully. The United Nations
should continue to play its catalytic and supportive role, particularly through the regional commissions,
which play an integral role in the overall implementation of the Programme of Action, especially in the
provision of assistance for capacity-building in small island developing States. Consequently, the efforts to
reform the institutional arrangements within the United Nations system must take these concerns into account
for future actions.
45. Ongoing monitoring and review is an important aspect of measuring performance and needs to continue
by way of reports of the Secretary-General and the work of the Commission on Sustainable Development
and its agreed programme of work.22 United Nations bodies need to focus further on their areas of expertise
and agreed mandates, as well as build upon regional or national strategies, conventions and programmes that
are country-driven. Moreover, there are important linkages with the Commission’s review of oceans and seas
and recommendations on international coordination and cooperation.
46. In addition to improving coordination, United Nations bodies should be more proactive in seeking the
views of small island developing States across the full range of sustainable development issues in order to
ensure that they take due account of both national differences and local sensitivities, in particular,
sensitivities in relation to such areas as traditional knowledge and the special place of local and indigenous
communities.
47. Increased international support for regional monitoring and assessment will be required and the
participation of small island developing States in the global environment outlook will be welcomed. It will
be essential to develop benchmarks and improve performance indicators, including time-frames for
measuring and assessing the implementation of the Programme of Action and decisions by governing bodies
of United Nations agencies. Although periodic reviews of certain aspects of the Programme of Action are
envisaged within the context of the work of the Commission on Sustainable Development, a full and
comprehensive review of these decisions and the implementation of the Programme of Action will be useful
and required in 2004.
48. In the context of actions being undertaken to address these issues and on the basis of a strong and
committed partnership between small island developing States and the international community, the
international community and small island developing States should pursue and support the following goals,
objectives and activities, including through specific modalities, to assist in the continued implementation of
the Programme of Action:
(a) Strengthening of the existing institutional arrangements through more efficient use of resources
in the United Nations to maximize support for small island developing States and so that the United Nations,
its bodies and regional commissions may become more effective in promoting and assisting sustainable
development in island States;
(b) Facilitating the development of partnerships among all stakeholders, in particular local
communities, non-governmental organizations and the private sector;

22

See E/CN.17/1996/6.
/...

A/RES/S-22/2
Page 21

(c) Recognizing the role and function of the Alliance of Small Island States and encouraging and
supporting the efforts of the Alliance in promoting the interests and concerns of those States and their
sustainable development;
(d) Ensuring that United Nations bodies and Member States take into consideration national and
regional sustainable development strategies and mechanisms, such as regional conventions, treaties and other
regional agreements and/or arrangements adopted by small island developing States, as the umbrella for
programme design, in close consultation with the small island developing States of the regions concerned,
thereby ensuring that the activities of the United Nations bodies are increasingly aligned with the strategies,
work plans and coordination mechanisms of the regional organizations of small island developing States;
(e) Support by United Nations bodies of the efforts of small island developing States to accede to and
implement relevant international conventions. In the event that some small island developing States are
unable, on account of financial or human resource constraints, to accede to international conventions, their
partners in sustainable development should consult with them to seek their views on the issues addressed by
such conventions in order that they may be able to take account of their positions during meetings of the
conferences of parties to those conventions;
(f) Support to other regional and subregional organizations belonging to or operating in regions of
small island developing States in continuing and strengthening their efforts to implement the Programme of
Action, and support to the national implementation effort of the Governments of small island developing
States.
