S/2016/138*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 February 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan
(covering the period from 10 November 2015 to 2 February 2016)

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2252
(2015), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) until 31 July 2016 and requested me to report on the
implementation of the mandate every 60 days. The present report provides an update
to my previous report dated 23 November 2015 (S/2015/902) and covers
developments from 10 November 2015 to 2 February 2016.

II. Political developments
2.
While there have been some positive developments in the implementation of
the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan,
mainly through the efforts of the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, the former President of Botswana, Festus Mogae, progress has been
slow and continues to face significant challenges.
South Sudan peace process
3.
On 21 December, following a series of negotiations facilitated by the Chair of
the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and international partners, the
first group of 163 members of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in
Opposition (SPLM/A in Opposition) advance team, led by the chief negotiator and
head of delegation, Taban Deng Gai, arrived in Juba on two flights from Pagak,
Upper Nile. A second group of 78 members arrived in Juba on 31 December,
bringing the total number in Juba to 241.
4.
The inaugural meeting of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission,
convened on 27 November, was attended only by the Government and the former
political detainees, with the exception of the reinstated SPLM Secretary -General,
Pagan Amum. Nevertheless, following the arrival of the SPLM/A in Opposition
team, the first meeting of the Commission attended by both parties to the conflict
was held on 22 December. Since then, the Commission has met twice, on 12 January
* Reissued for technical reasons on 17 February 2016.

16-01726* (E)

170216

*1601726*

S/2016/138

and 2 February. Based on the proposed timetable of the Commission, inaugural
meetings of the Joint Military Ceasefire Commission, the National Constitutional
Amendment Committee and the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism were held on 23 and 24 December. Paragraphs 56 to 58
below provide more information on progress made towards the operationalization of
these institutions of the transition.
5.
On 7 January, the President, Salva Kiir, appointed the 50 additional Members
of Parliament nominated by SPLM/A in Opposition to serve i n the Transitional
National Legislative Assembly. On the same date, the parties agreed on the
allocation of ministerial and deputy ministerial portfolios in the Transitional
Government of National Unity. On 12 January, at the third meeting of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, the Government and SPLM/A in
Opposition agreed to nominate ministers two days later.
6.
However, the dispute over the President’s order to create 28 states undermined
this momentum, and the Transitional Government of Nati onal Unity was not formed
by 22 January as envisaged in the timetable of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission. On 13 January, the SPLM/A in Opposition leader, Riek Machar, sent a
letter addressed to the Chair of the Commission in which he indicat ed that the
28-state structure was a violation of the peace agreement and would delay its
implementation. On 19 November, at a joint session, the Transitional National
Legislative Assembly and the Council of States approved constitutional amendments
removing all references to South Sudan as comprising a specific number of states
and granting the President powers to appoint governors and members of state
legislative assemblies. On 15 December, the amendments were passed by the
Council of States and, on 24 December, two presidential decrees were issued
dismissing 10 state and caretaker governors and appointing 28 new governors.
SPLM/A in Opposition, the former political detainees and the national alliance of
opposition political parties all expressed concern about the creation of 28 states and
the appointment of new governors, and about the potential impact on the
implementation of the peace agreement.
7.
On 19 January, 38 members of the SPLM/A in Opposition advance team
travelled to Pagak to participate in consultations convened by its leadership on
20 and 21 January. In a statement issued after the consultations, on 22 January,
SPLM/A in Opposition reiterated its position that the terms of the peace agreement,
which is premised on the existence of 10 states, should be upheld. Two days later,
the chief negotiator of SPLM/A in Opposition added that should the Government
fail to reconsider its decision with regard to the 28 states, SPLM/A in Opposition
would refer the matter to the mediators and the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission to make a decision or to report it to the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the Security Council.
8.
To address the impasse, on 30 and 31 January, Ministers for Foreign Affairs
attended the fifty-fifth extraordinary session of the Council of Ministers of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), held on the sidelines of the
African Union Summit in Addis Ababa. The Chair of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission reported on the progress made in the implementation of the
peace agreement and called upon the African Union Peace and Security Council and
the Security Council to underscore their commitment to supporting the Commission
and the peace agreement.

2/19

16-01726

S/2016/138

9.
The IGAD Council of Ministers subsequently released a communiqué in which
it urged the formation of the Transitional Government of National Unity without
further delay and the implementation of transitional security arrangements, and
called upon the Government of South Sudan to suspend the oper ationalization of
new states until an inclusive and participatory national boundary commission could
complete a review of the proposed states and their boundaries. Two days later, the
African Union Peace and Security Council, which had met at the level of Heads of
State and Government, endorsed the IGAD recommendation on South Sudan. The
Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission briefed the Peace and
Security Council and stated that the peace agreement risked becoming ineffectual in
restoring long-term peace and stability without concerted efforts by the parties and
the international community to urgently address the situation. He called for decisive
action, both by the parties and by the international guarantors and friends of South
Sudan.
10. On 2 February, at its fourth meeting, the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission endorsed the decision of the IGAD Council of Ministers and decided
on the sequence for the operationalization of the transitional security arrangements.
All the South Sudanese partners in the peace process, including the Government,
SPLM/A in Opposition, the former political detainees and the national alliance of
political parties not aligned to the Government, have since issued public statements
endorsing the IGAD communiqué.
Other political developments
11. Following the decision in mid-October by the National Liberation Council of
SPLM to dissolve the general secretariat of the party, the President, in his capacity
as Chair of SPLM, restructured and reconstituted the secretariat staff in November.
From 7 to 9 January, SPLM held an extraordinary national convention, at which
delegates reviewed reforms agreed as a result of the intra -SPLM dialogue and
adopted an amended party constitution and manifesto. SPLM/A in Opposition and
the former political detainees were represented, as well as Chama Cha Mapinduzi
and the African National Congress, the Tanzanian and South African co -guarantors
of the Agreement on the Reunification of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
(Arusha Agreement). However, in a statement on 9 January, SPLM/A in Opposition
noted that reunification of the party remained incomplete and that it was studying
the party constitution to formulate its position.
12. On 8 January, SPLM for Democratic Change, the main opposition party in
Parliament, changed its name to the Democratic Change Party. On 11 January, the
leader of the Cobra faction of the South Sudan Democratic Movement/South Sudan
Defence Army, David Yau Yau, officially joined SPLM. Further to the
announcement on a registration process by the Political Parties Council in October,
nine political parties submitted their documents to the Council for registration.
Economic developments
13. Following a statement by the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning, the
fixed official exchange rate of 2.96 South Sudanese pounds to the United States
dollar was replaced at midnight on 15 December by a floating exchange rate. Since
then, the rate has moved from an initial 18.50 pounds to 21.00 pounds to the dollar.
In addition, the Government introduced a number of economic reforms, including a

16-01726

3/19

S/2016/138

gradual reduction of fuel subsidies and an increase in customs rates. However,
South Sudan continued significant deficit spending owing to reduced oil revenues
and global oil prices. Inflation surpassed 100 per cent in January, affecting trade and
commodity prices and fuel and water availability. The economic climate seems to
have exacerbated the food insecurity in the country.

III. Security situation
14. Although the greater Upper Nile region was previously the centre of violence
and insecurity in the conflict, new patterns are now emerging, particularly in
Western Equatoria and Western Bahr el-Ghazal.
Greater Upper Nile region
15. The situation in Unity remained tense in November, with fighting between
government and opposition forces, primarily in Rubkona, Koch and Leer Counties.
In mid-November, fighting broke out in Gandor, Lual, Bieh and Both, in Leer
County, resulting in 18 fatalities. On 16 November, there was fighting between
government and opposition forces in Nhialdiu, Rubkona County. On 26 November,
armed youth from Koch County reportedly attacked several villages around Gandor.
Since early in December, the security situation has been relatively calm because of
local agreements between government and opposition officials.
16. In Upper Nile, government forces maintained their positions on the west bank
of the Nile at Lelo, Warjok and Ditang. On 24 and 25 November, government forces
reportedly attacked opposition positions in Panyikang County, inc luding near Tonga,
at Owachi and Tukernyang, as well as in Khorfulus, in northern Jonglei. Early in
December, government forces in Panyikang County reportedly moved south across
the Sobat River in Marian, on the border with Jonglei, and positioned more soldiers
and heavy equipment on the west bank of the Nile.
17. The situation in Jonglei, particularly in the town of Pibor, deteriorated at the
end of December following the appointment of the former Deputy Governor of
Jonglei as Governor of the proposed new Boma State. Late in January, the Governor
of Boma State issued a directive dismissing the Acting Chief Administrator of the
Greater Pibor Administrative Area, which increased tensions within the Cobra
faction of the South Sudan Democratic Movement/South S udan Defence Army and
the Murle community, fuelling insecurity in the town of Pibor and causing civilians
to flee.
Greater Equatoria region
18. In Western Equatoria, tensions remained high, with ongoing clashes reported
in several areas between government forces and armed groups, including the Arrow
Boys, the South Sudan National Liberation Movement and the South Sudan People’s
Patriotic Front. Since the end of November, there has been an upsurge in clashes
between government forces and armed youth in Ezo, Tambura and Yambio Counties,
resulting in an unspecified number of casualties and a large number of
displacements (see para. 41 for additional information). The situation in Yambio
County has remained volatile, with continued reports of armed robbery, killings and
abductions, including several attacks against South Sudan National Police Service
officers. On 21 January, heavy fighting occurred between government forces and

4/19

16-01726

S/2016/138

armed youth of the South Sudan National Liberation Movement in Yambio, in which
at least 15 people were killed and more than 7,000 civilians sought shelter in a non governmental organization compound next to the UNMISS base. Efforts by the
Government to conclude peace agreements with the armed groups continued.
Although the conflict and insecurity in the region are not necessarily linked to the
conflict at the national level at this stage, they pose a serious risk of further
degradation of security conditions and the proliferation of insecurity across the
country.
19. In Eastern Equatoria, there were tensions in mid-November in Ikotos
following fighting between government forces and youth, allegedly triggered by a
search operation by government forces. Several ambushes carried out by unknown
gunmen in military uniform were reported on the Juba-Nimule and Juba-Torit roads,
resulting in at least 18 casualties, including 7 deaths. Meanwhile, in Central
Equatoria, tensions rose in Lobonok Payam, Juba County, following skirmishes
between Dinka cattle keepers, with reports of raids, killings a nd abductions in midJanuary.
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
20. The situation in Western Bahr el-Ghazal deteriorated considerably during the
reporting period. Since 30 November, there have been multiple reports of armed
groups with alleged links to SPLM/A in Opposition launching attacks on payams to
the west of Wau and in proximity to the town itself. Fatalities were reported among
both the armed groups and government soldiers in Farajallah and Mboro.
Government forces commenced air strikes on 6 Dece mber and sent ground
reinforcements to Wau from Juba and neighbouring Warrap and Northern Bahr
el-Ghazal, targeting the areas of Bisellia, Bagari and Bazia Payams in Wau County.
Although the clashes had ended by 9 December, the situation around the town of
Wau remained tense. Approximately 17,000 internally displaced persons have been
registered in Wau, while an unknown number are hiding in the bush. Meanwhile, the
National Internal Security Service and government forces restricted UNMISS
movements to the town of Wau and its immediate vicinity on several occasions.
21. In Warrap, conflict over access to grazing lands in the border area of Tonj East
County resulted in the burning of villages, civilian displacement and
94 deaths. In Lakes, in two separate incidents, on 5 and 6 January, there was
fighting between the Waat and Panyar sections of the Dinka Ngok in Cuiebet
County, resulting in 62 casualties. Meanwhile, the signing of a peace agreement in
December allowed youth from the Ruop and Kuei Dinka Agar sub clans to move
freely in their respective territories for the first time in six years. However, the
situation remains volatile and will require the ongoing support of community
members and state authorities.

IV. Humanitarian situation
22. More than 2.3 million persons are currently displaced by the conflict,
comprising 1.69 million who are internally displaced, more than 199,000 of whom
are residing in six UNMISS protection of civilians sites, and 648,719 who are
seeking refuge in neighbouring countries. Since November, thousands have fled the

16-01726

5/19

S/2016/138

fighting in Western Equatoria, including at least 15,000 who have crossed
international borders.
23. The latest Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) assessment, of
September 2015, showed a significant increase in severe food insecurity and
malnutrition compared with 2014; more than 3.9 million people face severe food
insecurity across the country. As at October 2015, an estimated 40,000 people in
southern Unity were believed to be facing an extreme lack of food, leading to
destitution, starvation and death (IPC phase 5). In addition to further deterioration
for the most vulnerable, food insecurity spread to areas previously considered
relatively food secure, including the greater Equatoria region and Lakes, Northern
Bahr el-Ghazal and Warrap.
24. Preventable diseases continued to spread, causing illness and death. Malaria,
with more than 2 million cases, was the main cause of death reported during 2015
(1,340 deaths). There were five confirmed outbreaks of measles in 2015, in the
protection of civilians sites in Bentiu and Juba and in Duk, Wulu and Yei. Conflict,
displacement and inaccessibility continued to frustrate efforts to ensure vaccination
coverage; only 6 out of 79 counties in South Sudan have the requisite minimum of
80 per cent measles vaccination coverage, while 26 have less than 20 per cent
coverage, mostly in the greater Upper Nile region. In 2015, more than 230,000
vaccinations were conducted in the hardest-to-reach areas through rapid response
missions. However, an estimated 400,000 children under five years of age remain at
risk.
25. The operating environment for humanitarian actors continues to be extremely
challenging. Overall, there were 909 reported humanitarian access incidents in
2015, up from 779 in 2014. Of the access incidents reported in 2015, 516 involved
violence against humanitarian personnel or assets, up from 466 such incidents in
2014. Violence against humanitarian workers and facilities continued, with at least
43 aid workers killed and many more missing or injured since the conflict began in
December 2013. The insecurity faced by humanitarian actors in Juba is causing a
substantial loss of assets and undermining the operations of aid organizations. In
2015, a total of 123 armed robberies occurred nationwide in the compounds of
non-governmental organizations, and a further 11 such incidents have been reported
since January 2016.
26. Despite these challenging conditions, by the end of November 2015,
humanitarian personnel had provided aid to more than 4.4 million people across
South Sudan, including in some of the most remote locations. Following intensive
negotiations on access and some improvements in security, including through the
UNMISS military presence, humanitarian actors re-established a presence in Leer
and Thonyor early in December, providing food and survival kits, such as mosquito
nets and kitchen sets, to more than 31,500 people, as well as life -saving birth
delivery kits, and conducting health consultations, repairing boreholes, establishing
nutritional programmes and undertaking protection activities.
27. Humanitarian actors also focused on dry-season planning, especially the
pre-positioning of supplies ahead of the rainy season. An estimated 75,000 tons of
supplies will need to be moved by road in the three-month period to the end of April
2016. Insecurity, particularly on one of the major supply routes through Western
Equatoria, could significantly affect the pre-positioning.

6/19

16-01726

S/2016/138

28. Under the 2016 South Sudan humanitarian response plan, released in January,
humanitarian partners will require $1.31 billion to respond to the most life threatening needs of 5.1 million people out of an estimated 6.1 million in need of
protection and assistance across South Sudan.

V. Implementation of the Mission’s reprioritized mandated task
A.

Protection of civilians
29. In implementing its protection of civilians mandate, UNMISS continued to
follow a three-tiered approach. Under tier one, protection through dialogue and
engagement, the good offices of the Secretary-General were employed in a range of
ways. UNMISS held a total of 122 meetings with state and local authorities, civil
society and other actors to promote dialogue, peace and reconciliation. Some of
these anticipated the return of SPLM/A in Opposition representatives to the states
and promoted the engagement of local actors and stakeholders in the peace process.
UNMISS held 27 conflict management workshops for state and traditional
authorities, community and faith-based leaders, women, youth, teachers, students,
cattle keepers and internally displaced persons inside and outside protection of
civilians sites.
30. In Western Bahr el-Ghazal and Central Equatoria, UNMISS held three
workshops promoting women’s involvement in community dialogue, while in
Lakes, UNMISS supported peace campaign activities initiated by the Dinka youth
union to help to resolve conflict between the Ruop, Kuei and Pakam clans. In Tonj
East County, Warrap, UNMISS supported a plan led by the local government to
promote peace. In mid-November, UNMISS supported the participation of religious
leaders from Juba and Yambio in the brokering of an agreement to de -escalate
violence between the community and government forces in Mundri, Western
Equatoria. Both sides committed themselves to ending hostilities. Also in Western
Equatoria, UNMISS continued to support the local peace process between the South
Sudan National Liberation Movement and the Government. In Jonglei, UNMISS
continued its engagement with key stakeholders to access early warning information
and help to assess options for the peaceful resolution of ongoing tensions.
31. The good offices of the Secretary-General were utilized intensively by my
Special Representative for South Sudan and the Mission leadership to urge the
parties at both the local and the national levels to stop the fighting a nd for the
protection of civilians.
32. Under tier two, provision of physical protection, more than 199,000 internally
displaced persons continue to receive physical protection within the six UNMISS
protection of civilians sites. As at 28 January, there we re more than 122,000 in
Bentiu (Unity), just under 28,000 in Juba (Central Equatoria) and more than 45,000
in Malakal (Upper Nile). During the reporting period, an increase of around 22,000
internally displaced persons was recorded at the Bentiu site owing to continued
armed violence in central and southern Unity. This resulted in increased physical
protection and humanitarian needs, including as a result of food shortages in central
Unity. At the same time, some of the displaced persons voluntarily left si tes in Unity
and Upper Nile because of security improvements or to travel to the Sudan.

16-01726

7/19

S/2016/138

33. Pursuant to resolution 2252 (2015), UNMISS has intensified its presence in
areas with continued high risk of conflict and with high concentrations of internally
displaced persons through 4,437 short-duration, 545 long-duration, 33 dynamic air
and 15 riverine patrols since November. Operation Unity 2 led to the establishment
of temporary operating bases in Leer, Unity, aimed at deterring violence and
facilitating the delivery of humanitarian aid. The bases have facilitated a significant
increase in patrolling throughout the area. There have been no reports of attacks by
armed groups targeting aid recipients during or after food distribution, which
reached more than 45,000 recipients in Leer and Thonyor in December. UNMISS
continues to mitigate external security threats to residents of protection of civilians
sites through targeted patrolling, providing a degree of safety around the sites,
including for women and girls leaving the sites for livelihood activities.
34. Intercommunal tensions and violence, including sexual and gender -based
violence, and other security incidents continued to be reported at and around the
protection of civilians sites. During the reporting pe riod, 531 security incidents
were reported at the sites, including of armed robbery, murder, death threats,
abduction, shooting, explosions, fires, domestic violence, rape, armed incursions
and threats against humanitarian and UNMISS staff. Four UNMISS pol ice personnel
were injured while undertaking activities to maintain public safety and security at
the sites in Bentiu, Bor and Malakal. In an effort to mitigate such incidents,
UNMISS, through community policing programmes, pursued an integrated
approach, in close collaboration with community watch groups, through the conduct
of communal dialogues, public order patrols and rapid emergency and incident
response. UNMISS police personnel also conducted daily search operations for
prohibited items, such as weapons and contraband, that could lead to insecurity.
35. UNMISS continued to operate three holding facilities at the protection of
civilians sites in Juba, Bentiu and Malakal for perpetrators of incidents undermining
public security at the sites. As at 2 February, 37 persons were being held. The
holding facility at the Bor site was decommissioned in December because the public
security situation there no longer warranted a holding facility. According to the
agreed framework, UNMISS transfers individuals suspected of having committed
serious crimes at the protection of civilians sites to the national authorities. On
2 January, UNMISS handed over one suspect from the Juba facility to the national
police. During the reporting period, 11 additional individuals de emed security risks
were excluded from all protection of civilians sites. In all cases, UNMISS carried
out a detailed human rights risk assessment to confirm that the individuals were not
under threat of harm outside the sites.
36. As an integral part of the Mission, the Mine Action Service deployed 43 mine
action teams to survey and clear roads, airstrips and helicopter landing sites,
enabling security and humanitarian access. During the reporting period, 637 km of
roads were surveyed and cleared, including the Bentiu-Mayom road, which allowed
UNMISS to complete road rehabilitation and enabled the safe passage of UNMISS
supply and fuel convoys necessary to ensure the functioning of the UNMISS base in
Bentiu. From 10 November to 25 January, the Service clear ed 4,194,396 m 2 of land
and destroyed 441 landmines, 4,002 explosive remnants of war and 14,657 small
arms and rounds of ammunition. To protect civilians from explosive remnants of
war, the Service provided risk education to 80,410 civilians (25,512 boys, 21,072
girls, 17,185 men and 16,641 women). A further 419 UNMISS staff and
humanitarian workers received landmine safety briefings. Since December 2015, the

8/19

16-01726

S/2016/138

Service has investigated six accidents, including one resulting from unexploded
ordnance that killed an adult male in Terakeka, Central Equatoria, and one incident
outside the Malakal protection of civilians site in which six people were killed. A
further incident at the site brought the total number of injured civilians to 23.
37. Under tier three, establishment of a protective environment, UNMISS
participated in joint efforts with United Nations country team protection partners to
conduct intention surveys for the return or relocation of displaced populations.
Preliminary results from the six protection of civilians sites showed that displaced
persons identify security and access to food and health -care services as key factors
that could enable a return to peaceful coexistence within preferred areas of return or
relocation. The results also indicated that displaced persons welcome the peace
agreement and its implementation. Some showed willingness to return or relocate to
preferred areas should they be supported with start-up packages. On the basis of
these findings, the Mission is coordinating with partners to develop a joint action
plan to create the conditions for sustainable return, relocation and reintegration.

B.

Monitoring and investigating human rights
38. UNMISS continued to investigate reports of violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law, as well as human rights abuses, in connection with the
conflict. On 21 January, UNMISS and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights jointly issued a report entitled “The state of human
rights in the protracted conflict in South Sudan”. The report presented the findings
that widespread human rights violations and abuses have been committed by all
parties to the conflict, including hundreds of extrajudicial killings, forced
disappearances, sexual violence, forced recruitment and indiscriminate attacks
against civilians, and that the parties have intentionally attacked traditional safe
havens, including places of worship, hospitals and even United Nations bases.
39. In Unity, the stabilization of the security situation and a reduction in attacks on
civilians since early in December has allowed UNMISS to conduct human rights
monitoring visits in the central and southern counties. These included a mission to
opposition-held Buaw, in Koch County, where the county commissioner reported
that most civilians had fled to the UNMISS protection of civilians site in Bentiu or
to the bush. UNMISS continued to investigate reports that more than 50 civilians
(all male, and at least one boy) died in the town of Leer late in Octobe r after being
rounded up by government forces and locked in a container. The exact
circumstances and whether the deaths were caused intentionally, remain unclear,
although the account of a survivor suggests that the victims died of suffocation.
40. In Upper Nile, security improvements allowed UNMISS to resume missions
late in November to areas it had not visited since early in 2015. In Malakal, there
have been continued reports of the harassment, detention and abduction of displaced
persons from the Shilluk community between the river and the protection of
civilians site. On 21 December, five Shilluk persons were reportedly arrested on
suspicion of supplying goods to SPLM/A in Opposition and were detained and
beaten at the government barracks before being transferred to the national police
and released on 30 December. In another incident on 21 December, four Shilluk
youths were reportedly abducted at gunpoint outside a gate to the protection site. On
26 December, a government soldier summoned nine women who had gone to collect

16-01726

9/19

S/2016/138

firewood near the protection site. Three of the women reportedly fled, but the
whereabouts of the other six remain unknown. On 21 January, government forces
reportedly detained an internally displaced Shilluk woman outside the protection
site on suspicion of fighting for the opposition, first at the Malakal detention centre
and later at the government barracks, before releasing her to UNMISS on 26
January.
41. In the Equatorias, there were continued reports of human rights violations,
particularly in Western Equatoria. Following the outbreak of violence in Ezo
between armed youths and government forces on 17 November, civilians fled to the
bush. A woman national police officer was reportedly killed in the clashes, and
government soldiers allegedly shot dead two children. On 20 November, UNMISS
extracted 25 humanitarian workers from a humanitarian agency compound in Ezo.
On 21 November, five people were reportedly detained by the National Internal
Security Service in Yambio on suspicion of supporting armed youths there.
Following reports of heavy fighting in the town of Yambio on 7 and 8 December,
civilians sought refuge in a non-governmental organization compound near the
UNMISS base, where the number of displaced persons reportedly peaked a t 5,000.
UNMISS received allegations of violations in connection with the fighting,
including looting and the burning of as many as 200 houses. At the end of
December, in Yambio, armed men reportedly looted a faith-based organization and
assaulted staff, including sexually. An individual claiming to be the head of a group
known as the South Sudan People’s Patriotic Front acknowledged that undisciplined
elements in his forces were responsible and committed himself to bringing them to
justice.
42. In Central Equatoria, UNMISS received reports in November of continued
attacks by government forces on displaced persons in Wonduruba Payam, Juba
County, following violence that erupted in September between government forces
and opposition affiliates. As at the end of January, many were still too scared to
return to their homes owing to the presence of a government commando unit, while
others had reportedly fled to Juba. Four schools in the area were also reportedly
under military use by government forces.
43. There was an increase in human rights violations reported in Western Bahr
el-Ghazal. Early in December, hostilities between government and opposition forces
in areas including Farajallah, Bussere, Bazia and Bisellia caused civilians to flee
those areas. In mid-December, UNMISS received reports of government forces
looting and burning houses in the Momoi area, 13 km south of the town of Wau,
causing civilian displacement. Early in January, violence reportedly broke out in a
number of locations in Wau County, causing further civilian displacement. UNMISS
investigated reports of attacks against the Fertit community in Wau County,
including killings, looting and the burning of houses, although it was inhibited by
restrictions on access.
44. Freedom of expression continued to come under attack: there were reported
threats against newspapers and journalists and human rights defenders were
detained. On 9 December, UNMISS obtained information about threats made by
police officials against staff of Beitna, an Arabic-language newspaper, following the
publication of an article criticizing the national police emergency unit. On
22 December, security forces reportedly ordered another Arabic -language daily
newspaper, El Tabeer, to cease operations following the publication on

10/19

16-01726

S/2016/138

21 December of an article deemed critical of the Government’s economic and
political record. The security services reportedly detained the journalist responsible
for the article on 29 December, and the editor-in-chief announced his resignation on
30 December, alluding to harassment by the National Internal Security Service. In
Wau, at the end of November, security services arrested representatives of civil
society organizations accused by the state Governor of supporting the opposit ion,
following a civil society press conference at which they had depicted the security
situation as appalling. On 8 December, all the detainees were released following
advocacy by UNMISS.
45. With regard to human rights in the administration of justice, c ases of
prolonged, arbitrary and proxy detention, the detention of juveniles and poor prison
conditions remained prevalent. The absence of judicial staff remained a problem
throughout the country, some counties reportedly having no judges in post for over
six months, which resulted in local chiefs adjudicating criminal cases outside their
jurisdiction.
46. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
deployed an assessment team to South Sudan in October, pursuant to Human Rights
Council resolution 29/13, to undertake a comprehensive assessment of allegations of
violations and abuses of human rights. The team completed its fieldwork and its
report is due to be submitted to the Human Rights Council in March 2016.
47. UNMISS continues to emphasize the importance of the monitoring,
verification and reporting of the six grave violations against children, in line with
the Security Council mandate on children and armed conflict. During the reporting
period, 103 incidents (89 verified, 14 unverified) of grave human rights violations
affecting at least 3,750 children (1,844 boys, 1,599 girls and 307 children of
unknown sex) were reported. Thirty-nine children (23 boys, 11 girls and 5 children
of unknown sex) were reportedly killed in 15 armed conflict incidents (13 verified,
2 unverified), the majority of the killings in southern Unity. Furthermore,
40 incidents of recruitment and use of children by armed groups were reported,
affecting 261 children (all boys) throughout the country. Actual numbers of grave
violations are likely to be much higher because of underreporting. Despite the
ongoing challenges, the United Nations is encouraged by SPLM/A in Opposition’s
signing on 26 December of an action plan to stop and prevent recruitment and the
killing and maiming of children. The plan contains a commitment to release and
reintegrate child soldiers.
48. The occurrence of sexual violence increased as the security situation
deteriorated in areas previously not affected by conflict, notably in the greater
Equatoria region and Western Bahr el-Ghazal. Instances of rape and gang rape,
coupled with beating and abduction, also continued to affect women and girls
leaving the Malakal protection of civilians site to collect food or other items, and
Unity, where crimes are allegedly being perpetrated by government soldiers and
affiliated militias.
49. On 5 August, South Sudan was selected as a country to pilot an information sharing protocol between the Gender-based Violence Information Management
System and the Monitoring, Analysis and Reporting Arrangements. On
16 December, an addendum to the existing information-sharing protocol was signed,
which defined the guiding principles and procedures for sharing anonymous
statistical data on reported cases of gender-based violence, constituting a positive

16-01726

11/19

S/2016/138

step towards enhancing information collection and reporting on conflict -related
sexual violence in South Sudan.

C.

Creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
50. Through close collaboration with the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in Juba and local humanitarian partners and representatives in
the sectors, UNMISS continued to assess ways to maximize the impact of patrolling
and outreach operations, in close coordination with humanitarian agencies, to
support the delivery of humanitarian assistance. During the reporting period,
UNMISS undertook 3,296 force protection tasks at the request of the humanitarian
community to provide security for food drops, road convoys, b arge movements and
other humanitarian activities.
51. In particular, UNMISS integrated missions and patrols focusing on areas
affected by conflict and subsequent displacement. In Unity, an increased UNMISS
presence, including through the creation of a forward operating base in the town of
Bentiu, has helped to facilitate the incremental resumption of humanitarian and
protection service delivery. The establishment of the UNMISS temporary operating
base in Leer County has also supported increased humanitarian access and service
delivery. However, there remains a dire need for additional humanitarian and
protection services in vulnerable communities in hard -to-reach areas.
52. In Upper Nile, UNMISS assessed protection needs and prospects for return
and reintegration in several areas, including the town of Malakal. In Western
Equatoria, UNMISS patrols and a temporary operating base in Mundri enabled
humanitarian partners to undertake an inter-agency rapid needs assessment and
deliver humanitarian and protection services. Furthermore, UNMISS, in
coordination with humanitarian actors, strengthened engagement with local
authorities and communities in response to an influx of displaced persons into Lakes
from Jonglei and Unity.
53. Since 27 November, the Mine Action Service has played a vital role in
emergency response by providing humanitarian aid in southern Unity, and has
embedded a mine action team in Leer to support ongoing humanitarian efforts. In
addition, at the request of SPLM/A in Opposition, the Service ass essed hazards in
Pagak, Upper Nile.
54. UNMISS, in coordination with humanitarian partners, continued to improve
conditions at the protection of civilians sites to alleviate congestion and tensions
among displaced communities. In December, UNMISS completed the relocation of
4,221 persons from the Shilluk community within the Malakal site.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the peace agreement
55. In order to support the successful implementation of the peace agreement, the
Special Representative, as a formal member of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, employed her good offices to accompany and support the political
process while the Mission provided concrete support to the institutions of the
transition. Despite the progress reported above (paras. 3-5), implementation is

12/19

16-01726

S/2016/138

behind schedule, progress being hampered by the inability of the parties to
compromise on key issues. The Special Representative regularly convened a forum
for international partners and friends of South Sudan ahead of ea ch meeting of the
Commission to anticipate issues and align the positions of the international
community in support of the work of the Chair of the Commission.
56. Some progress has been made in the establishment and initial functioning of
the monitoring mechanisms and institutions of the transition, but it has been slow
and constrained by the political impasse caused by fundamental differences between
the parties. The presence in Juba of the SPLM/A in Opposition advance team has
enabled nascent movement in a number of areas, but huge challenges remain and
delays have occurred. Since its formation, the National Constitutional Amendment
Committee has been deadlocked, mainly over the issue of the 28 states. On
25 January, the SPLM/A in Opposition constitutional team met its government
counterpart, but no agreement has yet been reached. There has been some movement
in the Joint Military Ceasefire Commission, which has met three times and whose
secretariat is overseeing some progress in the planning for the can tonment of forces
and other transitional security arrangements, but there is no indication of major
movement towards cantonment. The Board of the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism has also met three times and has
extended its presence; new teams deployed to Aweil and Yambio in January, with
significant UNMISS support.
57. Progress towards the establishment of the joint integrated police has been
slow, owing in part to the changes in the national police leadership and the fact that
SPLM/A in Opposition personnel have not yet travelled to Juba to engage in
detailed planning or identification of officers. UNMISS has provided support, where
possible, to sensitization efforts ahead of the deployment of the joint integrated
police, but has yet to receive information on training support requirements. As yet,
there has been little progress towards the operationalization of the Joint Operations
Centre, which is dependent on a functioning joint integrated police. However, the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission has deployed an officer to work with
the parties to make the Centre operational.
58. The Board of the Strategic Defence and Security Review held its first meeting
on 1 February, at which a workplan covering the period until 30 May 2016 was
circulated for comment. Given the late start of the work of the Board, the
development of strategies for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
wider security sector reform has not begun.

VI. Mission staffing and status of deployment of surge capacity
59. As at 27 January, the actual strength of the UNMISS civilian personnel stood
at 2,525, comprising 827 international staff members, 1,279 national staff members
and 419 United Nations Volunteers.
60. As at 2 February, the force strength stood at 11,901, consisting of 11,342
troops, with 366 staff officers and 193 military liaison officers. The deployment of
two additional Kenyan companies (280 troops) was completed early in December.
Full deployment of the Ghanaian battalion (an additional 400 troops under the
previous force level ceiling of 12,500 troops) will be completed late in February or
early in March 2016.

16-01726

13/19

S/2016/138

61. As at 2 February, the UNMISS police strength stood at 1,178 of the authorized
2,001 police and corrections personnel, including 470 individual police officers,
52 corrections officers and 656 formed police unit personnel. Because of the
increase in the authorized police strength, the Mission expects the arrival of 100
additional Ghanaian formed police unit personnel to reinforce the existing Ghanaian
formed police unit in Bentiu by mid-February, and 70 additional Rwandan formed
police unit personnel to reinforce the existing Rwandan unit, to be deployed in
Malakal by late in March. Deployment timelines for the remaining police personnel
have yet to be determined.
62. In an effort to implement the provisions of my report on special measures for
protection from sexual exploitation and abuse (A/69/779), a dedicated UNMISS task
force continued to enforce the zero-tolerance policy. UNMISS provided mandatory
training on sexual exploitation, abuse and other prohibited conduct. In addition,
UNMISS initiated action to sign a memorandum of understanding with all
humanitarian actors residing within UNMISS premises in order to maintain the
highest standards of conduct.
63. UNMISS continued to implement measures to enhance the safety of mission
air operations. The Mission is implementing a fully integrated risk assessment and
flight safety assurance procedure, which requires flight safety assurances for any
UNMISS flight operating in an area assessed as at moderate risk or higher. The
flight safety assurances are sought from all parties to the conflict. Every month,
UNMISS provides a list of information on its aircraft, including aircraft registration
numbers, call signs and photographs, to government forces and SPLM/A in
Opposition. UNMISS also coordinates with the United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service through the Department of Safety and Security to share information and
ensure a coherent approach.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and security of United Nations staff
64. During the reporting period, UNMISS recorded 69 violatio ns of the status-offorces agreement, 44 of which were restrictions on movement affecting UNMISS
members, associated personnel, premises and equipment and air and land
operations. Other violations included demands for UNMISS members or contractors
to pay illicit levies or taxes, confiscation of UNMISS property, threats against
UNMISS members, protection of civilians sites and air assets, and assault and
harassment. Government security agencies committed the most violations, including
45 by government forces, 17 by the national police, 3 by the National Internal
Security Service and 5 by local governments. During the same period, two incidents
were committed by SPLM/A in Opposition forces relating to the restriction on
UNMISS movement and interference with implementation of the UNMISS mandate.
65. In an emerging trend, government officials and security agencies demanded
that UNMISS members, associated personnel and contractors pay fees, levies or
taxes in exchange for their movement within the country or befo re services could be
rendered. For example, on 3 December, the Northern Bahr el-Ghazal government
demanded that UNMISS pay 10 per cent of the value of all contracts entered into by
the Mission, 10 per cent of profits derived from the sale of assets to UNMI SS and
10 per cent of rents paid. On 10 occasions, government security agencies and local

14/19

16-01726

S/2016/138

officials demanded payment of taxes and bribes in relation to UNMISS -contracted
trucks on critical resupply missions. On three different occasions, immigration
officers at Juba Airport confiscated the passports of newly arrived UNMISS
personnel, including of four UNMISS military officers, which were returned weeks
later.
66. A number of incidents posed threats to the lives or physical integrity of
UNMISS members and civilians seeking protection in UNMISS premises. On
10 November, in Bentiu, several bullets were fired from a nearby government
position into the UNMISS protection of civilians site and UNMISS personnel
accommodation. On 13 November, in Leer County, Unity, three apparently
intoxicated government soldiers fired 12 small arms rounds at a UNMISS base and
left a rocket-propelled grenade near the base when confronted by UNMISS troops.
On 28 November, in Juba, a group of traffic police officers assaulted and injur ed a
UNMISS staff member who had intervened to prevent them from extorting money
from another UNMISS staff member.
67. Criminal acts and threats against United Nations personnel and assets included
illegal entry into United Nations compounds, theft of assets and armed robbery
against an inter-agency convoy on 23 November in Eastern Equatoria. United
Nations premises and assets continue to be regarded by criminals as soft targets for
personal economic gain. United Nations staff members were also targeted in
incidents of theft and robbery. On several occasions, United Nations personnel and
humanitarian workers sustained injuries while responding to incidents of violence or
unrest in protection of civilians sites. Weapons of various types, including firearms
and grenades, were seized from displaced persons or government security personnel
attempting to enter the sites.
68. Four UNMISS national staff members, two of whom were arrested in
December 2013, one in October 2014 and one in July 2015, are still in deten tion.
None of them has been charged. During a visit to South Sudan in December, the
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support met the Minister for Foreign Affairs to
urge for their immediate and unconditional release. UNMISS continues to visit the
detained staff members on a regular basis to monitor their well -being.
69. The Mission continues to notify the host Government of these violations
through notes verbales and in meetings with relevant officials. A monthly matrix of
incidents is also shared with the Government.

VIII. Financial aspects
70. The General Assembly, by its resolution 69/260 B of 25 June 2015,
appropriated the amount of $1,085,769,200 for the maintenance of the Mission for
the period from 1 July 2015 to 30 June 2016. As at 28 January 2016, unpaid
assessed contributions to the UNMISS Special Account amounted to $640.8 million.
Total outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations at the same
date amounted to $4,337.5 million. Reimbursement of troop and formed police c osts
has been made for the period to 31 October 2015, while reimbursement of the costs
of contingent-owned equipment has been made for the period to 30 September 2015,
in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

16-01726

15/19

S/2016/138

IX. Observations and recommendations
71. Following the signing of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan in August 2015, the South Sudanese parties have made
some progress towards its implementation. In particular, I welcome the return of the
delegates of SPLM/A in Opposition and the former political detainees to Juba. I also
welcome the inauguration of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and
other bodies mandated by the peace agreement. These are important milestones in
the implementation of the peace agreement. Every effort must be made by all
stakeholders to maintain and accelerate the momentum that has been generated. To
this end, the UNMISS leadership will continue to exercise my good offices in
support of the efforts of the Chair of the Commission, former President Mogae, by
encouraging the parties to fulfil their commitments under the peace agreement and
by supporting the establishment and operationalization of the institutions of the
transition.
72. The current relative calm in the greater Upper Nile region is tenuous and must
be consolidated further. In the meantime, rising levels of violence and displacement
in other areas, including in Western Equatoria and Western Bahr el -Ghazal, should
be addressed urgently. Further progress towards the implementation of the security
mechanisms called for in the peace agreement, such as the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism and the Joint
Operations Centre, is urgently required, as is the prompt deployment of th e joint
integrated police in Juba and other major towns.
73. The parties’ outstanding grievances need to be addressed in line with the peace
agreement, as they relate to the root causes of the crisis. In this regard, the
enactment by the President of the 28-state structure continues to be an issue of
concern, with the potential to create intercommunal tensions over land and resource
allocation. I have repeatedly called upon the President, Salva Kiir, and the former
Vice-President, Riek Machar, to resolve the existing differences and establish the
Transitional Government of National Unity. This is an essential step in the
implementation of the peace agreement and towards laying the foundation for peace
and stability. I welcome the calls in the communiqués of the African Union Peace
and Security Council and the IGAD Council of Ministers for the establishment of
the Transitional Government without further delay and for the formation of a
national boundary commission to review the proposed new states. I also wel come
the agreement reached among the parties at the meeting of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission on 2 February to move the implementation of the peace
agreement forward and to address the issue of the creation of new states within that
framework. It will be of the utmost importance for countries of the African Union
and IGAD to help to sustain the political momentum built under the leadership of
the Chair of the Commission through concerted political investment in the South
Sudan peace process. It is also critical that the Security Council lend its full support
and collective voice to the efforts of the Chair to implement the peace agreement.
74. To break the cycle of violence and foster sustainable peace requires justice and
accountability. Serious human rights violations and abuses have been committed in
the course of this conflict. The perpetrators of war crimes and possible crimes
against humanity must be held to account. In this regard, the United Nations stands
ready to lend its technical assistance to the African Union and the Transitional
Government of National Unity in the establishment of a hybrid court.

16/19

16-01726

S/2016/138

75. The economic situation continues to deteriorate and will be a major factor in
the peace process. The introduction of a floating exchange rate alone cannot solve
the economic challenges facing South Sudan. To produce long -term economic
benefits, the Transitional Government of National Unity will need to introduce
additional fiscal and economic reforms to address prevailing issues, su ch as
inflation, corruption and resource management.
76. The humanitarian situation in South Sudan remains dire. More than 2.3 million
people have now been displaced by the conflict, while more than 3.9 million across
the country face severe food insecurity. I remind the Government that it bears the
primary responsibility for facilitating the eventual safe and voluntary return of
displaced persons. In the meantime, I call upon donor countries to address the
$1.31 billion funding requirement under the 2016 South Sudan humanitarian
response plan to assist the victims of the conflict.
77. I strongly condemn the unacceptable access restrictions that peacekeeping and
humanitarian personnel continue to face, in addition to physical assault, extortion,
harassment, threats and detention. I call upon all parties to guarantee safe, secure,
and unrestricted freedom of movement for United Nations and relief personnel
throughout South Sudan, and for their full, safe and unhindered access to all those
in urgent need of assistance.
78. In view of its new mandate, UNMISS, in close coordination with United
Nations and humanitarian partners, will continue to project its presence through
proactive deployment and active patrolling to provide physical protection to
civilians. The Mission will also continue to ensure the conditions for the delivery of
humanitarian and protection services, both within and outside of its protection of
civilians sites. These efforts help to foster confidence for the safe and voluntary
return and reintegration of displaced communities. I once again call upon troop - and
police-contributing countries to hasten the deployment of newly pledged police and
military capabilities, including personnel, equipment and other enablers.
79. In my special report on the review of the UNMISS mandate of 23 November
2015 (S/2015/899), I recommended that once the Transitional Government of
National Unity has been formed, and the joint integrated police and the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism established, an
in-depth consultation would be required to clarify the prioritization of their tasks,
develop their operational plans and further assess the support needed to scale up
their operations. The strategic review of the support requirement for the peace
process, undertaken in November 2015 by the Secretariat and UNMISS, was the
first phase of a planning process that will need to continue once the transitional
institutions have been established. Within six months of the date of adoption of
Security Council resolution 2252 (2015), and, it is hoped, three months into the
transition, a detailed military and police capability study will be conducted and the
Mission will complete the second phase of the review and reassess whether the
recommendations in the strategic review still cover the full scope of support
required for the transitional security and ceasefire monitoring mechanisms, and
whether protection of civilians responses are appropriate for th e new security
environment.
80. At this critical juncture, steadfast implementation of the terms of the peace
agreement is of the utmost importance. It is vital that South Sudan’s regional and
international partners act collectively and make the necessary political investment to

16-01726

17/19

S/2016/138

encourage the parties to remain committed to the agreement. I look forward to even
closer coordination between the international partners and friends of South Sudan to
ensure unity of purpose in support of the Joint Monitoring and E valuation
Commission and the efforts of its Chair to bring about the successful
implementation of the agreement. I welcome the efforts of the African Union High
Representative for South Sudan, the former President of Mali, Alpha Oumar
Konaré, which complement those of the Chair of the Commission. I encourage the
African Union to enhance its engagement with the Commission. The road ahead is
far from easy. South Sudan’s leaders will have to make tough compromises to
ensure swift progress towards peace. The United Nations will continue to stand
shoulder-to-shoulder with IGAD, the African Union and international partners in
support of this goal. The people of South Sudan deserve nothing less.
81. Lastly, I wish to convey my sincere appreciation for the unwaverin g
commitment of UNMISS personnel, under the able leadership of my Special
Representative, Ellen Margrethe Løj. Their efforts to stabilize the security situation
and support the implementation of the peace agreement are commendable. In
particular, I thank the troop- and police-contributing countries that provide the
uniformed personnel and assets essential for the protection of civilians. I further
commend the United Nations country team and non-governmental organization
partners for their courage and commitment to providing much-needed humanitarian
assistance, often in perilous circumstances.

18/19

16-01726

16-01726

S/2016/138

19/19
