lleaolutiom adopted oa the reporta of the Sixth Committee

ensure the participation of an increasing number of
jurists of developing countries;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission the records of the discussion on the report of the Commission at the twentyninth session of the General Assembly;

II
1. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for its valuable work on the question
of succession of States in respect of treaties and to the
Special Rapporteurs on the topic for their contribution
to this work;
2. Invites Member States to submit to the SecretaryGeneral, not later than 1 August 1975, their written
comments and observations on the draft articles on
succession of States in respect of treaties contained in
the report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its twenty-sixth session, 10 including comments
and observations on proposals referred to in paragraph 75 of that report, which the Commission was
prevented from discussing by lack of time, and on the
procedure by which and the form in which work on
the draft articles should be completed;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate, before the thirtieth session of the General Assembly, the
comments and observations submitted in accordance
with paragraph 2 above;
·
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session an item entitled "Succession of
States in respect of treaties".
23 I 9th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3316 (XXIX). Report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its seventh session, 1:i
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 Decem·
ber 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law and defined
the. object and terms of reference of the Commission,
Further recalling its resolutions 2421 (XXIII) of
18 December 1968, 2502 (XXIV) of 12 November
1969, 2635 (XXV) of 12 November 1970, 2766
(XXVI) of 17 November 1971, 2928 (XXVII) of
28 November 1972 and 3108 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973 concerning the reports of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its first to sixth sessions,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law,
in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting the developing countries, would significantly contribute to universal economic co-operation among all States on a
basis of equality and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to the wellbeing of all peoples,
13 01/icial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/9617).

145

Bearing in mind that the Trade and Development
Board of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, at its fourteenth session, took note with
appreciation 14 of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its seventh session;
2. Commends the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law for the progress made in its
work and for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of its
working methods;
3. Notes with satisfaction that work on uniform
rules on the Iiabtlity of ocean carriers for loss, damage
or delay with respect to cargo is nearing completion
and that a draft convention setting forth such rules
will be transmitted to Governments and interested international organizations in 1975 for their comments;
4. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law should:
(a) Continue in its work to pay special attention to
the topics to which it has decided to give priority,
namely, the international sale of goods, international
payments, international commercial arbitration and
international legislation on shipping;
(b) Continue to consider the legal problems presented by different kinds of multinational enterprises
and the advisability of preparing uniform rules gbvern·
ing the liability for damage caused by products intended
for or involved in international trade, in accordance
with the decisions thereon adopted by the Commission
at its seventh session;
( c) Intensify its work on training and assistance in
the field of international trade law, taking into account
the special interests of the developing countries;
(d) Maintain a close collaboration with the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
continue to collaborate with international organizations
active in the field of international trade law;
( e) Continue to give special consideration to the
interests of developing countries and to bear in min\:I
the special problems of land-locked countries;
(/) Keep its programme of work and working methods under review with the aim of increasing the effectiveness of its work;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law the records of the discussions at the twenty-ninth
session of the General Assembly on the Commission's
report on the work of its seventh session.
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3317 (XXIX). United Nations Conference on
Prescription (Limitation) in the Interna•
tional Sale of Goods

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2929 (XXVII) of 28 November 1972 and 3104 (XXVIII) of 12 December
1973 on the convening of a United Nations Conference on Prescription (Limitation) in the International
Sale of Goods,
H Ibid., Supplement No. 15 (A/9615/Rev.l), para. 539.

146

General Auembl7-Tw-t7-ninth Ses■ion

Noting that the United Nations Conference on Prescription (Limitation) in the International Sale of
Goods was held at United Nations Headquarters from
20 May to 14 June I 974 and that the Conference
adopted, on 12 June I 97 4, a Convention on the Limitation Period in the International Sale of Goods, 111
Noting further that the Convention was opened for
signature by all States on 14 June I 974 and will remain
open until 31 December 1975, in accordance with its
provisions, at United Nations Headquarters, and was
also opened for accession in accordance with its provisions,
Reaffirming the conviction, expressed in the foregoing resolutions, that the harmonization and unification
of national rules governing prescription (limitation)
in the international sale of goods would contribute to
the removal of obstacles to the development of world
trade,
Invites all States which have not yet done so to
consider the possibility of signing, ratifying or acceding to the Convention on the Limitation Period in the
International Sale of Goods.
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3318 (XXIX). Dttlaration on the Protection of
Women and Children in Emergency and
Armed Conflict

The General Assembly,
Having considered the recommendation of the Economic and Social Council contained in its resolution
1861 (LVI) of 16 May 1974,
Expressing its deep concern over the sufferings of
women and children belonging to the civilian population who in periods of emergency and armed conflict in
the struggle for peace, self-determination, national liberation and independence are too often the victims of
inhuman acts and consequently suffer serious harm,
A ware of the suffering of women and children in
many areas of the world, especially in those areas
subject to suppression, aggression, colonialism, racism,
alien domination and foreign subjugation,
Deeply concerned by the fact that, despite· general
and unequivocal condemnation, colonialism, racism and
alien and foreign domination continue to subject many
peoples under their yoke, cruelly suppressing the national liberation movements and inflicting heavy losses
and incalculable sufferings on the populations under
their domination, including women and children,
Deploring the fact that .grave attacks are still being
made on fundamental freedoms and the dignity of the
human person and that colonial and racist foreign domination Powers continue to violate international humanitarian law,
Recalling the relevant prov1s1ons contained in the
instruments of international humanitarian law relative
to the protection of women and children in time of
peace and war,
Recalling, among other important documents, its
resolutions 2444 ( XXIII) of 19 December 1968, 2597
15 See Official Records of the United Nations Conference on
Prescription ( Limitation) in the Jntemational Sale of Goods
(United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.74.V.8), document
A/CONF.63/IS.

(XXIV) of 16 December 1969 and 2674 (XXV) and
2675 (XXV) of 9 December 1970, on respect for
human rights and on basic principles for the protection of civilian populations in armed conflicts, as well
as Economic and Social Council resolution l515
(XLVIII) of 28 May 1970 in which the Council requested the General Assembly to consider the possi·
bility of drafting a declaration on the protection of
women and children in emergency or wartime,
Conscious of its responsibility for the destiny of the
rising generation and for the destiny of mothers, who
play an important role in society, in the family and
particularly in the upbringing of children,
Bearing in mind the need to provide special protection of women and children belonging to the civilian
population,
Solemnly proclaims this Declaration on the Protection of Women and Children in Emergency and Armed
Conflict and calls for the strict observance of the Declaration by all Member States:
1. Attacks and bombings on the civilian population, inflicting incalculable suffering, especially on
women and children, who are the most vulnerable
members of the population, shall be prohibited, and
such acts shall be condemned.
2. The use of chemical and bacteriological weapons in the course of military operations constitutes
one of the most flagrant violations of the Geneva
Protocol of 1925, 16 the Geneva Conventions of
1949 17 and the principles of international humanitarian law and inflicts heavy losses on civilian populations, including defenceless women and children,
and shall be severely condemned.
3. All States shall abide fully by their obligations
under the Geneva Protocol of 1925 and the Geneva
Conventions of 1949, as well as other instruments of
international law relative to respect for human rights
in armed conflicts, which offer important guarantees
for the protection of women and children.
4. All efforts shall be made by States involved
in armed conflicts, military operations in foreign territories or military operations in territories still under colonial domination to spare women and children
from the ravages of war. All the necessary steps shall
be taken to ensure the prohibition of measures such
as persecution, torture, punitive measures, degrading treatment and violence, particularly against that
part of the civilian population that consists of women
and children.
5. All forms of repression and cruel and inhuman
treatment of women and children, including impris·
onment, torture, shooting, mass arrests, collective
punishment, destruction of dwellings and forcible
eviction, committed by belligerents in the course of
military operations or in occupied territories shall
be considered criminal.
6. Women and children belonging to the civilian
population and finding themselves in circumstances
of emergency and armed conflict in the struggle for
peace, self-determination, national liberation and independence, or who live in occupied territories, shall
not be deprived of shelter, food, medical aid or other
inalienable rights, in accordance with the provisions
16 League

of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, No. 2138,

p. 65.
11 United

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
