S/2001/905

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 September 2001
English
Original: French

Note by the President of the Security Council
The members of the Security Council, taking into account the views expressed
at its 4223rd meeting on “No exit without strategy”, held on 15 November 2000,
having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “No exit without
strategy: Security Council decision-making and the closure or transition of United
Nations peacekeeping operations” (S/2001/394), and recognizing the importance of
achieving a sustainable peace through a United Nations peace mission, have
indicated their agreement and commitment as follows.
1.
The Security Council recalls its resolutions 1327 (2000) and 1353 (2001),
all relevant Council resolutions and all relevant statements of its President, and
takes note of the respective roles of the Council, the Secretariat and the
General Assembly, including the Council’s relationship with troop-contributing
countries and the use of Council missions in conflict areas, in formulating and
implementing decisions with respect to a United Nations mission.
2.
The Security Council acknowledges that a good exit strategy is facilitated
by a good entrance strategy.
3.
The Security Council agrees that it is essential that all relevant parts of
the United Nations system, as well as the Government of the host country, be
fully engaged during the life of a mission, that clear direction is given and
milestones are established that support a comprehensive and integrated
approach to peace-building, where peace-building is appropriate, as well as the
operation’s exit strategy, and to that end encourages the Secretary-General to
make recommendations to the Council as appropriate.
4.
The Security Council undertakes to include, as appropriate, peacebuilding elements in a mission’s mandate to support the transition from
peacekeeping to post-conflict peace-building, and underlines the importance of
necessary coordination with the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council and the relevant funds, programmes and specialized agencies of
the United Nations system, as well as the Bretton Woods institutions,
particularly in respect of transition from peacekeeping to post-conflict peacebuilding.
5.
The Security Council recognizes that a more systematic assessment of
certain basic factors, including political objectives, strategic analysis, the
commitment of parties, the role of regional actors and the availability of
resources, in particular troops and equipment, will be important in deciding on

01-55097 (E) 250901

*0155097*

S/2001/905

the authorization of, making significant changes to, the withdrawal of and the
closure and transition of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
6.
The Security Council agrees that a major criterion for the Council’s
decision on the scaling down or withdrawal of a peacekeeping operation is the
successful completion of its mandate, resulting in the establishment of a
requisite political and security environment conducive to durable peace and/or
a follow-on post-conflict peace-building process.
7.
The Security Council welcomes the expressed commitment of the
Secretary-General to providing the best, most pertinent information available
to the Secretariat, including that obtained through the early dispatch of factfinding and technical surveys to potential mission areas.
8.
The Security Council reiterates that the Secretary-General should possess
the capacity for efficient information-gathering and analysis to provide
credible, objective analyses and sound advice to support the Council’s
deliberations during mandate formation, periodic or episodic review of a
mandate and consideration of withdrawal of a mission.
9.
The Security Council supports the expressed intention of the SecretaryGeneral to include comprehensive disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes in his plans for future peacekeeping operations, as
appropriate, so that the Council can consider, on a case-by-case basis, the
inclusion of aspects of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in the
operations’ mandates, and encourages the Secretary-General to do so.
10. The Security Council reiterates its commitment contained in its
resolution 1353 (2001) to strengthen its partnership with troop-contributing
countries, in particular the role of troop-contributing countries in the process
of mandate formation, review and termination, taking into account the views of
troop-contributing countries for the extension of cooperation between them
and the Council.
11. The Security Council undertakes to give consideration in its deliberations
on the launch, review, closure or significant alteration of the mandate of a
peacekeeping operation to the questions presented by the Secretary-General in
his report, and also to the observations made by Member States during the
debate of the Council on 15 November 2000.
12. The Security Council, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter, and
without compromising the Security Council’s prerogative to act, undertakes to
encourage cooperation with regional organizations, where appropriate, and
stresses, in particular, that the views of those who will be responsible for the
implementation of a peace agreement should be considered during the
negotiation phase, that the main actors in negotiations should assess
realistically the capacity and comparative advantage of different implementing
bodies and that the lines of reporting and the division of labour must be
unambiguous, and recognizes the importance of regional organizations that
contribute to peacekeeping operations, seeking to develop their capacity to
provide peacekeeping operations not only with military peacekeepers, but also
with other relevant personnel, such as police and judicial or penal experts, and
calls upon the international community to extend support in that regard.

2

S/2001/905

13. The Security Council recognizes that the timely contribution and
deployment of personnel, material and funds is vital to the successful
implementation of a mission and to the withdrawal of a mission on the basis of
an accomplished mandate, agrees to undertake a major role in accordance with
its Charter responsibilities in consolidating support for the mission among the
parties, regional actors, troop-contributing countries and Member States, and
reiterates that the support and political will of each can be crucial to a
mission’s ultimate success.

3
