sujet rentrant dans la competence de cet organe.

Nations on any subject which is within the competence of that organ.
2. All documents of the Commission which are
circulated to Governments by the Secretary-General shall also be circulated to such organs of the
United Nations as are concerned. Such organs may
furnish any information or make any suggestions
to the Commission.

2. Tous Jes documents de la Commission transmis aux Gouvernements par le Secretaire general
le seront aux organes de l'Organisation des Nations
Unics qui y sont interesses. Ces organes peuvent
fournir des renseignements et presenter des suggestions a la Commission.

Article 26
1. The Commission may consult with any international or national organizations, official or nonofficial, on any subject entrusted to it if it believes
that such a procedure might aid it in the performance of its functions.
2. For the purpose of distribution of documents
of the Commission, the Secretary-General, after
consultation with the Commission, shall draw up a
list of national and international organizations concerned with questions of international law. The
Secretary-General shall endeavour to include on
this list at least one national organization of each
Member of the United Nations.
3. In the application of the provisions of this
article, the Commission and the Secretary-General
shall comply with the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the other principal organs of the
United Nations concerning relations with Franco
Spain and shall exclude both from consultations
and from the list, organizations which have collaborated with the nazis and fascists.
4. The advisability of consultation by the Commission with inter-governmental organizations
whose task is the codification of international law,
such as those of the Pan-American Union, is
recognized.

Article 26
1. La Commi;sion peut consulter toute organisa-

tion, nationale ou internationale, officielle ou non,
sur tout sujet qui Jui a ete confie, si elle 1c juge
utile a J'accomplissement de sa tache.
2. Aux fins de la distribution des documents de
la Commission, le Secretaire general ctablira, apres
avoir consulte la Commission, une liste d'organisations nationales ou intcrnationales s'occup:mt du
droit international. II s'efforcera d'inclure a cette
liste au moins une organisation nationale de chaque
Membre de !'Organisation des Nations Unie~.
3. En appliquant Jes dispositions du present
article, la Commission et le Secretaire general se
conformeront aux resolutions de l'Assemblce gcnerale et des autres organes principaux de !'Organisation des Nations Unies concernant Jes relations
avcc l'Espagne franquiste et excluront des consultations et de la liste Jes organisations qui ont collabore avcc Jes nazis et les f aseistes.
4. L'utilite de consultations entre la Commission
et Jes organes intergouvernementaux, tels que ceux
de !'Union panamericaine, dont la tache est la
cndificattion du droit international, est reconnue.

175 UI). Preparation by the Secretariat of
the work of the International Law
Commission

175 (II). Preparation par le Secretariat du

The General Assembly,
Considering that, in accordance with Article 98
of the Charter, the Secretary-General performs
all such functions as are entrusted to him by the
organs of the United Nations;
Considering that, in the interval between the
first and the second sessions of the General Assembly, the Secretariat of the United Nations contributed to the study of problems concerning the
progressive development of international law and
its codification,
Instructs the Secretary-General to do the necessary preparatory work for the beginning of the
activity of the International Law Commission,
particularly with regard to the questions referred
to it by the second session of the General Assembly, such as the draft declaration on the rights and
duties of States.

L'AHemblee generale,
Considerant que, d'apres l' Article 98 de la
Charte, le Secrctaire general remplit toutes Jes
fonctions dont il est charge par Jes organes de
!'Organisation des Nations Unies;
Considerant qu'entre la premiere et la deuxiemc
session de I' Assemblee generale, le Secretariat de
)'Organisation des Nations Unies a participe a
l'ctude des prohlcmes concernant le developpcment progre!'Sif du droit international et sa
codification,
Charge le Secretaire general de faire le travail
preparatoire necessaire pour le commencement de
l'activite de la Commission du droit international,
en particulier en ce qui conccme les questions
qui seraient transmises a la Commission du droit
international par la deuxicme session de l' Assemblee generate telles quc le projet de declaration
des droits et des devoirs des Etats.

travail de la Commission du droit
international

Cent-vingt-troisieme seance pleniere,
le 21 novembre 1947.

Hundred and twenty-third plenary meeting,
21 November 1947.

176 UI). Teaching of international law
Considering that it is necessary to further the
aims of the General Assembly's resolution 94 (I) 1
'See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly during the second part of 11s first session, pages 187-188.

176 (II). Enseignement du droit international
Considerant qu'il faut travailler a atteindre Jes
buts que vise la resolution 94 (I) 1 du 11 decembre
'Voir Jes Resolutions adoptt!es par /'Assemblee gt!nerale
pendant l.t si,conde partie de sa premiere session, pages
18?.188.

110

1946 de l'Assemblce generale qui a inaugurc la
mise en application de l'Article 13, paragraphe 1,
alinca a, de la Charte, relatif au developpement
progressif du droit international et a sa codification;
Considerant que l'une des fai;ons les plus efficaces de travailler au developpement du droit
international consiste a favoriser l'interet du
public a son egard et a employer les methodes
d'cducation et de propagande tendant a familiariser les peuples avec les principes et les regles qui
regissent les relations intemationales;

of 11 December 1946, which initiated the fulfilment of Article 13, paragraph 1, sub-paragraph
a, of the Charter, regarding the development of
international law and its codification;

Considering that one of the most effective
means of furthering the development of international law consists in promoting public interest
in this subject and using the media of education
and publicity to familiarize the peoples with the
principles and rules that govern international
relations;
Considering that greater knowledge of and
fuller information on the aims, purposes and structure of the United Nations constitute another
positive method of assisting the development of
international law, of which the United Nations is
the main instrument,

Considerant qu'une connaissancc plus approfondic des buts, des objectifs et de la structure de
!'Organisation des Nations Unies, ainsi qu'une
documentation plus riche sur ces memes sujets,
constituent d'autres moyens efficaces de cooperer
au developpement du droit international dont cet
organisme est le principal instrument,

The General Assembly
Resolves to request the Governments of Member States:

L'Assem blee generate
Decide d'inviter les Gouverncments des Etats
Membres:

1. To take appropriate measures to extend the
teaching of international law in all its phases, including its development and codification, in the
universities and higher educational institutions of
each country that are under government control
or over which Governments have some influence,
or to initiate such teaching where it is not yet
provided;
2. To promote similar teaching regarding the
aims, purposes, structure and operation of the
United Nations in conjunction with paragraph 1
above and in accordance with resolution 137 (II)
adopted by the General Assembly on 17 November 194 7, on the teaching of the purposes
and principles, the structure and activities of the
United Nations in the schools of Member States;

1. A prendre les mesures propres a intensifier
l'enseignement du droit international considere
clans toutes les phases de son developpement et sa
codification, clans les universites et etablissements
d'enseignement superieur de chaque pays qui
dependent du Gouvernement ou clans lesquels
celui-ci peut exercer son influence, ou a organiser
cet enseignement clans les cas ou ii n'existe pas;
2. A favoriser de meme l'enseignement relatif
aux buts, aux objets, a la structure et au fonctionnement de !'Organisation des Nations Unies,
compte tenu de cc qui est <lit ci-dessus au paragraphe 1, et conformement a la resolution
13 7 (II) adoptee par l' Assemblee generale le 17
novembre 1947, relative al'enseignement des buts
et des principes, de la structure et de l'activite de
!'Organisation des Nations Unies clans les ecoles
des Etats Membres;

3. To give to the Secretary-General the fullest
possible co-operation with a view to facilitating
the preparatory work on the development of international law and its codification and to support
any individual or private effort to these ends
undertaken in their countries.

3. A preter au Secretaire general tout le concours en leur pouvoir pour faciliter les travaux
de preparation a la codification du droit international et a son developpement, et d'accorder leur
appui a toute initiative particuliere OU privee
prise clans leurs pays respcctifs et tendant aux fins
susdites.

Hundred and twenty-third plenary meeting,
21 November 1947.

Cent-vingt-troisieme seance pleniere,
le21 novembre 1947.

177 UI). Formulation of the principles recognized in the Charter of the Nurnberg Tribunal and in the judgment of
the Tribunal

The General Assembly

177 (II). Formulation des principes reconnus par le Statut de la Cour de Nuremberg et dans l'arret de cette Cour

L' Assemblee generate

Decides to entrust the formulation of the prinDecide de confier la formulation des principes
ciples of international law recognized in the char- de droit international reconnus par le statut de la
ter of the Niirnberg Tribunal and in the judgment Cour de Nuremberg et clans l'arret de cette Gour,
of the Tribunal to the International Law Com- a-la Commission du droit international, dont les
mission, the members of which will, in accordance membres seront, conformement a la resolution
with resolution 174 (II), be elected at the next 17 4 (II), elus a la prochaine session de 1'Assemblee
session of the General Assembly, and
I gcnerale, et
111
