United Nations

S/PV.6171

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6171st meeting
Monday, 27 July 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. Wolff
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-42432 (E)

*0942432*

S/PV.6171

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Adoption of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bangladesh, Brazil, Cuba, Ecuador,
Egypt, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Jordan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco, Nicaragua,
Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Tunisia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Weissbrod
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 22 July 2009
from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, which will be issued as document S/2009/380
and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council which will
be held on Monday, 27 July 2009, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

2

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Oscar FernandezTaranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I extend a warm welcome to Mr. FernandezTaranco.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, to whom I now give
the floor.
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: It is a pleasure for me
to brief the Council for the first time as Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs. Since the
Council was last briefed by the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, on 23 June 2009 (see
S/PV.6150), there have been concerted efforts by the
international community to create the conditions for
the prompt resumption and early conclusion of
negotiations to reach the end goal of a two-State
solution.
On 26 June, the Secretary-General joined other
members of the Quartet at a meeting in Trieste, which
was followed by a meeting with Foreign Ministers of
the Follow-up Committee of the League of Arab States
on the Arab Peace Initiative. The Quartet underscored
that the only viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is one that ends the occupation that begin in
1967 and fulfils the aspirations of both parties for
independent homelands though two States for two
peoples: Israel and an independent, contiguous and
viable State of Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security. All Quartet members affirmed their
determination to continue actively and vigorously to
seek a comprehensive solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict.

09-42432

S/PV.6171

At Trieste, United States Special Envoy George
Mitchell briefed both the Quartet and the Arab foreign
ministers on the United States intensive efforts with all
parties throughout the region. He stressed that the
objective was peace and not yet another process. I am
sure that all Council members are aware that Senator
Mitchell will be visiting the region for the fifth time
later this week, as are a number of senior United States
officials. The Quartet envoys will also meet in
Jerusalem at the end of this month to actively follow
up with the parties to promote the implementation of
Quartet positions and formulate recommendations for
Quartet action.
There was strong agreement among Quartet
members that both Israel and the Palestinians should
implement their obligations under the Road Map, and
they urged the Government of Israel to freeze all
settlement activity, including natural growth. I regret to
report that illegal settlement activity is continuing
across the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and
that there was no evacuation of settlement outposts
during the reporting period. The situation in East
Jerusalem is of particular concern due to the
developments on the ground, especially indications of
new settlement construction and house demolitions.
The international community expressed its
concern following the Jerusalem municipality planning
committee’s approval of the construction of 20 new
housing units on the site of the Shepherd Hotel in the
East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Sheikh Jarrah. On
19 July, in the Wadi Joz neighbourhood of East
Jerusalem, at the homes of two families that have
received eviction orders, Special Coordinator Serry
met with representatives of the European Union Troika
and other members of the international community in
order to express their concern at the plight of the
families and at the prospect of new settlement
construction in East Jerusalem. The homes are part of a
neighbourhood of 26 Palestinian refugee families that
all the face the threat of eviction.
In a significant development yesterday, settlers
accompanied by Israeli security forces took physical
possession of a house in another area of Sheikh Jarrah.
Demolition orders for Palestinian construction without a
permit were carried out against three Palestinian homes
during the reporting period and a further 13 new orders
were issued. Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem
remain closed by Israeli order, and on 15 July a
community centre in East Jerusalem was closed. These

09-42432

unilateral actions in highly sensitive areas of East
Jerusalem increase tensions and undermine confidence
in the basis for the two-State solution. The position of
the Secretary-General is clear — the future of Jerusalem
remains a matter for final status negotiations between
the parties.
In the reporting period, there were 51 incidents in
which 19 Palestinians were injured and property was
vandalized by settlers. Two Israelis were also injured in
these incidents. On 20 July, settlers injured two
Palestinians and set fire to agricultural land in the
village of Burin. There continues to be inadequate
enforcement of the rule of law on violent settlers.
This reporting period marks five years since an
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
stated that construction of the wall within occupied
Palestinian territory is contrary to international law.
The construction of the barrier has compounded
movement restrictions in the West Bank, and its
planned route includes some 9.5 per cent of the area of
the West Bank. Approximately 58 per cent of the
barrier in its current planned route has been completed,
and construction is ongoing.
The Quartet principals agreed that transformative
change on the ground should form an integral and
essential part of the agenda for peace. In this respect,
there were some improvements in the West Bank in the
reporting period. Israel has implemented a number of
measures to ease movement between Nablus, Qalqilya,
Ramallah and Jericho. Initial field observations
indicate that these measures have significantly reduced
the amount of time required for Palestinians to access
these cities.
The Government of Israel has also announced
that the hours for commercial crossing at the Allenby
Bridge to Jordan will be increased and that it will
promote the development of three key industrial zones
in Bethlehem, Jenin and Jericho. These welcome steps
by Israel, if sustained and expanded, would have a
significant impact on Palestinian freedom of movement
and on economic development.
There are now a total of 613 closure obstacles
within the West Bank. This figure has been jointly
confirmed for the first time following cooperation by
the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) Central Command and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, including detailed cross-checking and a series
of joint field trips.

3

S/PV.6171

In a difficult context, the Palestinian Authority
has continued to pursue an ambitious reform agenda.
From the establishment of a national credit bureau to
the modernization of the legal framework for
investment, a number of measures are being
implemented to strengthen the foundations for socioeconomic sustainability. I reiterate the call of the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee and the Quartet for robust and
sustained financial support for the Palestinian
Authority.
However, the fiscal situation of the Palestinian
Authority remains dire. The International Monetary
Fund estimates that $900 million in external financing
are still needed for the remainder of the year, including
$300 million to respond to needs in Gaza. It is essential
that donor countries fulfil all pledges made at Paris in
December 2007 and Sharm el-Sheikh in March this
year.
As the Quartet also noted in its meeting in
Trieste, the Palestinian Authority has made important
steps to reform its security sector. Members of the
judicial police completed a training course on 5 July,
and the renovation of prisons is under way in several
West Bank cities. Five police stations are also being
constructed in Jenin governorate. Palestinian forces are
now free to operate at night in four West Bank cities
following improved coordination with Israel.
The situation was generally calm in the West
Bank and there were no fatalities recorded during the
reporting period, although 19 Palestinians and 10
Israelis were injured. Israeli security forces continued
to arrest Palestinians, but in lower numbers than in
previous periods. In a disturbing development, on
4 July a Palestinian Authority official reported that
Palestinian security forces had uncovered arms,
explosives and $8.5 million in cash from Hamas cells
in the West Bank. I urge the Palestinian Authority to
continue to make every effort to improve law and order
and to fight violent extremism, consistent with its Road
Map obligations.
The Secretary-General shared with the Quartet
his belief that the situation in Gaza is unsustainable
and not in the interests of any of those concerned.
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) remains the
main framework for the way forward in Gaza. The
notable and welcome drop in violence reported in the
most recent briefing has continued into this reporting
period. However, there were four incidents of rockets

4

or mortars being fired into Israel during the past month
and nine Israeli army incursions into the Gaza Strip, in
which two Palestinian children were killed and seven
Palestinians injured. A reported seven Palestinians
were killed today when a tunnel used for smuggling
collapsed. No mechanism has been put in place to
prevent the illicit trafficking in arms and ammunition
in Gaza.
I would like to stress that the Quartet called for a
sustained reopening of all crossing points to ensure the
regular flow of people and humanitarian and
commercial goods into Gaza. A few categories of
goods, including small quantities of cement and glass,
prohibited for import since June 2007, were allowed
into Gaza on an exceptional basis during the reporting
period. Overall, an average of 78 trucks per days were
allowed into Gaza, an increase from approximately 70
trucks per day in June and a marked increase from the
18 trucks per day in November 2008.
However, in May 2007, prior to the imposition of
the comprehensive closure regime, 475 trucks per day
were entering Gaza as part of normal commerce and
trade. About 70 per cent of imports during the
reporting period were human and animal food products
while most industrial, agricultural and construction
materials were either prohibited or severely restricted.
No exports were allowed out of Gaza during this
period.
Over the past month, the amount of industrial fuel
entering Gaza through the crossing points was
sufficient to meet approximately 70 per cent of the
quantities needed for Gaza power plants to operate at
full capacity. Power cuts continued throughout the
Gaza Strip, directly affecting most households’ ability
to refrigerate foods, as well as the provision of
essential services like water and sanitation, health care
and storage of medicine as well as waste disposal. Due
to the lack of materials needed to fix damage sustained
to the network during Operation Cast Lead, some 10
per cent of the population in Gaza remained without
any electricity at all.
It is important to note that the tunnel economy
continues in Gaza, with smuggling providing an
increasingly broad range of consumer goods, and of
black market petrol in particular. The alternative tunnel
network has alleviated some of the shortages, but it
cannot be a substitute for a healthy and functioning
economy based on the free movement of goods.

09-42432

S/PV.6171

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East has opened more
than a 150 summer camps in Gaza which are being
attended by over 185,000 children. Under the
coordination of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), efforts to clear over 600,000 tons
of rubble have begun. In support of UNDP efforts, the
United Nations Mine Action Team for Gaza has
received its special explosive ordnance disposal
equipment but still waits for delivery of special
explosives to destroy unexploded ordnance.
No significant amounts of materials for
reconstruction have been allowed into Gaza and I
reiterate the Secretary-General’s position that this
situation is completely unacceptable. In Trieste, the
Quartet has expressed it support for the United Nations
proposal to kick-start early recovery in Gaza by
opening the crossings for materials to complete United
Nations construction work on housing, health and
education facilities suspended since June 2007. We call
on Israel for a prompt and positive response to this
proposal.
A further, inconclusive round of talks aimed at
reconciling Fatah and Hamas was also held in Cairo on
28 June. Egyptian efforts have now been put on hold,
at President Abbas’s request, to enable Fatah to focus
their efforts on their reform efforts at the upcoming
Fatah Congress, scheduled for 4 August in Bethlehem.
The factions are due to meet again in Cairo on
25 August.
Meanwhile, Hamas continues to assert its control
over the Strip and maintains a visible police presence
in public places. On 9 July, in a new development for
Gazan society, the Hamas Chief Justice in Gaza
instituted a rule that women lawyers must wear a
traditional gown and head covering in court. IntraPalestinian relations remain tense and on 21 July, a
bomb injured 61 people at a wedding in Khan Younis.
Fatah claims that nearly 200 of its members in
Gaza have been detained over the course of the
reporting period. Fatah has also expressed its concern
that its members in Gaza will be prevented from
attending its sixth Congress in Bethlehem.
On 14 July, the new Israeli negotiator met in
Cairo with his Egyptian counterpart to discuss
prospects for the release of Israeli captive Gilad Shalit
in exchange for a number of the 11,000 Palestinian
prisoners held in Israeli jails. The International

09-42432

Committee of the Red Cross has still not been granted
access to Shalit after his more than three years in
captivity.
Justice Goldstone returned to Gaza on 28 June to
conduct two days of public hearings with victims and
relatives of the Cast Lead Operation. On 6 July, similar
hearings were held in Geneva, during which witnesses
and victims from the West Bank and southern Israel
testified, including Noam Shalit, the father of captured
Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit. This mission’s report will
be presented to the Human Rights Council in August,
for discussion at the Council’s next session in
September.
In the region, Arab League foreign ministers met
in Cairo on 24 June and welcomed a new beginning for
United States relations with the Arab and Muslim
world and President Obama’s commitment to exert
every effort towards comprehensive peace in the
region. The foreign ministers emphasized the
importance of a complete Israeli settlement freeze and
the need to lift the blockade of the Gaza Strip as two
key elements to create the necessary climate for the
resumption of peace negotiations.
The Quartet took note of the Arab League
statement and expressed support for dialogue among
all States in the region in the spirit of the Arab Peace
Initiative. The Quartet called on Arab States to take
steps to recognize Israel’s rightful place in the region,
to affirm that violence cannot achieve regional peace
and security, and to assist the Palestinian people in
building their future State through consistent support
for the Palestinian Authority.
The situation in the occupied Syrian Golan
remained quiet during the reporting period, although
settlement activity continues.
Turning now to Lebanon, allow me to recall that
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Alain Le Roy, briefed the Council on 23 July on
recent violations of resolution 1701 (2006) that had
taken place in South Lebanon. Investigations are still
ongoing into some of these violations.
In addition, on 8 July, one Lebanese civilian
crossed the Blue Line near Sheikh Abbad tomb and
was arrested by the IDF. He was handed over to the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) the
following morning. During the month, Israeli air
violations took place almost daily.

5

S/PV.6171

In meetings with Lebanese and Israeli officials
and political leaders in the past week, the United
Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, Mr. Michael
Williams stressed the seriousness of these recent events
and the gravity of the violations to resolution 1701
(2006) that had taken place as well as the need to
de-escalate the situation. With Lebanese leaders, he
requested that there be no further incursions by
Lebanese civilians across the Blue Line. Mr. Williams
was reassured by Prime Minister Siniora, Speaker Berri
and Prime Minister-designate Hariri that no further
demonstrations would take place in the area. A senior
member from Hizbullah also gave the same
reassurances.
In a further effort to defuse the situation,
Mr. Williams visited Israel on 23 July where he raised
the question of the newly-erected watchtower in Kfar
Shouba and requested that it be removed. An
immediate priority is for all parties to refrain from any
provocative actions that could spiral into undesirable
results.
Even as we await the outcome of the
investigation into the recent events, UNIFIL will
continue to coordinate closely with the Lebanese
armed forces to ensure that the situation in UNIFIL’s
area of operation remains under control in line with
resolution 1701 (2006).
On the Lebanese side, the challenge ahead
remains the formation of a new Government after
parliamentary elections on 7 June. We hope that
ongoing negotiations over the formation of the
Government will proceed as expeditiously as possible.
The recent incidents in South Lebanon have been a
stark reminder of how quickly and dangerously the
situation can deteriorate. Despite the seriousness of
those incidents, however, we remain hopeful that we
can move towards full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) and towards greater security and stability
in the Middle East.
Now is the time for Israel, the Palestinians and all
actors in the region to play their part to end the ArabIsraeli conflict and to create a better future for all in
the Middle East. The Quartet will meet on the margins
of the General Assembly in New York in September,
and there will also be a meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee. We continue to support the convening of
an international conference in Moscow in 2009.

6

We remain determined to actively and vigorously
seek a comprehensive resolution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict on the basis of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and
1850 (2008), the Madrid framework, including the
principle of land for peace, the Road Map and
agreements previously reached between the parties.
The President: I thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I shall now give the floor to members of Security
Council.
Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to express my
appreciation to Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing, which clearly shows the extent of the
deteriorating situation and the danger posed to the
occupied Palestinian territories and to security and
stability in the region.
Despite the fact that more than six months have
elapsed since the Israeli forces perpetrated their
massacre in the Gaza Strip and the Security Council
adopted resolution 1860 (2009), we still cannot see any
sign that the occupying authorities intend to change
their inhuman behaviour towards the civilians in the
Gaza Strip. For the third consecutive year, we see their
lack of will to end the siege and the blockade, to open
the border crossings closed under a policy of collective
punishment that runs counter to all international and
humanitarian law, and to desist from committing grave
violations in the occupied Palestinian territories, some
of which easily qualify as war crimes under
international law and international humanitarian law.
Nor do we see any sign of international will to
break the world’s silence and pressure the occupation
authorities to put an end to the suffering of civilians in
the Gaza Strip. That silence has encouraged the
occupation forces to commit yet more crimes and to
intensify their practices, behaving like a State that is
above the law.

09-42432

S/PV.6171

At this juncture, we would like to commend the
role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the efforts
made by its personnel in the face of threats and danger.
We strongly condemn all aggression against its
personnel and the false accusations levelled against
them by the occupation forces.
Conditions in the West Bank are no better than
those in the Gaza Strip, which shows that, despite
Israel’s allegations and pretexts with regard to the Gaza
Strip, Israeli officials have not ceased to declare their
intention to continue expanding their settlement
activities and to apply policies that seek to rapidly
Judaize Jerusalem by confiscating identity cards and
land. Meanwhile, the settlers continue their crimes
against Palestinian civilians in the occupied West
Bank, which more often than not are committed with
the help and support of the occupation forces, which
protect them while ignoring the complaints of
Palestinian civilians.
Those measures have been intensified by the
continued construction of the racist separation wall
despite the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice and by blockades of ring roads and the
bypass roads that cut across the West Bank. The land
that has been taken from the West Bank as a result of
the settlements, the ring roads and the separation wall
totals 2,703 square kilometres, which constitutes 46 per
cent of the whole area of the West Bank. Yet, we still
talk about the establishment of a Palestinian State at a
time when 46 per cent of the West Bank has been taken
by the Israelis and their settlers.
I would like to mention the situation of
Palestinian detainees and prisoners, especially women.
Here, I refer to the report adopted by the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, which refers to
the grave and distressing situation of female
Palestinian prisoners in Israeli detention centres. The
report says that most of them are exposed to
psychological and mental pressure and torture,
including insults, beatings, threats and sexual
harassment. The report also states that 13 per cent of
these female prisoners are under the age of 18.
Any serious effort to achieve peace in the Middle
East must start by putting an end to the international
silence with regard to Israel. This means that the
international community should not fear Israel but
should dare to call on it to freeze all settlement

09-42432

activities and to halt and remove all settlements. The
Council has been silent, which has encouraged Israel to
continue those policies. It has rejected any mention of
a racist State, instead talking about a Jewish Israeli
State, and it has failed to condemn the enactment of
new laws against the Arab people. That threatens a new
Nakba, lays the groundwork for the transfer and
displacement of 1.5 million Palestinians from land
occupied in 1948 and denies the right of Palestinian
refugees to return under international law and
international resolutions.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): At the outset, I
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco for his detailed and comprehensive
briefing, his first before the Council.
Over the past six months the situation in the
Middle East has remained worrisome. Almost no
progress has been made on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860
(2009). Despite an announced ceasefire, incursions by
the Israeli armed forces into the occupied Palestinian
territory continued; Israeli imposition of restrictions
and
blockades
continued
to
inflict
untold
psychological, physical and humanitarian damage upon
the very fabric of the civilian population in Gaza and
adversely affected reconstruction efforts by United
Nations agencies and the international donor
community. Israel’s increased construction of
settlements in the West Bank and its ongoing pursuit of
the separation wall threatened to alter the legal status,
demographic composition and character of the
Palestinian territories before final status negotiations
could resume. And Israeli civilians continued to fall
victim to rocket attacks.
In the face of that situation, we welcome the
intensified diplomatic efforts and the broad consensus
among the Quartet, Arab League members, regional
countries and the international community at large on
the pressing need for early resumption of a fully
fledged peace process on all tracks. We also welcome
the undertakings of the Palestinian Government to
consolidate progress in revitalizing the socio-economic
infrastructure, developing an effective security
structure and establishing functional institutions for a
future State. Those positive developments give us a
sense of guarded optimism.
For more than six decades, the Middle East has
been suffering from protracted hostilities and has fallen

7

S/PV.6171

short of achieving a steady state of peace, stability and
prosperity. Violence and counter-violence will not
contribute to a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the region which could ensure Israel’s security and
achievement of the Palestinians’ ultimate goal of
setting up an independent and viable State of their
own. Peaceful settlement of disputes, constructive
dialogue and good-faith negotiations can and should be
the only option to help bridge the rift and cultivate
confidence between the parties, which is so essential
after years of disruptive mistrust and confrontation.
Viet Nam continues to support the Road Map, the
Madrid terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative,
and it calls for strict implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We urge the new Israeli
Government to stay the course towards settling the
crisis on the basis of a two-State solution, freeze illegal
settlement activity, dismantle outposts erected since
March 2001, allow unhindered access of humanitarian
assistance, open all border crossings and resolve the
fate of all Palestinian prisoners. We also urge the
Palestinian factions to promote national reconciliation
and to rally behind the Palestinian National Authority
in preparation for the establishment of a national unity
government and future statehood. We commend the
role played by the Arab countries in that regard.
To relieve the suffering of the people in Gaza, we
call upon the parties concerned to strictly abide by
international humanitarian and human rights law and
extend necessary cooperation to relief operations being
conducted by United Nations agencies and
humanitarian organizations.
While welcoming the successful conduct of the
parliamentary elections in Lebanon early last month,
we remain concerned, however, about the recent
security incidents in south Lebanon and support the
investigation process carried out by the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and the Lebanese Armed
Forces. At this critical juncture, we underline the
importance of maximum restraint among the parties
and the assurance of safety and security for United
Nations peacekeepers, humanitarian workers and the
local population. We urge Israel to cease flights over
Lebanese territory and to withdraw from the northern
part of Ghajar village and an adjacent area north of the
Blue Line. We continue to support collective efforts
aimed at ensuring full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006).

8

Mr. Okuda (Japan): I would first like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate
on the situation in the Middle East. I would also like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing.
It has been six months since the conflict in Gaza.
While there has not been any major outbreak of
violence since then, neither has there been any political
breakthrough towards lasting peace. We believe that
the current situation of no peace, no war is not
sustainable. We must do everything possible to realize
real peace.
We cannot overstate the importance of the twoState solution. This can only be achieved through
negotiation, and violence has no place in the process.
Japan strongly supports a comprehensive solution on
the basis of relevant Security Council resolutions
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1850
(2008), the Madrid principles, including land for peace,
and the Road Map.
In this regard, we reiterate our call on both the
Israelis and the Palestinians to fulfil their obligations
under the Road Map and refrain from any action that
might prejudge the outcome of negotiations. We urge
the Israelis to freeze their settlement activities,
including so-called natural growth in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem. In this regard, we are concerned
about the project of the construction of Jewish
residences in East Jerusalem.
Improving the humanitarian conditions in Gaza
continues to be an important priority. We call on the
Israelis to further cooperate with the international
efforts in that regard by keeping the crossings open
continuously to secure the smooth movement of the
relevant people and goods. We also call on all parties
to fully implement Security Council resolution 1860
(2009) to resolve the issues surrounding Gaza. To
increase this momentum, Japan has been making
efforts to alleviate the devastated humanitarian
conditions. This month, we have decided to provide a
total of $10 million in assistance, including food aid
through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the World
Food Programme and the project for prevention of
infectious diseases through UNICEF.
We take note of the removal of some of the
restrictions on movement and access in the West Bank
by the Government of Prime Minister Netanyahu. We

09-42432

S/PV.6171

encourage the Israelis and the Palestinians to
strengthen their security cooperation, which will enable
further relaxation of restrictions on movement and
access.
Palestinian reconciliation is essential. We support
Palestinian unity under the leadership of President
Abbas and call on the Palestinians to work vigorously
to achieve it. In this context, we hope that the Fatah
Congress will be a success. We fully support Egypt’s
efforts and ask that any country in the region with
influence cooperate in this endeavour.
Japan has consistently provided assistance to the
Palestinians since the Oslo Accord of 1993. Building a
viable economy for the Palestinians is an indispensable
component of a future Palestinian State. Japan will
continue to do as much as possible in that regard.
We welcome and support the renewed and
intensified efforts of the Obama Administration of the
United States to achieve comprehensive peace in the
region. The serious efforts of the United States are
creating an opportunity, which we have not seen in
some time, to realize the long-sought goal of achieving
comprehensive peace among all parties in the region,
including Syria and Lebanon. However, we cannot let
the United States alone shoulder all of the
responsibilities. The parties themselves, as well as the
international community, must also shoulder their
responsibilities if we are to achieve peace.
We fully support the Arab Peace Initiative, which
can be a basis for a comprehensive peace in the region,
and believe that all the Arab States can play a more
active role in ameliorating the atmosphere surrounding
the peace talks. We hope that they will take tangible
steps towards that end.
People in the region have seen various peace
initiatives come and go. We must not let the people feel
apathetic towards these renewed efforts. We should
seize this opportunity as if it were our last. Japan is
determined to help both parties reinvigorate the peace
process. Ambassador Yutaka Iimura, the newly
appointed Special Envoy of the Government of Japan
for the Middle East peace process, will work with the
parties to achieve a comprehensive peace in the region.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing today on the
situation in the Middle East. I would also like to thank

09-42432

the Permanent Representative of Israel for being with
us as well as the Permanent Observer of the Palestinian
Authority.
The open debate today on the situation in the
Middle East is taking place within the framework of
important diplomatic initiatives aimed at providing a
new impetus to the peace process. After the conflict
and political transition period which characterized the
region during the first half of this year, the time has
come for dialogue and negotiation.
Mexico hopes that during the second half of 2009
tangible progress will be achieved in the peace process,
which will lead us towards the objective that has been
endorsed by the international community — the
establishment of a Palestinian State living in peace
with Israel within secure and internationally
recognized borders.
That is why we welcome the diplomatic initiative
undertaken by the President of the United States,
Barack Obama, in the Middle East, as well as the
important message he gave during his recent talk in
Cairo on 4 June.
We have also taken note of the fact that Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has acknowledged the
need for the establishment of a Palestinian State.
However, in our view, the significant preconditions and
in some cases very restrictive conditions that have been
imposed for achieving this objective only run the risk
of further complicating the negotiation process and a
future settlement. We hope that this initiative will be a
first step in the right direction, which will allow all
political sectors in Israel to be involved in the
negotiating process.
Similarly, we welcome the statement made by the
Quartet in Trieste on 26 June, in which the
determination of the international community to
support the parties in the negotiation process and to
implement the resulting agreement was reiterated.
Mexico supports this statement which has a renewed
appeal to the parties to comply with their obligations
under the road map and to work together for a twoState solution.
We hope that these diplomatic initiatives will
generate the right conditions for the holding, at an
appropriate time, of an international conference in
Moscow that will enable us to consolidate the objective
of a final outcome in the Middle East peace process.

9

S/PV.6171

Mexico has participated actively in international efforts
for peace, and we would join any initiative of this sort.
Meeting the objectives of the peace process
should not remain wishful thinking. The critical
situation for the people in the region as well as the
constant tensions among actors who have been
involved in this conflict for decades demands that
progress be achieved as soon as possible.
A few days ago, we received new reports of
serious incidents along the border between Gaza and
Israel, which confirms the fact that tensions and
insecurity continue to be present following the military
operations that took place at the beginning of this year.
We condemn these acts of violence, in particular the
acts and attacks against the civilian population, and
once again we urge all actors to respect the provisions
of international humanitarian law at all times.
The living conditions in the Gaza Strip have
continued to worsen due to the fact that humanitarian
assistance has had difficulty gaining access and there
have been ongoing restrictions on the provision of
building materials, fuel and cash. According to figures
provided by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), the goods entering Gaza in recent weeks
totalled only one fifth of those for the corresponding
period in 2007.
This situation is not acceptable. It contributes to
the worsening of the humanitarian situation and a sense
of frustration and injustice among the population,
which helps to promote extremism and violence. The
restrictions on Gaza lead to illicit trafficking in
construction materials, fuel and food, and this in turn
creates a vicious circle, opening the door for illicit
trafficking in weapons and jeopardizing security
throughout the region.
We therefore continue to insist on the need to
establish an international monitoring mechanism that
will guarantee a lasting ceasefire, the opening of
border crossings and the monitoring of illicit
trafficking in weapons, in accordance with resolution
1860 (2009). We support all initiatives aimed at
establishing a mechanism of this type, the only way to
ensure progressive normalization of the situation in the
Gaza Strip.
This normalization also requires ongoing efforts
aimed at achieving intra-Palestinian reconciliation,

10

efforts which have received encouragement from the
Government of Egypt. We regret the fact that the recent
rounds of negotiations have not led to significant
progress and we hope that the various factions will
renew their commitment to reconciliation in order to
promote the peace dialogue with Israel. We also urge
Hamas and all Palestinian militia to renounce the use
of violence in order to create a climate of trust that will
be conducive to the peace process. Extremism should
not be fought solely with weapons. We also need to
provide, with due caution, a space for dialogue and
negotiation.
Only through the establishment of a unified
democratic Palestinian Government committed to the
peace process, the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative will it be possible to set the foundation
for a negotiating process that will lead to a lasting
solution to the conflict.
The situation prevailing in East Jerusalem and in
the West Bank continues to be a cause for concern.
While we welcome the lifting of some restrictions on
the movement of individuals in the West Bank, in
particular in the Hawara outpost in the Nablus region,
the population and the Palestinian economy continue to
suffer from numerous restrictions imposed by the Israel
Defense Forces.
The progressive professionalization of the
Palestinian security forces in the West Bank shows that
there is a commitment to peace and to regional
stability. This commitment must be accompanied by
concrete actions that will improve the living conditions
of the Palestinian people. Only in this way can any
serious progress be made towards peace.
Moreover, the commitments established under the
road map on the policy of colonization and settlement,
as well on the practice of the destruction of homes and
expropriation in East Jerusalem, have yet to be
fulfilled. Today, the press has reported that there are
more than 300,000 Israeli settlers in the West Bank, and
that population continues to increase significantly. This
situation cannot continue. It is a negative element in the
negotiating process between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority and in the establishment of lasting peace. We
recall that, in accordance with the principles of the road
map and international law, all Israeli settlement
practices in the occupied territories, including those
that are qualified as natural growth, must be halted as
soon as possible. The International Court of Justice

09-42432

S/PV.6171

decision should be followed with regard to the building
of the wall in occupied Palestinian territory, which runs
counter to international law.
It is essential for efforts aimed at achieving
regional peace to be pursued. A few weeks ago, we
welcomed the peaceful and transparent holding of
parliamentary elections in Lebanon on 7 June. The
successful conclusion of this electoral process
demonstrates the commitment of all Lebanese political
actors to the Doha agreements and to the process of
national reconciliation.
We also welcome the normalization of political
and diplomatic relations between Lebanon and Syria,
which will make it possible to enhance the dialogue
between those two neighbouring countries in order to
resolve pending issues and ultimately strengthen the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Lebanon in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Despite these important achievements, we note
with concern the events that took place a few days ago
south of the Litani River in the zone of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), in particular an explosion in a weapons
depot in the area of Khirbat Salim. The existence of
weapons south of the Litani River that do not belong to
the Lebanese Armed Forces is unacceptable and a
violation of resolution 1701 (2006).
We urge the Government of Lebanon, in
cooperation with UNIFIL, to take the necessary
measures to ensure that these types of incidents do not
recur. Similarly, we reiterate our appeal that Lebanon,
Israel and all other parties involved in this conflict
comply with the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006),
in particular those referring to the arms embargo and
the complete disarmament of all militias in Lebanon,
with the sole objective of strengthening the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of the country.
We attach particular importance to UNIFIL’s
ability to carry out its mandate unhindered and
unrestricted in any way. We also reiterate our appeal to
Israel and Syria to resume indirect talks under the
auspices of Turkey, as such talks could be very
beneficial to the population and security of both States.
The remaining challenges to resolving the
conflict in the Middle East in a definitive manner are

09-42432

numerous. However, we trust that this is the right time
to address those challenges progressively. The support
of the international community is therefore essential
but not sufficient. First and foremost, we need the
resolve and commitment of the actors directly involved
in the peace process. We therefore urge Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to undertake a constructive
dialogue without preconditions and on the basis of
prior international obligations and agreements. Only in
this way will we achieve the peace so hoped for by the
people embroiled for 60 years in this conflict, which
has had an impact not only on regional security but
also, to a great extent, international stability and their
future.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
welcoming
Assistant
Secretary-General
Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco and thanking him for his candid
briefing.
Our meeting today comes at the end of an intense
transition period that has witnessed important political
statements, meetings and events, bringing new
opportunities and challenges.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered later on behalf of the European Union, but
allow me to add a few comments.
Croatia sees this meeting as representing hopeful
momentum towards taking concrete steps to achieve a
two-State solution and regional peace. We are
encouraged by the vigorous engagement of the United
States Administration, which has created the impetus
for arriving at a lasting solution in the Middle East,
including through the personal determination of
President Obama and today’s activities of the special
envoy, Senator Mitchell. We also welcome the
commitment of Prime Minister Netanyahu and
President Abbas to the two-State solution. Croatia
believes that our collective interest is to remain focused
on a shared, clear and fundamental objective — the
establishment of an independent, democratic and viable
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel, and a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the region.
For the international community, this means
focusing on creating conditions conducive to the peace
process and encouraging the parties to resume
negotiations as soon as possible, with a view to settling
all permanent status issues on the basis of the two-State
solution, mutual recognition, freedom from violence,

11

S/PV.6171

incitement and terror, and respect for previous
agreements and understandings. There is no other way
for the two parties to realize their legitimate
aspirations.
This means respecting the integrity of the
bilateral negotiations while also recognizing the
regional dimension of the process. We value the efforts
of the responsible regional partners to secure a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East
based on the Arab Peace Initiative.
Croatia understands that the political and
diplomatic process remains inextricably linked to the
situation on the ground. We understand that it may be
illusory to expect credible progress without positively
changing the realities on the ground, or without
properly addressing the obstacles. That is why it is
crucial for both parties to implement their obligations
under the Road Map and to refrain from provocative
acts or unilateral actions that could prejudge the
outcome of the negotiations or erode trust and
confidence in the peace process. This makes it
necessary to end settlement activities, dismantle all
outposts and refrain from any unilateral action.
Division among the Palestinians and their
inadequate institutional and security capacity, as well
as the regional environment, are causes for concern.
Croatia appreciates the mediation efforts of Egypt and
the Arab League in overcoming Palestinian divisions.
Another ongoing cause for concern is the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. Croatia continues to
believe that this crisis ultimately requires a political
solution. The controlled and sustained opening of
border crossings, matched with appropriate monitoring
arrangements, is essential for securing adequate
supplies of food, medicine and cash, as well as
reconstruction and economic recovery. In that context,
the full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) is
critical to obtaining a durable solution to the Gaza
crisis and responding to legitimate Israeli security
concerns. Sustained and indiscriminate rocket attacks
on southern Israel and the ongoing arms smuggling
cannot be tolerated.
Croatia understands that the renewed push for
peace demands that both parties take decisive steps.
The Palestinian Authority needs to continue its efforts
to consolidate progress in developing an effective and
reformed security sector and functioning institutions.
Israel must be reassured that Palestinian statehood will

12

not come at the expense of its legitimate security
concerns. Both parties must take credible steps to
overcome the disruptive effects of the crisis in
confidence and implement their obligations under the
Road Map.
There also needs to be improvement in the lives
of ordinary Palestinians throughout the West Bank and
Gaza, including by promoting Palestinian economic
development based on the full implementation of the
Agreement on Movement and Access. We are pleased
to note the recent trend of economic and security
revival in the West Bank, and welcome steps taken by
Israel towards removing some of the road blocks in the
West Bank. Israel and Arab countries in turn would
need to undertake confidence-building measures. We
share the view that the comprehensive peace process
needs to see progress both on the Israeli-Palestinian
and on the Syrian-Lebanese tracks, including by
preparing the Moscow conference.
Allow me to briefly turn to Lebanon. Croatia
congratulates the people of Lebanon on holding free,
fair and peaceful elections — a remarkable
demonstration of their yearning for democracy and
normalcy. With the process of the formation of a
Government under way, which we hope will continue
in a spirit of dialogue and responsibility, it remains
crucial, as the recent incident in South Lebanon clearly
demonstrated, for all political actors to remain
committed to the full implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Taif Accords and
to address the question of disarming Hizbullah, which
remains of central importance to peace and stability in
Lebanon and the region.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I too would like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Oscar FernandezTaranco for his update on recent developments in the
Middle East. We welcome the presence at the table of
the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine.
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union, but let me add the following
points.
We welcome the recent intensified efforts by the
international community to break the deadlock in the
Middle East peace process. As suggested by Mr. Javier
Solana, High Representative for the Common Foreign
and Security Policy of the European Union, the

09-42432

S/PV.6171

Security Council can assume a key role with its
steadfast support for the peace process and its final
objective, namely, a permanent two-State solution.
We would like to recall the European Council
conclusions of June and point out that, beyond its
continued political and economic support to the peace
process, the European Union is ready to contribute
substantially to post-conflict arrangements aimed at
ensuring the sustainability of peace agreements, while
also addressing regional, economic and security
dimensions.
We welcome the determination of the Quartet, as
expressed at its recent meeting, to seek a
comprehensive resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The Arab Peace Initiative and the decision of the Arab
League of 24 June, underscoring the commitment to
comprehensive peace on all tracks, are also important
contributions to the Middle East Peace process.
We welcome the talks under way between the
United States and all parties in the region aimed at
creating conditions for the prompt resumption and
early conclusion of negotiations without preconditions
on all permanent status issues.
That Prime Minister Netanyahu has expressed a
commitment to a peace agreement that includes the
establishment of a Palestinian State is a welcome initial
move. But that needs to be followed up by concrete
steps, such as a revision of Israeli settlement policies,
with an immediate end to settlement activities,
including in East Jerusalem and including natural
growth and the dismantlement of all outposts erected
since March 2001. Furthermore, we call upon the
Government of Israel to refrain from unilateral actions
in East Jerusalem, including the demolition of houses
and evictions.
While we acknowledge the progress made by the
Palestinian Authority in security sector reform, efforts
to fight violent extremism and to strengthen the rule of
law need to be stepped up. That includes reliable longterm safeguards against renewed rocket attacks from
the Gaza Strip.
Palestinian reconciliation is vital. More decisive
efforts towards a unified political leadership by all
political representatives of the Palestinians and a
common renouncement of violence are required. The
delay of the Cairo talks, already in their seventh round,
is therefore a source of concern. We hope that

09-42432

Palestinian leaders will work towards the prevention of
even deeper separation between the West Bank and
Gaza, thereby preserving chances for the unity of the
future Palestinian State.
Half a year after the escalation of the Gaza
conflict, we again reiterate the importance of the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009). Ensuring
open access to the Gaza Strip is indispensable for
improving the intolerable humanitarian situation of the
people in Gaza and for the start of reconstruction
efforts.
Controlled but comprehensive supply of the Gaza
Strip would discourage tunnel trafficking and allow for
effective measures against the smuggling of weapons
through the tunnels, thereby also contributing to the
security of Israel. Austria continues to hold the view
that rebuilding Gaza also requires rebuilding trust and
respect for the rule of law. That includes a thorough
investigation of all allegations of violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law and a
follow-up to the findings of such investigations.
Concerning the situation in the West Bank, we
strongly encourage the continued and sustained easing
of restrictions on movement. As Prime Minister
Netanyahu has stressed, a strong Palestinian economy
will strengthen peace. We therefore hope that that
objective will be supported by a rapid and ambitious
programme of removal of barriers to freedom of
movement and economic activity in the West Bank.
Regarding Lebanon, we are very concerned about
ongoing developments in southern Lebanon. That is an
issue that we brought up in the Council earlier on. It is
clear that the most recent events constitute a violation
of resolution 1701 (2006). The explosion of an arms
cache and the incidents that followed have once more
revealed the general fragility of the situation. Thus, we
reiterate the need for the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) by all sides. We encourage all
sides to engage in visible steps in that regard.
Austria congratulates Lebanon on the successful
holding of parliamentary elections. We hope that the
process of the formation of a new Government under
Prime Minister-designate Saad Hariri will see steady
progress. We wish to stress the importance of close
cooperation by any new Government with the main
constitutional bodies as an important step towards
further consolidating Lebanon’s democracy.

13

S/PV.6171

In conclusion, let me express once again Austria’s
conviction that it is essential to make progress on all
tracks of the Middle East peace process. Only a
comprehensive peace will be a durable peace.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Let me
also thank the Secretary-General for his report, as well
as Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco for
his briefing. We welcome him to his new position and
congratulate him on his first appearance before the
Council.
The United States is firmly committed to working
towards a comprehensive and lasting peace in the
Middle East, including a two-State solution, with Israel
and Palestine living side by side in peace and security.
President Obama is personally engaged in that effort,
and he will continue to lead it.
In consultation with States in the region and
beyond, the United States is working vigorously to
create the conditions for the prompt resumption and
early conclusion of negotiations to end the IsraeliPalestinian
and
Arab-Israeli
conflicts.
My
Government’s Special Envoy, Senator George Mitchell,
is again in the region today, consulting with his
counterparts about the way forward. As Special Envoy
Mitchell emphasized yesterday, comprehensive peace
is the only way to guarantee stability, security and
prosperity for all States in the region. We will need
Arabs and Israelis alike to work with us to succeed.
As we move forward, we should recall that all
parties have responsibilities. With Israel and the
Palestinians, those responsibilities centre on fulfilling
the Road Map commitments. With Israel, our focus is
on settlements, outposts and movement in the West
Bank. With the Palestinians, our focus includes their
commitment to provide effective security in areas
under their control, to continue important security and
other reforms and to end incitement. With the Arab
States, we are seeking increased support for the
Palestinian Authority and forward movement on their
offer to normalize relations with Israel, made in the
2002 Arab Peace Initiative. As a concrete gesture, we
urge the leaders of Arab States to do their part by
taking meaningful steps towards normalization.
We have been working intensively with the Israeli
Government to deal with the issue of settlement
activity. For decades, United States Administrations
have had a consistent position on that subject. While
we recognize that those decisions are difficult, we are

14

asking Israel to uphold commitments it has made,
including to stop settlements and to dismantle outposts.
At the same time, Israel is taking positive steps to
ease the living conditions of Palestinians and to create
circumstances that can help lead to the establishment
of a viable Palestinian State. Over the past several
months, Israel has removed, or eased conditions at,
several key checkpoints in the West Bank. The Israeli
military has also withdrawn its troops to the outskirts
of four cities. If expanded and sustained, these changes
should have a significant impact on Palestinian
freedom of movement, economic development and
growth and overall quality of life. We expect that this
process will continue.
These positive developments make it all the more
imperative that we work together to support the
Palestinian Authority and its non-partisan, transparent
programmes that aim to improve the lives of ordinary
Palestinians throughout the West Bank and Gaza. The
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) have endorsed the Palestinian Authority’s 2009
budget and the accounting controls it has put in place.
But the Palestinian Authority’s domestic revenue
is still not enough to cover all its operational expenses
and to continue security and institutional reforms.
According to IMF projections for 2009, the Palestinian
Authority needs $120 million each month in donor
assistance to cover its operational expenses. Yet donor
support has failed to keep up with the Palestinian
Authority’s needs, falling almost $50 million short on
an average monthly basis during the first quarter of the
year. Thus, the Palestinian Authority is accumulating
arrears and unsustainable levels of debt to private
banks, threatening its financial stability.
On 24 July, Secretary of State Clinton announced
the transfer of $200 million in direct budget support
from the United States to the Palestinian Authority. We
call on other countries that wish to see a strong, viable
Palestinian State to join us in providing such concrete
support to the Palestinian Authority.
On the security front, the Palestinian Authority is
taking its responsibilities for security sector reform
seriously. To date, 1,998 Palestinian security personnel
have completed training in Jordan and have been
deployed to the West Bank. Another full battalion of
roughly 500 men will begin training in August. These
efforts must continue in conjunction with the
invigorated efforts to promote the rule of law, so that

09-42432

S/PV.6171

Palestinians can live in the secure environment they
have long deserved and so that they can demonstrate
that Palestine will be a responsible State in the region.
The unimpeded distribution throughout Gaza of
humanitarian assistance, including food, fuel and
medical treatment, remains a pressing issue. As
Secretary Clinton has said, progress towards the goals
we seek is more likely to grow out of opportunity than
out of futility, out of hope than out of misery. By
ensuring the delivery and distribution of humanitarian
assistance to Gaza, we aim to foster the conditions in
which a Palestinian State can be fully realized: a State
that is a responsible partner, a State at peace with Israel
and with its Arab neighbours, a State accountable to its
people, a State that Palestinians everywhere can be
proud of, a State that is respected around the world.
The United States continues to urge the Government of
Israel to ensure that United Nations and other
humanitarian agencies are able to go about their work.
Moreover, all United Nations Member States,
including those in the region, must work to ensure the
end of illicit smuggling of arms and ammunition into
Gaza, lest Hamas restock its arsenal and spark further
conflict. My Government therefore supports reopening
Gaza’s border crossings in a controlled manner, with an
appropriate monitoring regime involving international
and Palestinian Authority participation.
Arab States also have responsibilities, in
particular to support the legitimate Palestinian
Authority and help President Abbas and Prime Minister
Fayyad, thus demonstrating that negotiations, not the
terrorism and violence chosen by Hamas, are the path
to an independent and viable State.
President Obama has also called for Arab States
to take clear and unambiguous steps towards
normalization with Israel in the context of significant
Israeli actions, in order to advance our shared goal of
comprehensive peace in the Middle East and stability
for all the region’s people. The Arab Peace Initiative,
supported by the 57 members of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, was a positive step, but more
is needed. Those who embraced the proposal should
taken meaningful steps now, and that includes
contributing to a more positive international backdrop
to our efforts for peace in international forums,
including here at the United Nations. We will be
looking for early signs of such a change.

09-42432

The Quartet remains the most effective
instrument
for
marshalling
the
international
community’s diplomatic efforts in support of Middle
East peace. In Trieste last month, the Quartet
underscored that the only viable solution to the conflict
is one that fulfils the aspirations of both parties for
independent homelands: two States for two peoples
living side by side in peace and security. It also
welcomed Prime Minister Netanyahu’s and President
Abbas’s commitment to the two-State solution. The
Quartet voiced its support for Palestinian unity in
pursuit of such a solution. It called on all Palestinians to
commit themselves to non-violence, recognition of Israel
and acceptance of previous agreements, as well as to the
obligation to facilitate the reconstruction of Gaza and the
organization of elections.
I should note here that since the most recent
Security Council consultation on the Middle East we
have marked the third year that Gilad Shalit has been
held in captivity by Hamas, in direct contradiction of
international law. To compound that grave violation,
Hamas has never allowed the International Committee
of the Red Cross access to Corporal Shalit. We
encourage all efforts to secure Gilad Shalit’s immediate
release.
Events in Lebanon over the past several weeks
have
underscored
the
importance
of
full
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1701 (2006). Implementing those
resolutions is the only sure path to protecting
Lebanon’s sovereignty, stability and independence. As
the Council heard last week, on 14 July a series of
explosions shook a house in the village of Khirbat
Salim, well south of the Litani river. Initial findings
point to a large quantity of arms and ammunition being
stored there in serious violation of resolution 1701
(2006), with all evidence pointing to Hizbullah. The
Khirbat Salim events clearly demonstrate the urgent
need to bring arms in Lebanon under legitimate control
of the State and the need for the international
community to remain fully committed to supporting the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) in
its mission.
We are deeply concerned about the threat that
such weapons pose to the civilian populations in both
Israel and Lebanon. By Hizbullah’s own admission, it
is continuing to rearm. That is a dangerous
development which represents a severe violation of a
core objective of resolution 1701 (2006), since it was

15

S/PV.6171

Hizbullah that launched the 2006 war that neither
Israel nor Lebanon sought.
We join the Secretary-General in calling on
Hizbullah to disarm and to transform itself into a solely
political party. We also call for UNIFIL and the
Lebanese Government to act energetically to follow up
on information about Hizbullah’s weapons stocks and
call for full and unimpeded investigation into the
explosion of the weapons cache at Khirbat Salim.
Resolving that situation would reassure the
Government of Israel that its northern border and
citizens are secure. Israel has said that, until it has such
assurances, it will persist with its reconnaissance
overflights of Lebanon. While we recognize those
overflights also as violations of the Blue Line, we
understand Israel’s justification for them. Simply put,
we have not succeeded in ensuring that Lebanon has
secured its borders in order to prevent the entry of
illegal arms or related materiel. In short, Hizbullah has
intentionally perpetuated the threats that lead to these
Blue Line violations.
The United States remains firmly committed to
supporting UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces in
their efforts to fully implement the provisions of
resolution 1701 (2006). We stand firmly in support of
Lebanon’s State institutions, and that includes
providing the Lebanese Armed Forces with support to
protect Lebanon and its citizens, pursue international
peace and security and implement the resolutions of
the Security Council.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
briefing and to welcome him to the Security Council.
Naturally, France endorses the statement to be
made by the Permanent Representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union.
To begin, I would like briefly to refer to the
Lebanese dossier before the Security Council. France
welcomes the success of the legislative elections held
in Lebanon on 7 June, which represents a new, positive
step for that country and its democracy. We hope that
the renewed dialogue will be continued and help
Lebanon to pursue the unity, stability and reform
sought by its people.
Recent incidents in southern Lebanon remind us
of the importance of the full implementation by all

16

parties of resolution 1701 (2006). We reiterate our full
support for the work of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). Any attack on UNIFIL is
unacceptable, and it is important and even essential
that the parties cooperate fully with the Force.
I turn now to the Israeli-Palestinian issue. Rarely
if ever has there been such international consensus on
the nature of a solution to the conflict — the
establishment of a viable, independent and democratic
Palestinian State living side by side with Israel within
secure and recognized borders. The statements of the
Israeli Prime Minister on that specific point represent a
first and welcome step, as the ministers for foreign
affairs of the European Union stressed on 15 June.
The task now is to determine how successfully to
engage the various stages leading to that objective.
Those stages are many, difficult to complete and
varied. I shall refer to the three principal stages.
First, daily living conditions must be improved so
that the people do not lose all hope. That will require
the implementation by the parties of their Road Map
obligations. In that respect, the Israeli authorities must
cease all settlement activity, the destruction of homes
and other evictions in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. The issue of settlements is, of course,
critical, and we welcome the stress placed by President
Obama on that point. As President Sarkozy has
recalled, by complicating the prospects for establishing
a Palestinian State, settlement activity does not
contribute to Israel’s security but will, contrarily, only
increase the dangers. The authorities of France and the
European Union have sent that very clear message to
the Israeli authorities.
The second requisite development on the ground
involves freedom of movement and access. That
applies not only to Gaza, on which I will have more to
say, but also to the West Bank and East Jerusalem. The
lifting by the Israeli authorities of some major
obstacles to movement, in particular in Nablus, is an
important move that must be followed up.
All measures aimed at restoring a normal life for
the Palestinian people must be encouraged. Beyond
their humanitarian and human consequences, such
measures will also help the Palestinians and their
authorities to meet their responsibility to strengthen the
foundations of their future State. In that regard, the
Palestinian Authority must pursue its efforts to
strengthen the security sector and ensure the rule of

09-42432

S/PV.6171

law. The pitiless fight against terrorism must also be an
ongoing priority.
With regard to the situation in Gaza, the
consolidation of the ceasefire, encompassing the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009), remains a
priority. Resolution 1860 (2009) defined the main
parameters of a permanent ceasefire, including the
opening of crossings and the establishment of
mechanisms to end the smuggling of weapons.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza is most
disturbing. We call for the immediate opening of
checkpoints, in particular to facilitate access for
humanitarian assistance and the resumption of
economic activity. Beyond the issues of humanitarian
assistance and reconstruction, we believe that such
closures will perpetuate the political status quo in
Gaza. In addition to those efforts, we continue firmly
to call for the unconditional and immediate release of
Gilad Shalit.
My third and final point involves interPalestinian reconciliation and the role of neighbouring
States. The Palestinians must speak in a single voice if
the peace process is to resume. There can be no peace
agreement with a single party representing the
Palestinian people, or a viable Palestinian State without
Gaza. While talks to achieve inter-Palestinian
reconciliation face myriad challenges, we continue to
support the Egyptian mediation efforts. Of course, the
countries of the region have an important role to play.
At the appropriate time, we will be prepared to work
with a Government of national unity that respects the
basic principles of the peace process and agrees to
resume negotiations with Israel leading to a two-State
solution.
Moreover, we continue to lend our full support to
the Arab Peace Initiative, which must be part of a
comprehensive and lasting solution in the Middle East.
Any step taken or gesture made by States of the region
to demonstrate their commitment to lasting peace,
which necessarily involves good-neighbourly relations
with Israel, is to be encouraged. In the context of the
regional approach, we also believe that the time has
come to move forward on the Syrian and Lebanese
tracks of the peace process.
The elements to which I have referred will, at this
critical juncture for the Middle East, determine
progress towards the necessary resumption of
negotiations on a peace agreement on the basis of the

09-42432

principle of land for peace, the resolutions of the
Security Council and the Arab Peace Initiative. The
international community and the Security Council must
be fully committed, because the situation in the Middle
East is of urgent concern to us all. France and the
European Union have repeatedly shown our readiness
to assist in facilitating negotiations to the maximum
possible extent and to consider guarantees for a
possible new agreement. We note with great hope the
intentions expressed by the new United States
Administration. We must now move tangibly towards
peace, and France is resolved to play its full role to that
end.
Mr. Koudougou (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): At the outset, my delegation wishes to thank
you, Sir, for organizing today’s debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
a subject to which we attach great importance.
We also thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
introductory briefing to our discussion, which we hope
will contribute to the search for a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution for the entire Middle East.
The evolution of the situation in the Middle East,
particularly with respect to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, remains of major concern to the international
community, which has undertaken numerous efforts
and initiatives to re-establish lasting peace in a region
beset by several decades of war that have claimed
countless victims. My delegation once again welcomes
the efforts made at various levels by the Quartet and a
number of countries and organizations to help the
parties to relaunch their peace talks, particularly now
that recent developments threaten to compromise the
fragile progress that has been achieved. These
developments include the ongoing Jewish settlement
activity in the West Bank and the appalling
humanitarian situation that continues to prevail in the
Gaza Strip due to the lengthy closure of crossing
points, which has hindered the delivery of essential
goods and particularly the importation of construction
materials into Gaza. All such actions contribute to
hindering the momentum of the dialogue resumed at
the Annapolis Conference.
At this point, we believe it critical for the parties
to commit further, resolutely and unconditionally to
open and direct discussions on all issues. In this regard,
Burkina Faso welcomes the recent commitments made

17

S/PV.6171

by the Israeli authorities to launch discussions with a
view to achieving peace with the Palestinians and to
expand this peace to the regional level.
Likewise, we welcome the public statement made
by the Palestinians which states that the Palestinians
are ready to resume discussions immediately.
The urgency of the situation calls for direct talks
to resume without delay and without conditions. These
discussions should respect the spirit and the letter of
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular, the
most recent, 1850 (2008) and 1860 (2009), as well as
the Madrid terms of reference and the Arab Peace
Initiative of 2002. These undoubtedly constitute the
most appropriate political and legal frameworks for a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement to the
conflict in the Middle East in general.
My delegation believes in the advent of a stable,
peaceful and prosperous Middle East, with the full
participation of an independent and viable Palestinian
State, with secure and internationally recognized
borders, living side by side in peace with the State of
Israel, which, itself, would live in security with all its
neighbours.
In our view, this is the only solution for putting
an end to this regional conflict. To achieve this, the
first step to take, as we emphasized during the most
recent ministerial debate, held in May under the
Russian presidency, is still the establishment of a
genuine climate of confidence through the adoption of
the following measures: an end to extremist rhetoric
from all sides; an end to Israel’s construction of the
separation wall; an end to its policies of colonization
and settlements; the guarantee of humanitarian access
by opening passage points; and an end to the firing of
rockets by Hamas and all its other forms of violence in
Israeli territory.
In parallel, the Palestinians should succeed in
restoring their unity to give themselves a chance to
build a stable and prosperous State. We reiterate our
thanks to Egypt for its commitment and efforts to help
them do so, and we encourage the international
community to continue to provide support to this end.
The donor conference held in Sharm El-Sheikh
on 2 March of this year was an opportunity to make
commitments on essential issues. We hope that these
commitments will be kept.

18

In my delegation’s view, humanitarian aid must
be able, without hindrance, to reach Gaza and all the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, in order to ease the suffering of the
population.
It is evident, then, that the road to peace in the
Middle East is indeed still long, but there are grounds
for hope given such positive signs as the
reestablishment of diplomatic relations between
Lebanon and Syria. This good example indicates that,
with further efforts, we can ultimately succeed in
defining the conditions for peaceful coexistence
between Israel and its Arab neighbours in the light of
the aspirations for peace and security on all sides.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict, on which the
stability of the entire region seems to depend, requires
ongoing attention and unflagging support from the
Security Council so as to ensure compliance with all
related resolutions it has adopted.
In conclusion, we would like once again to
reaffirm that a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East cannot be contemplated without the
commitment and determination of all actors in the
conflict. They should shoulder their responsibilities,
reaffirm their commitment, show their firm
determination and take ownership of the processes
leading to peace.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by thanking you, Mr. President, and your
delegation for convening this debate. We would also
like to welcome Mr. Fernandez-Taranco and thank him
for the report he has given us. We welcome the
presence
here
today
of
the
distinguished
representatives of Israel and Palestine.
This debate is a timely and necessary one. The
quantity and quality of efforts today seem to show the
conviction of the international community that the time
has come for the conflict in the Middle East, a source
of instability and violence, to be put to rest once and
for all.
Despite the temporary suspension of negotiations,
perhaps never before have there been so many
initiatives, never before have we been so close to
making reality the aspirations of two communities in
neighbouring countries to live as two States, side by
side, in peace and security.

09-42432

S/PV.6171

However, the remaining tasks are not easy ones.
There are a number of situations which will require
renewed determination by all parties in the region and
by those who have interest or influence in that region.
In this context, we agree on the need to conclude
prompt peace agreements between Israel and Lebanon
and Israel and Syria. The Arab Peace Initiative is a key
platform for the normalization of relations among all
States in the region. We hope that in the future it will
be possible to extend respect and coexistence beyond
this very reduced environment in which we must work
today.
Costa Rica also knows that the unity of the
Palestinian people is an absolutely essential ingredient
for the progress of any peace initiative between Israelis
and Palestinians. We recognize the valuable mediation
efforts of Egypt and the Arab League, and we call upon
the Palestinian people to place their trust in peaceful
means, to recognize the State of Israel and to comply
with earlier agreements and commitments.
We also hope that once the natural shocks which
a change of regime produces have been overcome the
authorities of Israel and Palestine will return to
negotiate on key remaining issues in the conflict,
without preconditions and with the understanding that
these negotiations will be carried out on the basis of
obligations already undertaken and agreements
previously reached between the parties which are
underpinned by international law and the decisions of
this Council.
In this context, Costa Rica supports the appeal of
the Quartet to the parties to comply with their
obligations in accordance with the Road Map, and we
share their belief that unilateral action will not
prejudge the result of the negotiations and will not be
recognized by the international community. We
believe, therefore, that it is absolutely essential for
Israel to halt its policies of settlements and their
expansion, regardless of what it chooses to call it.
Every new wall built is a new obstacle to peace.
Particularly in this area, Israel must not ignore
international law or the consensus which exists on this
issue in the international community. This persistent
illegal behaviour on Israel’s part is one of the reasons —
although not the only one — why its other concerns are
not being considered with the calm necessary for their
resolution. Likewise, we urge the Government of Israel

09-42432

to contain the violence of some of its settlers against
Palestinians.
Costa Rica has always understood the legitimate
security concerns of Israel. However, we believe that
they do not justify the disproportionate restrictions it
imposes on the Palestinian people, affecting their
human rights and creating an unparalleled
humanitarian situation. The humanitarian situation in
Gaza is dramatic and unsustainable as a result of the
restriction of flows of humanitarian and commercial
goods on which some 1.5 million people depend. It
must change. Access must be allowed for materials to
rebuild the homes, hospitals, schools and medical
infrastructure destroyed at the beginning of this year.
We reiterate our call for international law, in particular
international humanitarian law, to be respected and for
border crossing activity to be normalized.
Costa Rica welcomes the measures that the Israeli
Government has taken to ease restrictions on
movement in the West Bank and hopes for new
conciliatory gestures on its part. Similarly, we
acknowledge the reforms adopted by the Palestinian
Authority to improve its security sector, and we see
Israeli cooperation as a step in the right direction
towards the establishment of robust Palestinian
institutions that one day will be part of its State
apparatus.
I conclude by acknowledging the work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East for the courage with which it
continues to provide assistance to those affected by the
conflict, despite the difficult conditions in which it
works.
Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): Like others, we
are grateful to Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing
to the Security Council this morning. Indeed, we
welcome him to the Council for the first time.
In the Council’s regular meetings on this issue in
recent months, there has been broad agreement on what
needs to be done to achieve the ultimate goal of a twoState solution with an independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State, based on 1967
borders, living side by side in peace and security with
Israel. However, the peace negotiations essential to
achieving that aim still elude us. The parties must take
bold action to create an atmosphere conducive to
peace.

19

S/PV.6171

We fully support last week’s statement by the
Secretary-General calling for a freeze on Israeli
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territories. Such settlements are illegal under
international law. Their continued expansion, including
so-called natural growth, goes against the overwhelming
international consensus and, indeed, the decisions of the
Security Council. It creates a further obstacle to the
two-State solution, which is the only sustainable
response to the national aspirations of both parties.
We are especially concerned by Prime Minister
Netanyahu’s recent comments, rejecting calls to halt
work on the Shepherd’s Hotel settlement project in
East Jerusalem. Developments such as that, in what is
by any measure an Arab neighbourhood, would
seriously undermine the prospects for a successful twoState solution, with Jerusalem as the capital of both
Israel and Palestine. We urge the Israeli Government to
bring an immediate halt to that construction and to
cease activities such as the house demolitions and
evictions that continue to cause such deep resentment.
We also encourage Arab partners to demonstrate
their readiness to move towards a normalization of
relations with Israel, as envisaged in the Arab Peace
Initiative. Prime Minister Netanyahu’s remarks on
23 July indicated Israeli’s interest in expanding peace
with the Palestinians into a broader regional peace. We
welcome the views expressed recently by His Highness
the Crown Prince of Bahrain on taking forward the
Arab Peace Initiative. It is vital that all Arab States
demonstrate both their commitment to dialogue and
peaceful relations and their willingness to respond
positively to any significant Israeli action to freeze
settlement activity.
Firm commitments are also needed from the
Palestinians. Rocket and mortar attacks by Palestinian
militants continue. The people of southern Israel have
the right to live free from terror. We call for those
attacks to stop, for the immediate release of Gilad
Shalit, for access by the International Committee of the
Red Cross to Corporal Shalit and for an end to all acts
of violence. Palestinian factions should unite behind
President Abbas, and we support the efforts of Egypt in
that regard. Palestinian reconciliation is essential to
prevent further political separation of the West Bank
and Gaza.
We are encouraged by the recent increase in
economic activity in the West Bank. We support the

20

work of Quartet Representative Tony Blair and his
team in helping to create the conditions for such
activity. In particular, there have been positive
developments in the city of Nablus, where the removal
of just six Israeli roadblocks and checkpoints has led to
a marked improvement to local economic activity. We
welcome recent Israeli action to reduce movement and
access restrictions and encourage further such steps.
The benefits are plain to see.
That is all in sharp contrast to the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. We are still a long way from the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009). Continued
Israeli restrictions imposed on the Gaza crossings have
allowed for little improvement in the plight of ordinary
Gazans. Restrictions on certain foodstuffs and
reconstruction materials have a serious and detrimental
impact, forcing goods to be smuggled in through
tunnels. As those tunnels are under Hamas control, the
restrictions serve only to strengthen their position. It is
in the interest of all that those restrictions be eased,
particularly as winter approaches.
We remain deeply concerned by allegations that
breaches of international humanitarian law were
committed by both sides during the Gaza conflict
earlier this year. We encourage all parties involved to
cooperate fully with the Human Rights Council factfinding mission, headed by Justice Goldstone.
As I said at the start, much-needed peace talks
still elude us. With regard to Syria, Lebanon and Israel,
negotiations are the only way to resolve the issues that
divide them. Now is the time to take that forward. We
urge Syria and Israel to restart indirect peace talks and
to consider moving to direct talks.
The positive manner in which the Lebanese
elections took place provides a good basis on which to
make real progress towards creating a durable peace.
Recent events in south Lebanon, particularly the
explosion of an arms cache on 14 July, underline,
however, the urgency of moving towards a
comprehensive agreement. We are deeply concerned
that Hizbullah continues to maintain a substantial
military capacity, which is a destabilizing factor for the
whole region. We condemn the recent attacks on
peacekeepers of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon in the strongest possible terms. We urge all
parties to step up their commitment to full and
unconditional implementation of resolution 1701

09-42432

S/PV.6171

(2006). Movement on Ghajar would be an important
confidence-building measure.

forward. Unfortunately, the most recent round has once
again been postponed — this time to 25 August.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I would like to thank
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing on the situation
in the Middle East and to welcome him to the Security
Council.

With regard to achieving a comprehensive
settlement in the region, another relevant factor is the
return to active diplomacy on the Syrian and Lebanese
tracks of the peace process. It is now important,
through collective efforts, actively to help eliminate
obstacles to restoring a full-fledged regional peace
process. Russia’s initiative to hold an international
conference on the Middle East in Moscow this year,
which has wide support, aims to promote that goal. We
continue to prepare for the forum, which is enshrined
in the Security Council resolutions, the decisions of the
Middle East Quartet and the recent G-8 summit.

Since the Security Council’s previous discussions
on the Middle East, the situation in the region has
remained at the centre of the international community’s
attention. With the 11 May ministerial-level meeting of
the Council (see S/PV.6123), the Trieste meeting of the
Quartet of Middle East mediators and the Group of
Eight (G-8) summit in L’Aquila, the international legal
basis for the peace process has been reaffirmed,
primarily the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles and the Road Map. The significance
of the Arab Peace Initiative has been noted. The
importance of the two-State principle has been voiced.
All those key provisions were also reflected in a
statement made by the President of the Russian
Federation, Dmitry Medvedev, at the headquarters of
the League of Arab States. A positive development that
should be noted is the readiness expressed by the Prime
Minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu, for an
immediate resumption of negotiations with the
Palestinian side and his de facto recognition of the
two-State concept.
I emphasize that the main objective now is to
create conditions for an immediate resumption of
negotiations and strict compliance by the parties with
their obligations under the Road Map, including to
combat terrorist activity and to ensure freedom of
movement for the population in the West Bank.
One of the main factors hampering the
resumption of dialogue is settlement activity, including
natural growth. We consider unacceptable actions that
bring about new realities on the ground and could
prejudge the outcome of final-status negotiations. The
ongoing blockade of Gaza, which is causing the
suffering of civilians in the Gaza Strip, is also
unacceptable. Moving the peace process forward
requires restoring unity in the Palestinian ranks, based
on well-known principles.
Once again, we would like to commend most
highly the mediation efforts of Egypt. We look forward
to results in moving intra-Palestinian consultations

09-42432

That topic was discussed during the latest trip to
the region by the Special Representative to the Middle
East of the President of Russia, Alexander Saltanov,
who held extensive talks in the region. We firmly
intend to continue our work at various levels with all
interested parties and partners. The Moscow meeting
should be effective and productive.
I would now like to say a few words on Lebanon.
Russia continues to hold the position of unwavering
support for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Lebanese State. We welcome
the successful holding of parliamentary elections. We
are closely following talks under way in Beirut among
the leading political parties of the country, and hope
they will soon conclude and that an effective
Government will be formed to represent the interests of
all communities living in Lebanon.
We are concerned by outbreaks of tension in
southern Lebanon and welcome efforts now being
made by Lebanese authorities in cooperation with the
United Nations, to defuse the tension. We reaffirm the
need for strict compliance with the provisions of
resolution 1701 (2006) by all sides without exception.
That is the only way to guarantee the maintenance of
stability in southern Lebanon.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I would like to thank you, Sir, for
convening this open meeting and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing on the
situation in the Middle East.
Over the past six months, the Middle East peace
process has had its ups and downs. Early in the year,
the conflict in Gaza claimed the lives of hundreds of

21

S/PV.6171

civilians and caused serious loss of property, making
the original situation more tense and fragile. The
Council adopted resolution 1860 (2009) which led to
an end to hostilities between Israel and Palestine and
created conditions for relaunching the peace process.
However, it is disturbing that the resolution has not
been fully and effectively implemented. The
humanitarian situation in Gaza remains serious and
reconstruction has been slow.
China calls upon all parties concerned to fully
and conscientiously implement resolution 1860 (2009)
and to avoid taking any action that could reignite
tension. China calls on Israel to open all the crossing
points into Gaza and to ensure that reconstruction can
proceed smoothly. The international community should
honour its pledges as soon as possible in order to help
the people of Gaza normalize their lives.
The situation in the other occupied Palestinian
territories is also a source of concern. The situation of
the Palestinian people in the West Bank remains tense
and they cannot enjoy a life of dignity. China expresses
its deep concern and urges Israel to respond
conscientiously to the appeal of the international
community to halt construction of the separation wall
and the settlements.
In the current situation, political negotiation
remains the only viable path towards the achievement
of lasting peace in the Middle East. China believes that
irreversible peace can be achieved only through a
negotiated agreement by all parties. We hope that all
parties will commit themselves to dialogue with the
goal of achieving the comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East that it is in their own interest
and in the interest of regional peace and stability in the
Middle East. We call on all parties to avoid any action
that could exacerbate tensions in the Middle East.
Reconciliation between Palestinians is essential
to safeguarding the interests of the Palestinian people
and to ensuring the resumption of the Middle East
peace process. China appreciates Egypt’s efforts to that
end and hopes that the Palestinian parties will set store
by their long-term national interests, resolve their
differences through dialogue, achieve reconciliation
and establish a Government of national unity.
Resolving the issue of Israel and Palestine is the
only way to achieve the peaceful coexistence of the
two States of Palestine and Israel. China supports the
implementation of the two-State solution based on the

22

relevant Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the principle of land for peace. That will
require not only the efforts of the parties concerned,
but also the help and support of the international
community. All parties must try their best to encourage
Palestine and Israel to address their challenges
positively and to persevere in their efforts to achieve
the objective of the two States of Palestine and Israel
with the Arab people and Jewish people living in
peace.
Other issues in the Middle East are also important
components of the Middle East peace process. China is
pleased to see that the political and security situation in
Lebanon has improved somewhat and that legislative
elections have been carried out. China hopes that
Lebanon can form a new Government as soon as
possible. We respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon and express our concern
about the multiple security incidents that have taken
place recently in southern Lebanon. We call on all
parties concerned to fully implement resolution 1701
(2006) and encourage them to create conditions for the
resumption of negotiations between Syria and Israel.
China has always been committed to the
promotion of the Middle East peace process and
welcomes all initiatives conducive to that end. We
support Russia’s initiatives to convene an international
conference on the Middle East in Moscow within the
year. China encourages the Quartet and the Arab
countries to play an important role in persuading the
parties concerned to resume serious and direct
negotiations as soon as possible.
It is China’s hope that the Security Council will
address the question of the Middle East more actively.
We are ready to join with the wider international
community in pursuing the unremitting efforts to
achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): As Turkey aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of Sweden on behalf of the European Union, I will
keep my remarks brief.
First, I wish to thank Mr. Oscar FernandezTaranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his briefing.
As international efforts to reinvigorate the search
for peace in the Middle East are under way, the

09-42432

S/PV.6171

expectation is building within the international
community for a prompt resumption and early
conclusion of negotiations to resolve all permanent
status issues, as stated in the recent Quartet
declaration.
Given the fact that there has been no functional
process in the region for a while, the resumption of the
peace process on all its tracks has become a matter of
urgency. At this stage, strong affirmation is needed for
the framework of peace as embodied in the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Road Map obligations. It
is crucial that we keep dialogue channels open with all
parties and remain committed to the vision of two
States living side by side in peace and security. That
vision holds the key to a permanent peace in the
Middle East and has no alternative.
In this respect, we also wish to note the particular
importance of the Arab Peace Initiative, which Turkey
firmly supports. As we hope to enter a new and
intensive period, it is incumbent upon the parties to
adopt a constructive and positive approach. In this
vein, they should first fulfil their obligations emanating
from the Road Map and the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
Secondly, the parties must avoid taking steps and
declaring preconditions that might empty the peace
process of its content. The core issues are subject to
final status negotiations and should not be undermined
by unilateral acts. Any action that prejudges the final
outcome of the negotiations would only lead to a
further crisis of confidence among the parties.
Here, we wish to underline our concern, once
again, about the settlement activities of Israel in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, as well as measures
taken by Israel that could alter the character and status
of Jerusalem and further isolate East Jerusalem from
the rest of the Palestinian territory. Turkey has
repeatedly made it clear that such policies are not
compatible with peace efforts and hamper the peace
process. They are illegal and should stop.
There is a persistent need for international efforts
in the peace process to be accompanied by decisive
actions on the ground in order to offer a real change for
the Palestinians and give them the chance to lead a
better life. At this point, we sadly note that there has
been almost no progress in recent months on
implementing resolution 1860 (2009). We re-emphasize

09-42432

the fact that the full opening of the crossings into Gaza
is a must for the humanitarian response, socio-economic
recovery and reconstruction. The suffocation of Gaza
has led to immense suffering, unprecedented
unemployment and poverty rates, and almost total aid
dependency. This situation must be reversed.
I would also emphasize the fact that
reconciliation among Palestinian groups is also a must.
We hope that talks to this end will succeed and that the
presidential and legislative elections will be held at the
appropriate times.
As for Lebanon, we reaffirm our strong support
for resolution 1701 (2006) and its full implementation
by all parties. We hope that, following the elections in
Lebanon, a Government that embraces all segments of
the Lebanese people is established as soon as possible.
At the current stage, it is essential that all parties in
Lebanon act in conformity with the national dialogue
process initiated by President Michel Sleiman. We
believe that lasting stability in Lebanon is important
not only to Lebanon itself, but also to the peace and
security of the entire region.
In the Middle East, we need to maintain optimism
in the face of the challenges persisting in the region.
Currently, there have been some developments that do
give us some hope. Let us keep in mind that
opportunities rarely last forever and that now is the
right time to seize them. For our part, we continue to
work on all tracks of the Middle East peace process to
achieve a viable and comprehensive peace.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Uganda.
We thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. We also welcome the
representatives of Israel and Palestine to this debate.
We welcome the relative calm during the period
under review, despite a few incidents. It is clear from
the briefing that not much progress has been achieved
on the implementation of key elements of resolution
1860 (2009). We welcome the efforts undertaken by
different parties within and outside the region towards
the reinvigoration of the peace process. We are
encouraged by the affirmation by the Quartet,
following its recent meeting held in Trieste on 26 June,
in which its members reiterated their determination to

23

S/PV.6171

actively seek a comprehensive resolution of the Middle
East conflict. We welcome and support the convening
of the international conference on the Middle East in
Moscow later this year.
Uganda calls for an early resumption and
conclusion of negotiations between the parties towards
a lasting and comprehensive peace in the region
premised on a two-State solution and independent,
democratic and viable Palestinian State living side by
side with Israel in peace and security.
We welcome the recent removal of checkpoints
and roadblocks in the West Bank by Israel. We also
commend the recent steps taken to boost the
Palestinian economy in the West Bank. We
nevertheless reiterate our concern over the continued
blockade of Gaza. It is clear that this blockade
continues to have a negative impact on the fabric of
civilian life, and we call for its immediate end. We also
call for an end to arms smuggling into Gaza.
My delegation also reiterates its concern over the
significant rise in settler activities in both the West
Bank and East Jerusalem, which have continued to take
their toll on the population. We call for a freeze on all
settlement activity, including natural growth.
Uganda appreciates the efforts of the Palestinian
Authority to implement its obligations under the sector
reforms of the Road Map. We note the budgetary
constraints it is facing. We call on development
partners to fulfil their pledges in order to enable the
Palestinian Authority to meet its obligations, including
the payment of salaries to civil servants.
We are also concerned that divisions among
Palestinian groups persist, with a detrimental effect on
the overall negotiations related to the Middle East
question. The divisions have adversely affected the
reconstruction and development of Gaza. We reiterate
our call on the Palestinians to peacefully resolve their
differences. In this regard, we commend Egypt for its
role in promoting Palestinian unity and Palestinian
reconciliation. My delegation urges all parties to fully
comply with all Council resolutions.
With regard to Lebanon, we are deeply concerned
about the explosions that occurred on 14 July in the
area of Khirbat Salim and the subsequent injuries to a
number of troops serving with the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon. We call on all parties to
fully implement resolution 1701 (2006) and to avoid

24

engaging in any acts that may aggravate the situation in
Lebanon.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Mr. President, on
behalf of Palestine, I warmly congratulate you and
your friendly country, Uganda, on your presidency of
the Security Council and express our confidence that
you will ably guide the Council as it works on this
month’s agenda. We also express our appreciation to
Turkey for its wise stewardship of the Council in June.
I also wish to express our appreciation for today’s
monthly briefing to the Council delivered by the
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco. It remains an important
barometer of the situation on the ground and of the
many challenges that we continue to confront in our
search for peace and security in the region.
In the few months since the Security Council’s
most recent open debate on the situation (see
S/PV.6123), there have been some encouraging
developments. In late March, the twenty-first summit
of the League of Arab States, held in Doha, Qatar,
reaffirmed the Arab Peace Initiative, which has
emerged as a key component of the regional and
international efforts to achieve a just and
comprehensive settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and of the Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole.
Significantly, in a testament to the genuine Arab
commitment to and readiness for peace and
coexistence, the Initiative was renewed in spite of the
deep anger, mistrust and tensions permeating the
region following the criminal Israeli military onslaught
against the Gaza Strip earlier in the year. The
opportunity provided by the Arab Peace Initiative for
the advancement of peace must be urgently seized.
Other encouraging developments have been the
reaffirmation of the international consensus on the
necessity and parameters of a peace settlement and the
reassertion of the Security Council’s central role vis-àvis the achievement of such a settlement. These were
reflected in the Council’s adoption of a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2009/14) on 11 May 2009 at a
ministerial meeting held under its Russian Federation
presidency (see S/PV.6123). In following up to

09-42432

S/PV.6171

resolution 1850 (2008), the Council, inter alia,
reaffirmed the two-State solution, the irreversibility of
the peace process and support for an international
conference in Moscow this year on the Middle East
peace process, which, under the appropriate
circumstances, could constitute an important forum for
the resumption of peace negotiations that we all seek.
As evidenced in that debate and in other recent
deliberations on this matter, the achievement of a just
and lasting solution to the question of Palestine is a
political, security, legal, human rights, humanitarian
and moral responsibility and an imperative for the
international community that can no longer be delayed.
That, too, was the clear message conveyed in the
Quartet statement issued on 26 June 2009 in Trieste, as
well as in recent statements by the European Union,
which, inter alia, reaffirmed the Union’s commitment
to the principles and the basis of the peace process and
which also bolster the overwhelming international
consensus that has existed for so long regarding a
peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine.
Over the past few months, we have also been
encouraged by the more active, balanced approach
being taken by the new United States Administration of
President Barack Obama towards the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and the Arab-Israeli conflict as a
whole, based on a clear commitment to the two-State
solution for peace and justice. President Obama’s
speech in Cairo last month, as well as the diplomatic
efforts of his Special Envoy George Mitchell, have
renewed hopes in the vast potential of responsible, fair
United States leadership to contribute positively to the
achievement of a solution that will make peace and
security a reality for the Palestinian and Israeli peoples,
as well as for the Middle East region as a whole.
Despite those developments, the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, remains grave and the peace process
remains frozen. That is because of Israel’s continued
violation of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law, and its rejection of the appeals
to cease its violations and instead truly pursue peace on
the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008)
and the principle of land for peace, underpinning all
tracks of the peace process.
In contrast, the Palestinian leadership has
consistently endeavoured to uphold its obligations

09-42432

under international law, agreements reached and the
Road Map. It has made historic concessions and
repeatedly reaffirmed its commitment to the two-State
solution for peace; has made well-documented progress
in the fulfilment of its obligation to promote security
and the rule of law in the areas under the Palestinian
Authority; has strived, with the support of the
international donor community, to build the institutions
of the future Palestinian State; and has also continued
to pursue much-desired national reconciliation and
unity. All of that has been undertaken despite the
unending cycle of Israel’s violations, including of its
obligations as an occupying Power under the Fourth
Geneva Convention, of previous agreements and of its
obligations under the Road Map.
Indeed, Israel has repeatedly undermined
confidence and progress by refusing to refrain from
illegal, destructive and unilateral measures prejudicing
the outcome of negotiations on the core final status
issues — Jerusalem, settlements, refugees, borders,
security and water. It has continued to establish facts
on the ground, creating even more obstacles with
which to contend, in addition to its relentless
oppression and humiliation of the Palestinian people,
including the perpetration of gross human rights
violations and war crimes.
Israel’s credibility as a peace partner has thus
remained in serious question. That was the case with
the previous Government, which launched the Israeli
military aggression against Gaza and accelerated
settlement activities, and it is the case with the current
Government, which continues to flout the law, further
inflaming tensions and obstructing the resumption of
negotiations.
In the Gaza Strip, Israel continues to inflict vast
deprivations on the Palestinian civilian population
which it has so gravely traumatized and terrorized. The
disastrous impact of the Israeli military aggression on
Gaza’s socio-economic, humanitarian and security
situation is far from being ameliorated, as Israel
continues to blockade Gaza and prevent its
reconstruction, in grave violation of international
humanitarian law and United Nations resolutions,
including resolution 1860 (2009), and with total
disrespect for the repeated calls to lift its inhumane
siege and to cease forthwith its imprisonment and
collective punishment of the entire Palestinian people
in the Gaza Strip.

25

S/PV.6171

In that regard, we must also recall that more than
11,000 Palestinians remain captive and suffering in
Israeli jails and detention centres. Among the
unlawfully imprisoned and arbitrarily detained are
hundreds of children and women, as well as
democratically elected officials, and their numbers
continue to grow with Israel’s daily arrests.
At the same time, in flagrant defiance of
international law and the international community’s
demands for the cessation of all settlement activities,
Israel continues its construction of settlements and the
wall, its transfer of Israeli settlers, its land
confiscations, its home demolitions, its excavations
and its imposition of hundreds of checkpoints in the
West Bank. The current Government’s zealous support
for the illegal settlement enterprise has also further
emboldened settlers, whose acts of violence and
depravity against Palestinian civilians and property
have sharply escalated.
That these illegal, provocative colonization
measures are directly aimed at creating and
entrenching massive facts on the ground in order to
alter the demography and character of the territory and
to prejudge the negotiations can no longer be denied.
Moreover, this colonization drive has been most
intense in and around East Jerusalem, the heart of the
Palestinian territory, where the lives, communities and
growth of the indigenous Palestinian inhabitants of the
city are being deliberately stunted and suffocated by
the occupying Power’s aggressive pursuit of de facto
annexation.
It is widely recognized that the current situation
is abnormal, unjust and untenable. Yet, regrettably, no
real collective action has been taken in response. The
obvious question then is, what can and must be done
by us — all of us — to redress this situation?
A settlement freeze and the dismantlement of all
outposts is a priority. In the debate today, all Member
States who spoke unanimously concurred with this
request: an immediate and total settlement freeze.
Israeli colonization is destroying the contiguity,
integrity and unity of the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, thus destroying the viability of the future
Palestinian State and the prospects for realizing the
two-State solution. Attempts to minimize, belittle or
distract from the settlements issue must be rejected. All
settlement activities, including so-called natural
growth, are unlawful, unnatural and contradictory to

26

the principle of land for peace and the main objective
of the peace process, which is the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security on the basis of the 1967
borders.
In this connection, attempts to characterize Israeli
acceptance of the two-State solution as a concession
must also be rejected. The two-State solution not only
finds its basis in Security Council resolutions, but also
dates back to General Assembly partition resolution
181 (II) of 29 November 1947, to which Israel owes its
very existence.
At the same time, another priority is the lifting of
the Israelis’ blockade of Gaza and the sustained
opening of all border crossings, in accordance with
international humanitarian law, United Nations
resolutions and the 2005 Agreement on Movement and
Access. The free movement of persons and goods,
including unimpeded access for humanitarian
assistance, the commercial flows necessary for the
revival of the collapsed economy and the entry of
construction materials and adequate fuel supplies, are a
matter of urgency.
In this regard, we support the Secretary-General’s
proposal for the immediate launch of long-overdue
United Nations projects in Gaza as a start for
reconstruction. The proposal of starting with
$93 million, made by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the United Nations Development Programme,
which was agreed upon two years ago — and the
funding is there — is the first step that should be
undertaken. The only party that does not agree with
this proposal — all of us agree, including all Council
members — is the Government of Israel. The
Secretary-General is awaiting a positive answer from
the Government of Israel in this connection.
Moreover, we reaffirm the need to pursue
accountability for Israeli war crimes against the
Palestinian people. No Member State should be
permitted to breach the law so shamefully,
systematically
and
unapologetically
without
consequences. We thus await the report of the Human
Rights Council fact-finding mission and call for
follow-up of its findings and recommendations as well
as those of the Secretary-General’s Board of Inquiry.
This is crucial for ending impunity, redressing the
searing sense of injustice among the thousands of

09-42432

S/PV.6171

victims and allowing genuine healing to occur. It is
unquestionable that this is also essential for the longterm prospects for peace, reconciliation and
coexistence.
The international community must remain active
and consistent in the efforts to advance the
international consensus vis-à-vis the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, which is the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The recent encouraging developments must be seized
upon.
If faced with continued Israeli defiance, the
international community must use the political and
diplomatic tools at its disposal — foremost via the
Security Council — to collectively take the measures
necessary to bring Israel into compliance with the
Charter, international law and United Nations
resolutions, including with regard to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Only this will create a
different environment, in which the talk of and the
efforts for peace will actually have a chance to
succeed, bringing an end to the entire 1967 Israeli
occupation of Arab lands and enabling the Palestinian
people to exercise their inalienable rights in their
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, which is the key to the realization of a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in our region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Ms. Shalev (Israel): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your leadership of
the Council for the month of July. I thank Assistant
Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco
for
his
informative briefing.
I shall begin my statement by citing from a letter
sent by courageous residents of Khirbat Salim to the
President of Lebanon in the aftermath of the explosion
in their village earlier this month. The letter appeared
in the Lebanese newspaper Al-Mustaqbal on 16 July.
“The explosion of the arms depot in our
town Khirbat Salim is a most dangerous and
worrisome matter, which brings into the open
what everyone is trying to black out, to obfuscate
and to conceal, namely illegal arms and their
storage in our civilian areas and in basements
near our children by an organization that has
begun to pose a threat to our interests and to our
tranquil lives.

09-42432

“The policy that we are adopting thus far, of
concealing what is happening in reality, due to
various security pretexts, in effect allow the
armed elements to fulfil their interests at the
expense of ... the welfare and the prosperity of
people of the Lebanese nation.”
The letter continues:
“To the leaders of Hizbullah we say: we are
not so naive. We distinguish very well between
the sounds of regular fire and the sounds of an
explosion of cluster bombs and other explosive
materials. We have had enough of the pain and
the disasters of the so-called victory of July 2006.
If you, as you claim, tie your activity to religion
and Allah, then you must empty the residential
areas of weaponry and ammunition and of all else
that threatens our lives.”
This explosion, which occurred 13 days ago,
exposed the world to a dangerous phenomenon that
Israel has been warning about for years. It
demonstrated that the Hizbullah terrorist organization,
together with its two sponsors — Member States of this
Organization — continue to operate actively south of
the Litani river in overt violation of resolution
1701 (2006), as this Council was informed last week
by Under-Secretary-General Le Roy. This severe
incident — the most grave in a series of violations by
Hizbullah over the last three years — demonstrates to
the world the volatile reality on the ground.
It further shows the challenges to the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), namely, an
unenforced arms embargo along the Lebanese-Syrian
border and the presence of Hizbullah on the ground.
This terrorist group threatens Israel, Lebanon and the
region, as it continues to build its military
infrastructure, both north and south of the Litani River.
Above all, the Khirbat Salim explosion
demonstrated that the work of the Security Council in
Lebanon is necessary and urgent. In that regard, I
congratulate you, Mr. President, on convening the
consultations and briefing by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations held on 23 July. However,
there is more to be done.
The repeated breaches by Hizbullah of the
Council’s demands are indicative of the danger posed
to our region by Iran. From southern Lebanon to Gaza,
the arming, training and financing of terrorism bear the

27

S/PV.6171

same certificate of origin: Tehran. The Iranian
Government remains the world’s greatest sponsor of
terrorism. It sabotages the peace process. It threatens
the stability of countries in the region.

recently stated, if the Palestinians recognize Israel as
the Jewish State, we are ready to agree to a real peace
agreement — a demilitarized Palestinian State side by
side with the Jewish State.

Moreover, Iran continues to pursue the
development of nuclear weapons, together with longrange missiles. That is a clear threat to peace and to
security. Such grave realities reflect an unsustainable
future. The Security Council has already addressed that
dangerous phenomenon, but there is more to be done on
this issue, too. We call upon the Council to act urgently
and effectively to put an end to the Iranian nuclear
threat and to stem Iranian terrorist interference. The
Council must consider more effective ways to impose
its arms embargo along the Lebanese-Syrian border. It
should strengthen the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon and the Lebanese armed forces and establish
clear benchmarks to disarm and dismantle Hizbullah.

This year, Israel took a number of successful
security coordination steps that extend Palestinian
movement, strengthen Palestinian security forces and
improve the Palestinian economy. Thus, 152
roadblocks have been dismantled or have extended
their hours of passage. Such measures offer
improvements to the lives of Palestinians in the West
Bank and serve as important confidence-building
measures. A special ministerial committee headed by
the Prime Minister was established to facilitate
economic projects and integration between Israel and
the West Bank. Such efforts, including an industrial
zone in Jenin, an agricultural export venture in Jericho
and the creation of tourist infrastructure along the
Jordan River, are only the beginning. Yet they offer
concrete ways to build a foundation of coexistence in
our region.

Turning to Gaza, the Council cannot ignore the
second terrorist front that Israel confronts — the
Hamas rulers of Gaza. We cannot ignore the smuggling
of deadly weapons and arms into Gaza, which, sadly,
hasten a future military conflict. As acknowledged in a
recent report by Mr. Robert Serry, Israel advised that it
had detected the smuggling into Gaza of no less than
330 mortars, 37 rockets, roughly 40 anti-tank weapons,
46 anti-aircraft missiles and 17 tons of explosives.
Those numbers reflect only part of Hamas’s
military build-up and demonstrate its desire to provoke
another conflict. The Hamas terrorist organization
continues to reject the terms established by the
international community, namely, recognition of the
State of Israel, an end to violence and acceptance of
previous agreements between Israel and the
Palestinians.
Israel desires peace. Our desire for peace is
rooted in our yearning for a future in which Israelis and
Palestinians will have put an end to the suffering and
bereavement that have afflicted our region for too long.
We seek a brighter future, a future in which Israel and
all of its Arab neighbours can better fulfil their
aspirations and pursue their dream of leading normal,
peaceful and creative lives.
Peace is built solely through direct negotiations
between the parties themselves. Our partners in the
peace process must recognize that Israel has always
been and will continue to be the eternal homeland of
the Jewish people. As Israel’s Prime Minister

28

Earlier this month, the Quartet’s Middle East
Envoy, Mr. Tony Blair, publicly applauded Israel’s
concrete efforts to promote peace. He noted that such
steps had not been appropriately commended, or even
acknowledged, by members of the international
community.
Israel continues to call for the immediate
resumption of a political dialogue with the Palestinian
Authority. Israel will continue to build a foundation of
peace that promotes progress on economic, political
and security-related matters. We call upon all our
neighbours to translate into action the spirit of the Arab
Peace Initiative. Admittedly, dangers and risks still
remain. In the West Bank, Israeli and Palestinian
security forces have successfully curbed terrorist
activities. However, such success has not yet
significantly diminished the threat at hand.
We now stand at a critical juncture. One path is
the way of terrorism and hatred. It is the way of
Hamas, the way of Hizbullah and the way of terror. It
is the way of Iran. It offers violence, not vision;
confrontation, not coexistence. A second way lies
ahead of us, as well. It is the way of peace, prosperity
and mutual respect. It is a way that represents a better
future for all in our beleaguered region. It offers hope
to our peoples. Israel, for its part, has made a clear
choice — to pursue the way of peace.

09-42432

S/PV.6171

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. My delegation is
confident that your wisdom, knowledge and diplomatic
skills will enable this body to fulfil its duties. Allow
me also to express our deep appreciation to your
predecessor, Permanent Representative of Turkey
Ambassador Baki İlkin, for his able leadership. With
his team, he managed several crises and challenges
successfully. I also wish to thank Mr. Oscar FernandezTaranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his exhaustive and comprehensive briefing.
Once again, we are meeting to discuss the
situation in the Middle East; and once again, peace, as
well as the region, are facing critical challenges and
threats. What was supposed to be the year of peace and
a window of opportunity started with a systematic
Israeli war on Gaza. Indeed, for each call for peace,
Israel is building a settlement. For each step that the
international community takes towards establishing a
Palestinian State, Israel introduces its own definition of
that State and imposes its own conditions: no control
over the airspace, the sea or crossing points; no army;
no contiguous territory; no sovereignty; no Jerusalem;
and no return of refugees. There is only one yes,
namely, the responsibility of that so-called State to
ensure the security of Israel. In that context, one might
ask: Who will defend Palestine and the Palestinian
people? Who will defend the rights of Palestinian
refugees to return to their homeland? Who will defend
Gaza, the West Bank and Jerusalem? Who will defend
the peace process?
In the midst of this precarious situation, and again
from Lebanon, where the Arab Peace Initiative was
adopted in 2002, the President of Lebanon, General
Sleiman, reiterated the importance of this initiative
when he stated that “the Arab peace initiative is an
opportunity to achieve a just and comprehensive peace”.
He urged the United States and Europe “to exert more
pressure on Israel to accept a fair peace initiative”.
How hopeful we were when we heard statements
from various leaders from all over the world
highlighting the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative,
the need to put an end to settlements and the need to
address the continuing humanitarian crisis in Gaza.

09-42432

Today, more than ever before, the will for peace
should prevail. Peace is not merely a choice. It was, is
and continues to be a necessity, and it should be
translated into a reality. We consider that the upcoming
Moscow conference should build on well-established
terms of reference for the peace process, such as the
principles of the Madrid Peace Conference, the Arab
Peace Initiative in its entirety and relevant Security
Council resolutions. As for the Moscow conference, an
honest commitment should be invested in it in order to
achieve a just, durable and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East. We owe that to future generations in the
region and throughout the world.
I turn now to issues related to Lebanon. Almost
three years after the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006), which ended Israel’s
aggression against my country, the message from the
President of Lebanon is clear: Lebanon remains
committed to the full implementation of that
resolution. Lebanon reiterates its call upon the
international community to exert pressure on Israel to
abide by its obligations under that resolution and to put
an end to its violations.
Almost three years after the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006), we in Lebanon are still
suffering from Israeli violations on a daily basis. Israel
continues to violate Lebanon’s land, sea and airspace.
The Secretary-General, in paragraph 63 of his tenth
report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2009/330), clearly called upon Israel to cease
immediately all overflights of Lebanese territory,
which are in violation of Lebanese sovereignty and
resolution 1701 (2006).
Israel continues its occupation of the northern
part of Ghajar, in violation of Lebanon sovereignty and
resolution 1701 (2006). In paragraph 64 of the same
report, the Secretary-General noted with concern, that
the Israeli Forces continued their occupation of part of
the village of Ghajar, and in accordance with its
obligations under resolution 1701 (2006), Israel must
complete its withdrawal from this area. Israel continues
to occupy the Sheba’a farmlands and Kfar Shouba
hills, in violation of our sovereignty over our land.
As if all those violations were not enough, the
Lebanese authorities have also dismantled Israeli spy
networks, which are in blatant violation of Lebanese
sovereignty and relevant Security Council resolutions.

29

S/PV.6171

In addition to the delay in providing complete
information on the strike data regarding the locations
of the millions of cluster munitions with which Israel
pounded Lebanon during the July 2006 war, killing or
maiming hundreds of Lebanese civilians, Israeli
officials are bombarding Lebanon with public threats.
These are hostile statements on launching a massive
and destructive war.
All of these violations are aimed at destabilizing
Lebanon and threatening its security. They threaten
peace and stability throughout the region and add to
existing tensions when serious efforts are being exerted
to achieve a comprehensive, just and durable peace.
As for the incidents which occurred two weeks
ago in the south of Lebanon, my delegation has already
shared its views on this matter in its letter of 22 July
2009. A joint investigation commission between the
Lebanese army and the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) has been established. The
investigation is still under way, and preliminary
information of the investigation showed that the arms
and ammunitions found were remnants of the July 2006
war. While we are still waiting for the conclusion of
this investigation, we refuse to anticipate the outcome,
and we reject any accusations launched by Israel of
arms smuggling into UNIFIL’s area of operation.
Whenever southern Lebanon is mentioned, the
image of UNIFIL appears. UNIFIL, which has been
present there since 1978, the year of the first Israeli
invasion, has become part of the social scenery. The
Force, like Lebanese civilians, has suffered losses
during successive Israeli acts of presumed “selfdefence”. The events known as Qana 1 and Qana 2 are
there to remind us of that. An understanding of the
culture and the social traditions of the population and
close consultation and cooperation with the Lebanese
army have ensured UNIFIL’s success and will reinforce
its important role and established image in the south.
The international community and, in particular,
the Security Council need to be fully aware of Israel’s
intention to change the status quo, through attempts to
create new facts along the Blue Line and through
provocation, by establishing new realities on the
ground. Hence, our repeated calls to achieve real and
sustainable progress and to move from this precarious
cessation of hostilities to a permanent ceasefire.
In the framework of resolution 1701 (2006),
UNIFIL has the mandate to defend civilians and

30

prevent another Israeli aggression against Lebanon. In
that context, on 4 July, my Government addressed a
letter to the United Nations which requested the
renewal of UNIFIL’s mandate for one additional year
and without any amendments. While looking forward
to the upcoming renewal without any changes — either
in the mandate or in any of the relevant rules and
concepts of operation — my delegation would like to
express Lebanon’s appreciation to all troopcontributing countries and to all peacekeepers for their
courage and relentless efforts to maintain security and
stability in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Let me begin, Mr. President, by thanking you
for convening this meeting. My thanks go also to the
former Permanent Representative of friendly Turkey
and his delegation for the excellent and wise manner in
which they guided the work of the Security Council
last month. I thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
his briefing.
The experience of the past — remote or recent —
shows that those who take the path of war or the use of
force to achieve political goals face only destruction.
That is the case with Israel today. Israel continues to
insist on using force to impose occupation, illegality,
oppression and injustice upon peoples. When we say
“today”, we refer not only to six decades of
occupation, but also to the 17 years that have elapsed
since peace negotiations began in Madrid. Those
negotiations have only damaged and dimmed the
prospects for peace. The only positive contribution of
the peace process is that it has revealed the obvious
truth that Israel is the principal obstacle to achieving
the long-awaited peace.
Syria, as an Arab State, believes that peace is a
strategic objective encompassing the restoration of all
rights and the return of all occupied territories. While
the Arab States sought to achieve peace by adopting
their Arab Peace Initiative seven years ago at the 2002
Beirut summit, Israel, rather than responding
positively, went on to commit further crimes,
expanding its construction of settlements and its
aggression against Palestinians, Lebanese and Syrians;
undertaking extensive, repeated and provocative
military manoeuvres on its borders; creating espionage

09-42432

S/PV.6171

networks in Lebanon and repeatedly threatening war
there. In his most recent speech, Prime Minister
Netanyahu clearly rejected the objective requisites of
achieving peace in the Middle East and all the bases of
the peace process identified by the international
community over the 20 years since that process was
begun. His repudiation of the need for peace on all
tracks reaffirms Israel’s lack of genuine will to
establish peace in the region and the absence of an
Israeli partner in the peace process.
The Palestinians have lived under the yoke of
occupation for more than six decades, during which
they have endured the worst manifestations of injustice
and subjugation and Israel has pursued its escalations
and aggressions by confiscating land, building the
racist separation wall, continuing its settlement
activity, and attacking Palestinian farmers and
international activists. In spite of all these illegal and
immoral acts, Israel enjoys an impunity that Arab and
international public opinion finds hard to understand.
Our meeting today coincides with the fifth
anniversary of the adoption by the International Court
of Justice of its advisory opinion enshrining the
illegality of the separation wall and calling on Israel to
destroy it. Israel continues to reject all international
appeals to that end, and occupied Jerusalem is
experiencing the most painful moment in its history as
Israel’s vicious aggression threatens its very existence
and its Muslim and Christian identities, including
excavations under the Al-Aqsa mosque and the
campaign to destroy Palestinian homes. What can we
say when confronted with the image of Palestinians
forced to destroy their own homes and expelled in the
name of Israeli control and Judaization of Jerusalem?
Nearly 2 million Palestinians have been expelled in
this new campaign of ethnic cleansing, which, under
cover of what Israeli politicians call the “Jewishness”
of the State of Israel, represents the darkest pages of
human activity that we had hoped closed forever.
The Palestinian inhabitants of Gaza continue to
suffer under the blockade. Following the thousands of
casualties claimed by the Israeli aggression there, my
delegation studied the report compiled by the
independent Board of Inquiry dispatched by the
Secretary-General to Gaza on Israel’s crimes against
United Nations property and Palestinian civilians,
including women and children. The report noted
Israel’s use of white phosphorous and its responsibility
for deaths and injuries inside United Nations buildings

09-42432

and for damaging those buildings, all of which
constitute war crimes, including the Board’s findings
with respect to Israel’s use of Gazan women, children
and the elderly as human shields and its intentional
destruction of United Nations infrastructure in Gaza.
The international community and the Security
Council in particular must therefore call for the
immediate lifting of Israel’s unjust blockade of the
Palestinian people in Gaza and the removal of all
border crossings into Gaza. It should also recognize the
need for international guarantees that Israel will not
destroy the infrastructure facilities and buildings that
have been or will be rebuilt, pursuant to the
recommendations of the Board of Inquiry led by
Mr. Ian Martin. The leaders of Israel must be held
responsible for their repeated crimes, legally classified
as war crimes, crimes against humanity and crimes of
genocide.
Israel continues to refuse to restore the occupied
Golan Heights to its homeland, Syria, and to implement
the decisions of the international community, including
resolution 497 (1981). Israel’s practices in the occupied
Syrian Golan exceed all legal and moral bounds,
including the recent forcible detention of the 2-year-old
Fahd Louay Shker under the pretext that he had been
born outside Israel while his parents studied in Syria.
Israel is pursuing its terrorist and oppressive policies
against Syrian citizens, confiscating their land,
imprisoning them, expanding settlements and planting
landmines. We recall that Israeli mines in the Syrian
Golan have resulted in 531 casualties, of whom 202
died, many of them children, and have permanently
disabled 329 for life.
Israel continues to refuse to allow Syrian citizens
in the occupied Golan Heights to visit their homeland
through the Quneitra crossing. This is at a time when
Israel, which claims to be a democratic State and to
respect human rights, has held many Syrian citizens in
its prisons for more than a quarter of a century, along
with 11,000 Palestinians.
Added to this are the various hostile declarations
by Israeli leaders which run counter to peace. The
question that arises is this: can Israel, with its past and
current Governments — the latter the most extremist in
Israel’s history — having both openly and secretly
blocked any possibility of reaching a peace agreement
since the beginning of the peace process, be a partner
in the peace process?

31

S/PV.6171

We just heard the statement by the Israeli
representative with respect to the need to put an end to
arms smuggling at the Syrian-Lebanese border. But
then we see the Secretary-General’s report on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1701
(2006) (S/2009/330), reports of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and reports by Lebanese
authorities which contradict what the Israeli
representative said. All of this is something everyone
knows today.
This is a desperate attempt by Israel to distract the
attention of the international community from the
crimes it has committed in occupied Palestine, in the
Golan Heights and in Lebanon. It is also an attempt to
conceal its 4,268 documented violations of Lebanese
sovereignty and of resolution 1701 (2006) since 2006.
These are not only flagrant violations of resolution
1701 (2006); they are also a threat to peace and security
in the region. This is why the Security Council must

32

hold Israel to account for these violations and must take
the necessary measures to put an end to them.
Syria has opted for a just and comprehensive
peace. This was a strategic choice based on wellknown terms of reference established in resolutions of
international legitimacy. This means the return of all
occupied Arab lands, including the occupied Syrian
Golan, up to the borders of 4 June 1967 and the
creation of an independent Palestinian State with
Jerusalem as its capital.
The continued occupation runs counter to peace
and necessitates taking all possible measures to put an
end to it.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers on my list for this meeting. I intend, with the
concurrence of members of the Council, to suspend the
meeting until 3.15 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.25 p.m.

09-42432
