A/75/634–S/2020/1182

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
9 December 2020
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 39
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-fifth year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2543 (2020), in which the Secretary-General was
requested to report every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including political, humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of the previous report dated 18 August 2020 ( A/75/378S/2020/809).

II. Relevant developments
3.
Ministerial nominations by the President, Ashraf Ghani, and the Chairperson of
the High Council for National Reconciliation, Abdullah Abdullah, were presented to
the Wolesi Jirga (lower house of parliament) for a vote of confidence. The peace
negotiations between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban were
launched on 12 September in Doha. High levels of violence were sustained in
Afghanistan, in particular in the south, resulting in continued significant numbers of
civilian casualties despite the launch of the peace negotiations. The Government
continued to promote regional consensus on intra-Afghan peace and reconciliation,
economic cooperation and connectivity. Humanitarian needs climbed owing to
violence, natural disasters, heightened levels of food insecurity and the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, with a total of 18.4 million people estimated to be in
need of humanitarian assistance in 2021, up from 14 million in mid-2020. At the 2020
Afghanistan Conference, held in Geneva on 23 and 24 November, renewed
international commitments were given in support of the country’s peace, prosperity
and self-reliance.

20-16138 (E)

141220

*2016138*

A/75/634
S/2020/1182

A.

Political developments
4.
Pursuant to the political agreement concluded between Mr. Ghani and
Mr. Abdullah on 17 May, which provides for an equal share of Cabinet posts,
Mr. Ghani announced a total of 13 ministerial nominees and two State ministers, and
Mr. Abdullah announced 10 ministerial appointments and one State minister. All
assumed their functions as acting ministers. On 21 October, Mr. Ghani introduced the
23 acting ministers (including 4 women) and the other three government nominees
requiring parliamentary approval to the Wolesi Jirga plenary for a vote of confidence.
He also continued to appoint provincial governors. Since March, 22 of the 34
provincial governors have been replaced.
5.
On 14 August, the President issued a decree establishing a High Council for
Women, intended to support the empowerment of women and the implementation of
the Government’s commitments regarding women’s rights. Membership, authority
and the relationship between the Council and existing government structures are yet
to be defined.
6.
Further to the call for electoral reforms in the agreement of 17 May, the Ministry
of Justice began a review of the election law and the political parties law and started
work on legislation concerning political party and electoral campaign financing. Civil
society organizations, including the Civil Society Election Coordination Group and
the Free and Fair Election Forum of Afghanistan, submitted their electoral reform
proposals to the electoral management bodies. The latter initiated planning for the
delayed Wolesi Jirga election for Ghazni Province, contingent upon security,
agreement on constituencies and budget, and commenced recruitment for 199
positions.
7.
In Kabul, from 7 to 9 August, 3,000 community representatives from across
Afghanistan, including 700 women, gathered for the consultative peace loya jirga for
consultations on the release of an additional 400 prisoners, as sought by the Taliban.
On 9 August, the representatives adopted a resolution in which they recommended
the prisoner release and called for the immediate start of negotiations, a ceasefire and
the preservation of democracy, the constitutional republic and the basic rights of all
Afghans, including women and minorities. The resolution was broadly welcomed by
Afghan political figures and civil society groups, although some commentators
expressed concern about the prisoner release and conside ration for the rights of
victims of war. The Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission noted that
the President did not have the authority to release individuals convicted of war crimes
and crimes against humanity. On 10 August, the President issued a decree authorizing
the release of the 400 prisoners.
8.
The Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban continued preparations for
negotiations. From 23 to 26 August, a Taliban delegation, led by its deputy and head
of the Political Commission, Mullah Baradar, met in Pakistan with the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, Shah Mahmood Qureshi, and the Special Representative
of Pakistan for Afghanistan, Mohammad Sadiq. On 26 August, the Taliban announced
the formation of a 20-member negotiation team. On 5 September, the size of the team
was increased to 21 members, all men, and the leadership was transferred to Mawlawi
Abdul Hakim. In early September, the Taliban agreed to the transfer by the
Government of Afghanistan of six prisoners to house arrest in Q atar, instead of their
release, and to release or account for a further 22 Afghan government soldiers, which
was completed in the week leading up to the opening of the talks.
9.
The Afghanistan peace negotiations were launched on 12 September in Doha.
Delegations of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban and
representatives of the international community attended a ceremony opened by the

2/16

20-16138

A/75/634
S/2020/1182

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Qatar, Mohammed bin
Abdulrahman bin Jassim Al-Thani, Mr. Abdullah, Mr. Baradar and the Secretary of
State of the United States of America, Michael R. Pompeo. Remarks were then given
virtually by the ministers for foreign affairs of 13 countries, the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Josep Borrell, the SecretaryGeneral of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Jens Stoltenberg, the Secretary General of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, Yousef Al-Othaimeen, and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. The two negotiating teams then established
contact groups to discuss a potential code of conduct and other practical matters. In
meetings held throughout September and October, the parties discussed issues
relating to the school of Islamic jurisprudence to be referenced as part of a dispute
resolution mechanism, as well as the putative basis for the negotiations, which the
Taliban insisted should be the agreement concluded on 29 February with the United
States. The agenda for the negotiation is still to be agreed.
10. During his visit to Doha on 5 and 6 October, Mr. Ghani discussed ongoing peace
efforts with the Emir of Qatar, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, and the Prime
Minister of Qatar, Sheikh Khalid bin Khalifa bin Abdulaziz Al -Thani. Mr. Abdullah
continued to seek regional support for the Afghan peace process, with trips to
Islamabad from 28 to 30 September to meet with the Prime Minister of Pakistan,
Imran Khan, Mr. Qureshi and Mr. Sadiq; to Delhi from 6 to 10 October to meet with
the Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi, and the Minister for External Affairs,
Subrahmanyam Jaishankar; to Tehran from 18 to 20 October to meet with the
President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Hassan Rouhani, and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mohammad Javad Zarif; and to Uzbekistan from 10 to 11 November
to meet with the President, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Abdulaziz Kamilov, and other officials, as well as the Grand Mufti and Chair of the
Muslim Board of Uzbekistan, Usman Khan Alimov. Meanwhile, the political
opposition engaged with regional actors: the leader of the Hizb -i Islami party,
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, visited Pakistan, and Marshal Abdul Rashid Dostum travelled
to Turkey and India.
11. International and regional partners accelerated their engagement in support of
the peace negotiations. Representatives of the host country support group from
Germany, Indonesia, Norway and Uzbekistan gathered in Doha, along with the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). International special
representatives and regional partners continued their engagement in support of the
negotiations. The United States Special Representative for Afghanistan
Reconciliation, Zalmay Khalilzad, met with the Chief of Army Staff of Pakistan,
General Qamar Javed Bajwa, and Mr. Sadiq in Islamabad on 14 September; with
Mr. Jaishankar and the National Security Adviser of India, Ajit Doval, in Delhi on
15 September; and with the President of Tajikistan, Emomali Rahmon, in Dushanbe
on 2 October. On 16 September, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, Ine
Eriksen Søreide, met virtually with Mr. Baradar to discuss the negotiations and called
for an inclusive peace process with war victims, women, ethnic minorities and rural
communities. The Special Envoy of China for Afghanistan, Liu Jian, met with
Mr. Baradar in Doha on 19 September; this was followed by a meeting in Islamabad
with Mr. Sadiq on 24 September, in which Mr. Liu expressed the support of China for
the Afghan peace process. On 3 November, the special envoys for Afghanistan of
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Russian Federation held a trilateral
meeting in Moscow to voice their support for peace and stability in Afghanistan. On
7 November, the Special Envoy of Finland for the 2020 Afghanist an Conference,
Janne Taalas, met separately with the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and Taliban
negotiation teams in Doha to give them briefings on the upcoming conference.

20-16138

3/16

A/75/634
S/2020/1182

12. With violence on the rise, efforts continued in order to push for a reduction of
violence. Mr. Khalilzad met with Mr. Baradar, Mr. Hakim and other Taliban officials
in Doha on various occasions in October and November to discuss adherence to the
agreement between the United States and the Taliban, and announced on 15 October
that a “reset” had been agreed to, aimed at decreasing military activity and violence
and strengthening compliance with the agreement. Mr. Khalilzad also held meetings
with the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan negotiation team while in Doha.
13. Women’s organizations continued public advocacy, with the Afghan Women’s
Network and the women’s coalition for peace “Our Voice, Our Future” publishing an
open letter to the Taliban on 13 August, expressing concern at the ambiguity of the
movement’s position on women’s rights. On 15 August, women’s networks in 15
provinces held simultaneous rallies and issued a statement conveying the concerns
and expectations of rural and urban women and a call for an immediate ceasefire. On
8 September, several Afghan women’s organizations sent letters to Germany,
Indonesia, Norway, Qatar, the United States and Uzbekistan, asking for their support
in drawing attention to human rights, women’s rights, political participation and
demilitarization in the context of the peace talks. On 13 Octo ber, several Afghan
women’s networks sent an open letter to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, expressing concern regarding the intra-Afghan peace process and
seeking support for a just, durable and inclusive peace process.
14. Civil society engagement in the peace process also increased. On 30 September,
a collective of Hazara diaspora groups issued a statement welcoming the intra -Afghan
peace talks while calling for an inclusive peace process that guarantees the full
participation of Hazara and other ethnic groups in a future political system. The State
Ministry for Peace organized 20 outreach initiatives for various stakeholder groups,
including virtual consultations on 13 and 28 October between the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan negotiation team and victims of war and a women’s group. On
25 October, the Ulama Council of Afghanistan held a gathering of around 2,000 ulama
representing the country’s Sunni and Shia populations to express support for the
Afghan peace process.
15. UNAMA continued to support local-level conflict resolution and peacebuilding
efforts with subnational authorities and civil society. Within the context of
COVID-19-related limitations, the Mission began eight new local peace initiatives
while continuing its collaboration with national partners in implementing the national
strategy on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. In the central region, it provided a platform for women and youth
representatives of six provinces to engage with representatives of the Afghan peace
structures to discuss the negotiations. On 1 and 2 October, the Mission supported a
gathering of nearly 100 women religious scholars, community representa tives and
activists from across Afghanistan to discuss women’s rights and political participation
within Islam. In October, participants in a series of radio conversations supported by
UNAMA in eight provinces discussed the importance of the inclusion and
participation of women in areas of peace and security, stressing that women were
skilled peace brokers, experienced negotiators and key to the success of any future
political settlement. The Mission promoted support by international donors for these
and other relevant programmes and activities.
16. To mark the twentieth anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and UNAMA organized a high-level dialogue on 26 October on 20
years of hard-fought progress on women’s rights in Afghanistan. The First Lady, Rula
Ghani, delivered keynote remarks, emphasizing the role of women in areas of peace
and security at the provincial and central levels. Afghan women members of civil
society organizations reiterated that sustainable peace could not be achieved without
4/16

20-16138

A/75/634
S/2020/1182

the active participation of women. On 29 October, the Executive Director of the
Women and Children Legal Research Foundation, Zarqa Yaftali, also representing an
Afghan non-governmental organization working group, gave a briefing to the
Security Council, calling for political accountability from the international
community and the United Nations to ensure that g ains in terms of women’s rights
and participation are not compromised in the peace talks. On 31 October, the Friends
of Afghan Women Ambassadors’ Group in Kabul issued a statement to celebrate the
achievements of Afghan women peacebuilders and reaffirm sup port for their future.
17. Dialogues supported by UNAMA to mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations provided an opportunity to galvanize ideas on ways to shape a better
future collectively. In discussions in several municipal districts of K abul in
September, young people, including women and persons with disabilities, shared their
vision of a future free of violence and discrimination in which all people can meet
their full potential.

B.

Security
18. The security situation in Afghanistan remained highly volatile. From 13 July to
12 November, the United Nations recorded 10,439 security-related incidents,
representing an 18 per cent increase compared with the same period in 2019. Armed
clashes accounted for 63 per cent of all security in cidents. There were 6,599 armed
clashes, representing a 38 per cent increase compared with the same period in 2019.
Anti-government elements conducted 92 per cent of all security-related incidents and
95 per cent of armed clashes. The total number of air strikes decreased from 689 to
416. A total of 389 assassinations were reported, a 21 per cent increase compared with
the same period in 2019. The targets of the assassinations included members of the
security forces, government officials and civilians, and religious leaders known for
being critical of the Taliban. On 24 October, the acting Minister of the Interior,
Massoud Andarabi, announced that the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
had killed Abu Muhsin Al-Misri (also known as Husam Abd-al-Ra’uf), a senior
commander of Al-Qaida in the Indian subcontinent.
19. The highest number of security incidents was recorded in the southern region,
followed by the northern and eastern regions. Collectively, incidents in those regions
accounted for 62 per cent of all security incidents in the country, with Kandahar,
Helmand, Nangarhar and Balkh Provinces recording most security incidents. The
Taliban conducted attacks on several district administrative centres across the country
and increased pressure on provincial capitals such as Kunduz, Lashkar Gah and Tirin
Kot. Levels of reported armed clashes increased steadily from mid -July to the end of
October. October was the month with the highest level of armed clashes since the
United Nations started to keep records in 2007.
20. Throughout the country, high-profile attacks by anti-government elements
continued, with 42 suicide attacks recorded, including 30 attacks with suicide vehicle borne improvised explosive devices targeting the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces and 1 targeting the convoy of the Governor of Laghman Province.
21. The city of Kabul witnessed three high-profile attacks during the reporting
period and 65 incidents of improvised explosive device detonations. The targets of
these complex attacks were civilians, while 82 per cent of all improvised explosive
device attacks targeted Afghan National Defence and Security Forces or government
entities.
22. The number of incidents claimed by or attributed to Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant-Khorasan (ISIL-K) was lower in 2020 than in the same period in 2019 (11
compared with 343). On 18 August, in Kabul, ISIL-K claimed a rocket attack that

20-16138

5/16

A/75/634
S/2020/1182

targeted the Presidential Palace during the Independence Day speech delivered by
Mr. Ghani. A total of 14 rockets were reportedly launched from two locations in
Kabul, with three people killed in the attack. On 28 August, ISIL-K claimed one attack
in the city of Herat, with a magnetic improvised explosive device attack targeting an
ice cream shop. On 24 October, ISIL-K claimed an attack at an education centre in
Kabul, with at least 25 people killed and 52 injured. On 2 November, ISIL -K claimed
responsibility for an attack on Kabul University, resulting in 22 people killed and 24
injured.
23. Overall, progress relating to security sector reform was limited, focusing on
reshaping local protection forces and strengthening security management in urban
areas. International funding for the Afghan Local Police ended in September 2020; it
is expected that by the end of 2020 two thirds of the forces will be integrated into the
Afghan National Police and the Afghan National Army Territorial Force, while the
remainder are to retire. The security charter plan, launched in July 2020 by the
Government and local communities, was met with concerns voiced in parliament that
communities were being mobilized to enhance the national security forces, with no
tangible improvements in security. At the subnational level, 100 new district chiefs
of police, all men, were appointed.
24. There were 34 incidents involving United Nations personnel during the
reporting period, including 11 incidents of intimidation and 19 criminal -related
incidents. A United Nations staff member who was abducted by anti-government
elements on 13 September was released on 17 September.

C.

Regional cooperation
25. On 20 August, the acting Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan,
Mohammad Haneef Atmar, held virtual consultations with the State Councillor and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of China, Wang Yi, Mr. Jaishankar and Mr. Zarif to
discuss regional and international support for peace, connectivity and bilateral
relations. China, India and the Islamic Republic of Iran expressed support for the
consultative peace loya jirga, the Afghanistan peace nego tiations and preserving the
achievements of the past 19 years.
26. On 25 August, the first senior officials’ meeting in 2020 of the Heart of Asia Istanbul Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable
Afghanistan was held, co-chaired by Afghanistan and Tajikistan. Participants
reiterated support for an inclusive peace process. Owing to COVID -19 restrictions,
many of the planned activities under the seven confidence-building measures were
deferred.
27. On 31 August, the second review meeting of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action
Plan for Peace and Solidarity was held in Kabul, chaired by the Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Mirwais Nab, and the Foreign Secretary of Pakistan,
Sohail Mahmood. Following the meeting, the Government of Pakistan announced the
liberalization of its visa policy with Afghanistan to allow the issuance of long -term
multiple-entry visas to Afghan nationals visiting Pakistan for medical treatment,
family matters, business and education, among other things.
28. Efforts aimed at enhancing regional economic and infrastructure connectivity
also continued. On 28 and 29 August, Mr. Atmar travelled to Tashkent, where he met
with the Prime Minister of Uzbekistan, Abdulla Aripov, the National Security
Adviser, Viktor Makhmudov, and Mr. Kamilov. Mr. Kamilov emphasized his
country’s support for an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. The two
delegations highlighted the importance of expanding cooperation in trade and
transport. The Afghan electricity company Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat and the

6/16

20-16138

A/75/634
S/2020/1182

Ministry of Energy of Uzbekistan signed a 10-year power transmission agreement on
28 August. During a visit to Kabul from 20 to 22 October, an Uzbek delegation and
Afghan counterparts signed several cooperation agreements to further strengthen
economic and trade ties.
29. Afghanistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran continued to intensify efforts to
improve economic and energy cooperation. At a meeting held in Tehran on
6 September, the Afghanistan-Iran joint committee on transport discussed ways to
improve transport and transit efficiencies. From 22 to 25 September, the Islamic
Republic of Iran held a three-day technical exhibition in Kabul, showcasing advanced
technologies in the fields of electricity, energy, telec ommunications and engineering.
On the margins of the event, Afghan and Iranian officials discussed the development
of electricity infrastructure to boost the two countries’ energy cooperation.
30. On 17 and 18 September, Mr. Atmar visited Dushanbe, where he met with
Mr. Rahmon, the Prime Minister, Qohir Rasulzoda, the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Sirojiddin Muhriddin, and other senior officials. Discussions were focused on
strengthening cooperation in trade, the economy and cultural and hu manitarian
spheres; the joint implementation of regional infrastructure projects; and the
development of a bilateral strategic cooperation agreement. The two sides also
discussed the need to strengthen security and intelligence cooperation, aimed at
securing borders and combating terrorism and organized crime.
31. On 30 September, Afghanistan and Turkmenistan signed three memorandums of
understanding and an economic cooperation agreement in Kabul. The documents
cover the development of a downstream plan of the Turkmenistan -AfghanistanPakistan-India gas pipeline project to the city of Herat, the construction of a 500 MW
electricity transmission line from Turkmenistan to Herat and the expansion of
telecommunications ties and fibre-optic networks.
32. On 8 October, Mr. Atmar, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkme nistan,
Rashid Meredov, and the United States Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs,
David Hale, co-chaired an inaugural Afghanistan-Turkmenistan-United States
trilateral meeting, held virtually. In a joint statement, the participants pledged to
improve regional security cooperation to address terrorism, drug trafficking,
smuggling and irregular migration; to increase people-to-people ties and promote the
equality and inclusion of women; and to expand trade, regional connectivity and
humanitarian engagement.
33. On 26 and 27 October, the Speaker of the National Assembly of Pakistan, Asad
Qaiser, organized a seminar entitled “Pakistan-Afghanistan Trade and Investment
Forum”, attended by Mr. Khan, the Chairperson of the Wolesi Jirga of Afghanistan,
Rahman Rahmani, and a 17-member Afghan delegation including the acting Minister
of Commerce, Nisar Ghoriyani. The lawmakers of the two countries decided to create
a task force to oversee the renegotiation of the Afghanistan -Pakistan Transit Trade
Agreement, which will expire in 2021.
34. UNAMA initiated a working group of diplomatic representatives of the six
countries neighbouring Afghanistan to discuss trade and transit, infrastructure
connectivity, counter-narcotics, people movements and knowledge transfer. The
Mission works closely with United Nations partners in Afghanistan and neighbouring
countries to contribute to existing regional formats, such as the Heart of Asia -Istanbul
Process and the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan. In
addition, my Special Representative for Afghanistan visited the Islamic Republic of
Iran and Pakistan to support the region’s engagement on peace and regional
cooperation.

20-16138

7/16

A/75/634
S/2020/1182

III. Human rights
35. UNAMA continued to document high levels of civilian harm from the conflict
in Afghanistan. On 27 October, the Mission released its third quarterly report,
documenting 5,939 civilian casualties (2,117 killed, including 251 women and 553
children; and 3,822 injured, including 495 women and 1,295 children) from 1 J anuary
to 30 September. The 30 per cent drop in civilian casualties compared with the same
period in 2019 is mainly due to decreases in civilian casualties from suicide and
complex attacks carried out by anti-government elements and air strikes by
international military forces. Civilian casualties from ground engagements remained
at similar levels, and those from Taliban pressure-plate improvised explosive devices
and Afghan Air Force air strikes increased compared with 2019. The Afghanistan
peace negotiations have so far failed to slow the civilian casualty toll; from the start
of the negotiations on 12 September to the end of October, UNAMA did not document
a reduction in the number of civilian casualties.
36. Anti-government elements continued to cause the majority of civilian casualties
(58 per cent), mostly attributed to the Taliban (45 per cent), followed by ISIL -K (7 per
cent) and the remainder by undetermined anti-government elements. Pro-government
forces were responsible for more than a quarter of all civilian casualties (28 per cent),
with Afghan national security forces causing 23 per cent of civilian casualties,
international military forces 2 per cent, and pro -government armed groups and
undetermined or multiple pro-government forces each responsible for 1 per cent.
Ground engagements (38 per cent) were the leading cause of civilian casualties,
followed by suicide and non-suicide improvised explosive devices (29 per cent),
targeted killings (16 per cent) and air strikes (8 per cent).
37. The armed conflict continued to inflict serious harm on children. During the
third quarter of 2020, the country task force on monitoring and reporting on grave
violations against children in armed conflict verified 954 grave violations against 908
children (630 boys, 277 girls, 1 sex unknown).
38. The country task force verified 773 child casualties (210 killed (64 girls and 146
boys) and 563 maimed (206 girls, 356 boys, 1 sex unknown)). Anti-government
elements were responsible for the same number of child casualties as pro-government
forces (320 each). Ground engagements remained the leading cause of child
casualties, with 448 child casualties (102 killed and 346 maimed), accounting for
approximately 58 per cent of the overall total. The task force verified 119 children
(all boys) recruited and used by the Taliban (108), a pro-government militia (7) and
the Afghan National Army Territorial Force (4) for combat and service roles, in
particular in the north-eastern and northern regions, compared with 19 children
verified during the previous quarter. The country task force also verified the abduction
of 15 children (14 boys, 1 girl), all attributed to the Taliban. Seven children were
released, two were killed, and the remaining six are either still in custody or thei r
whereabouts are unknown. As at 30 September, 151 boys aged from 13 to 17 years
were being held in juvenile rehabilitation centres for periods ranging from six months
to three and a half years.
39. Between 1 July and 30 September, the country task force verified 25 attacks
against schools, more than four times the number in the previous quarter. Attacks
were attributed to the Taliban (11), the Afghan National Army (6), joint operations by
multiple pro-government forces (2), undetermined armed opposition groups (2),
crossfire during operations between armed opposition groups and pro -government
forces not able to be attributed to either side (2), ISIL-K (1) and undetermined
pro-government forces (1).

8/16

20-16138

A/75/634
S/2020/1182

40. Attacks on hospitals decreased during the reporting per iod, with 13 verified
attacks against hospitals and protected health personnel, compared with 18 attacks
verified in the previous reporting period. Of the 13 incidents, 8 were attributed to the
Taliban, 1 to the Afghan National Army, 1 to a pro-government militia, 1 to an
incident involving ISIL-K and Afghan National Defence and Security Forces in which
it could not be determined which side was responsible, 1 jointly attributed to the
Afghan National Army and international forces and 1 to an undetermined pe rpetrator.
41. UNAMA documented 77 crimes of violence against women and girls from
August to October, including 20 cases of beating, 16 cases of murder, 15 cases of
harassment or annoyance, 7 cases of rape, 3 cases of causing injury or disability, 3
cases of forcing into self-immolation or suicide, 2 cases of forced marriage and 1 case
of child marriage. The Mission also documented 10 cases of conflict -related sexual
violence (rape), 6 of which were reportedly perpetrated by members of the Taliban
and 4 reportedly perpetrated by pro-government forces. Crimes of violence against
women and girls are still significantly underreported because cultural barriers,
security threats and widespread impunity continue to impede access to justice for
women who experience violent crimes. During the reporting period, UNAMA
organized awareness-raising and capacity-building events on the protection and
promotion of women’s rights, including a radio event in Kandahar on the law on the
elimination of violence against women, an awareness-raising workshop in Sari Pul on
the anti-harassment law and a radio programme in Paktika on women’s rights.
42. On 3 September, the Cabinet Legislative Committee proposed an amendment to
the provision in the Penal Code concerning so-called virginity testing by requiring
both a court order and a woman’s consent for such a test to be conducted. The proposal
entered into force pursuant to a presidential decree gazetted on 29 September. The
amendment falls far short of prohibiting the practice entire ly, long called for by the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, women’s rights organizations
and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women. UNAMA
continues to support civil society engagement regarding calls for a prohibi tion of the
practice without exception. On 17 September, it was stipulated in a presidential decree
that national identification cards would include an individual’s mother’s name, a
change long sought by civil society groups, though the inclusion of the na me remains
optional.
43. Between mid-July and late September, no prison reported any new cases of
COVID-19 among prisoners or staff, though limited testing may have resulted in
underreporting. In early October, Herat prison reported several positive cases . The
release of prisoners for the purpose of preventing COVID -19 transmission has almost
ended; the prison population started to increase during the second week of August.
As at the end of October, approximately two thirds of prisons operated beyond their
full capacity. Many prisons appear to be unprepared for a possible second wave of the
disease. In both prisons and juvenile rehabilitation centres, the frequency of
disinfection of the facilities decreased compared with July, mainly owing to a lack of
disinfection materials.
44. In the Pul-e-Charkhi women’s prison in Kabul, women continue to be held in
overcrowded conditions, and close to 300 children are held with their mothers. There
are over 100 women with alleged links to ISIL-K who have been in pretrial detention
for almost one year.
45. Attacks on judicial officials and those working for independent institutions
continued. On 18 September, two judges were abducted in Ghazni Province. In
separate incidents, on 9 September and 4 October, three prosecutors were killed in
Kabul. On 4 October, a commissioner with the Access to Information Commission

20-16138

9/16

A/75/634
S/2020/1182

survived an attempted assassination when a magnetic bomb attached to his vehicle
detonated, killing his driver. All incidents are awaiting investigation.
46. Human rights defenders and media workers continued to face security threats.
During the reporting period, three civil society activists were killed by unknown
perpetrators in Logar, Paktya and Kabul Provinces. Two others were injured in Kabul
and Paktya Provinces; there was no claim of responsibility. UNAMA received
additional reports of 14 human rights defenders threatened by unknown perpetrators,
1 targeted (with no consequences) with an improvised explosive device and 1
summoned by prosecutors for criticizing local authorities. With regard to the media,
UNAMA recorded two journalists killed and one injured in two separate attacks with
magnetic improvised explosive devices in Kabul and Helmand; one journalist
summoned by prosecutors for broadcasting a report about alleged sexual abuse of
women inmates in prison; the detonation of an improvised explosive device near a
private radio station in Baghlan Province, causing damage to it; one journalist
allegedly detained by the National Directorate for Security in Khost Province for
spreading propaganda against the Government on social media; and two journalists
(one man and one woman) allegedly threatened by the Taliban. Journalists reported
to UNAMA a growing sense of insecurity, in particular owing to the killing s in
November of colleagues and remarks made in October by the First Vice-President that
those reporting on civilian casualties could possibly face legal action.
47. The Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission engaged on various
issues related to peace, human rights and victim-centred justice, including victims’
rights, supported by UNAMA with technical assistance from the Mediation Support
Unit of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs. On 12 September, the
Commission welcomed the opening of the Afghanistan peace negotiations,
encouraging the parties to agree on a set of principles to guide the talks, such as
inclusivity and victims’ rights. The Commission continued to advocate a ceasefire,
women’s rights and victim-centred justice.

IV. Coordination of development assistance
48. The 2020 Afghanistan Conference convened on 23 and 24 November by
Afghanistan, Finland and the United Nations brought together representatives of over
60 countries, some 30 international organizations, and civil society groups, all
attending virtually. In the communiqué that was adopted, the participants called for
an immediate, permanent and comprehensive ceasefire and a meaningful peace
process, with the participation of women and young people, as well as ethnic,
religious and other minorities. They affirmed a renewed partnership to strengthen a
sovereign, unified, democratic and peaceful Afghanistan on its path towards self reliance, and welcomed a new Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework and the Afghanistan Partnership Framework. Donors pledged at least
$3.3 billion for the first year of the upcoming quadrennial period 2021 –2024, with
annual commitments expected to stay at the same level year on year.
49. At three side events on 23 November, key challenges and accomplishments for
Afghanistan in the areas of sustainable peacebuilding were discussed, with a focus on
human rights, the participation of women, reintegrating refugees and returnees,
anti-corruption, economic priorities and aid effectiveness. The Afghanistan National
Peace and Development Framework II provides a vision, strategy and plans for
development for the 2021–2025 period and towards the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals, organized around three pillars: peacebuilding, Statebuilding and market-building. The conference also included high-level thematic
meetings. On 19 November, the United Nations and Nordic countries organized a side

10/16

20-16138

A/75/634
S/2020/1182

meeting on the theme “From peacemakers to negotiators: Afghan women envision
peace”. Speakers stressed the importance of sustaining and strengthening the
participation of women and addressing security and protection concerns.
50. While pressure on the Government intensified to enhance anti-corruption efforts
ahead of the conference, few tangible results were produced. On 19 September, the
Special Anti-Corruption Secretariat in the Office of the President requested UNAMA
and international partners to provide feedback on the Government’s updated draft of
9 September of a strategic anti-corruption reform document, which is to succeed the
2017 reform strategy. While welcoming the effort, international partners stressed that,
in line with the recommendations of the UNAMA anti-corruption report of 2020, a
genuinely new long-term reform document resulting from far-reaching consultations
and built upon an impact assessment of previous reform steps, was needed.
51. On 16 September, the heads of the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre primary trial
and appeals courts, as well as the chief of investigation in the prosecution office, were
transferred in a standard rotation. During the reporting period, the primary court
adjudicated seven cases, three more than in the previous reporting period. The appeals
court affirmed the conviction of the former Police Commander, Zmarai Paikan, who
had been at large since 2017, and sentenced him to three years’ imprisonment. Since
its inception in 2016, the Centre has adjudicated 83 cases involving 317 defendants
at the primary trial level and 73 cases (including 6 during the reporting period)
involving a total of 229 defendants at the appeals level.
52. On 12 November, Mr. Ghani announced the appointment of the five
commissioners (including two women) of the Anti-Corruption Commission, thus
finalizing the establishment of anti-corruption institutions. The framework for
anti-corruption legislation, however, remained incomplete. The Office of the
Ombudsperson continued to operate without a confirmed legal basis. On 26 August,
following a presidentially mandated investigation, the Ombudsperson publicly
announced her findings, confirming widespread misuse of COVID -19 funds. She
found that there were possible instances of embezzlement and misuse of authority and
referred several suspects to the Office of the Attorney General for criminal
investigations. On 27 August, the High Council for Rule of Law and Governance
downgraded the legal basis for the Office of the Ombudsperson from a law to a
regulation and directed the Office of the Ombudsperson and the Offi ce of the Attorney
General to agree on an appropriate jurisdiction for the former. On 6 October, the
Wolesi Jirga rejected the anti-corruption law, which had been enacted on 5 September
2018 by presidential legislative decree, arguing that the process thro ugh which it was
enacted was irregular. On 1 November, the Meshrano Jirga (upper house of
parliament) approved the law, with amendments. The law remains in force pending a
decision of a joint committee of both houses.
53. The Government continued to implement subnational governance and civil
service reforms. On 17 August, the Cabinet established a subnational governance
consultative board, comprising former provincial governors, to inform subnational
governance reforms. On 9 October, the Independent Directorate of Local Governance
published its five-year strategic plan to operationalize the subnational governance
policy. The plan is focused on improving local planning and budgeting processes and
organizational capacity to support provincial, district and mu nicipal administrations
in delivering services and leading local peace efforts effectively.
54. Following a return on 5 August from essential staff only in government offices
owing to the COVID-19 pandemic to a normal staff presence, the Independent
Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission launched the annual
competitive mass recruitment process on 28 August for 16,111 entry -level civil
service positions, including 11,496 teaching positions. For the first time, 220
20-16138

11/16

A/75/634
S/2020/1182

positions in the Ministry of Finance, including its Customs Department, were part of
the process. Furthermore, 495 senior civil service positions previously encumbered
by acting directors were under recruitment.
55. The Government continued to implement the 2016–2026 Citizen’s Charter
national priority programme as part of the national strategy to reduce poverty and
improve the socioeconomic conditions of communities. By 20 October, the
programme had been rolled out in all provinces, providing critical services, including
short-term employment and increased access to electricity, irrigation, water supply,
sanitation services, roads and bridges, for 13.5 million beneficiaries, 50 per cent of
whom were women, in 13,000 rural and urban communities. Furthermore, the
programme supported the national response to the COVID-19 pandemic by raising
awareness at the community level and serving as a platform for relief efforts.
Operational challenges have hampered implementation, including delayed
operationalization in insecure districts, inadequate monitoring of project activities,
the lack of full participation of women in project selection and implementation, and
occasional delays in the disbursement of project funds.
56. As the pandemic continues to affect the lives of Afghans, the national and
international response has shifted to longer-term planning for recovery and resilience.
On 4 August, the World Bank approved a $380 million grant to help Afghanistan to
cushion the economic impact of the pandemic on Afghan households and farmers. In
addition, the United Nations facilitated the engagement of the World Bank and United
Nations experts in the country for a regional risk and resilience assessment, bringing
together Afghanistan and countries in Central Asia to identify common risks and
resilience-building opportunities. On 6 November, the International Monetary Fund
approved a $370 million Extended Credit Facility arrangement to support Afghanistan
in its recovery from the pandemic, to anchor economic reforms and to catalyse donor
financing.
57. The United Nations accelerated advocacy with government entities to ensure
commitment to legislative reform and protection to address harmful practices such as
early forced marriage, virginity testing and convictions for moral crimes. Between
1 August and 31 October, risk communication reached a total of 53,400 women, girls,
boys and men, providing sexual and reproductive health information. The United
Nations continued to support the prevention of gender-based violence, while also
providing survivors with multisectoral life-saving services during the pandemic,
primarily through mobile outreach and women-friendly health spaces, reaching a total
of 9,205 women and girls. In addition, a total of 37,600 internally displaced persons
and returnees, and their host communities, were provided with sexual and
reproductive health and psychosocial support services.
58. The United Nations continued to support the Government in implementing an
alternative education plan in response to the pandemic. In the lead-up to and following
the reopening of all grade levels in early October, the United Nations provided
technical support for risk mitigation measures to enable students to return to school
and make up for missed lessons. In addition, the United Nations continued to suppor t
the Government in finalizing the new competency-based curriculum framework
aimed at transforming general education in Afghanistan.

V. Humanitarian assistance
59. Humanitarian needs continued to rise owing to ongoing violence, natural
disasters and heightened levels of food insecurity, further compounded by the
COVID-19 pandemic. It is estimated that a record of 18.4 million people will need

12/16

20-16138

A/75/634
S/2020/1182

humanitarian assistance in 2021, up from 9.4 million at the beginning of 2020 and
14 million at the middle of the year.
60. As at 15 November, some 43,240 people across Afghanistan were confirmed to
have been infected with COVID-19, but the actual number was believed to be much
higher. Hospitals and clinics continued to report challenges in maintaining or
expanding their capacity to treat patients with COVID-19 as well as in maintaining
essential health services, with anticipated higher mortality and morbidity rates in the
coming months. Health and nutrition data showed that patients were not receiving
basic health services because the system was overwhelmed, and many people were
staying away from health facilities out of fear that they would be infected with the
virus. In October, UN-Women and the International Rescue Committee released a
national assessment of the disproportionate impact of the pandemic on women, in
particular internally displaced women. It was noted in the study that 78 per cent of
women experienced adverse mental health effects from the ongoing conflict and
COVID-19.
61. Since the beginning of the pandemic, humanitarian aid workers have
implemented a multisectoral response to COVID-19 needs and have reached over
3 million people across the country with COVID-19-specific assistance. This includes
supporting the establishment of 14 laboratories with the capacity to process 5,500
tests per day; deploying 34,000 polio surveillance volunteers to engage in case
identification and contact tracing activities; engaging over 61,400 community leaders
and people of influence in almost 12,000 villages across 34 provinces to amplify risk
communication and community engagement messages; supplying more than
1.1 million units of protective equipment to health providers and front -line aid
workers nationwide; training more than 4,350 health-care workers in infection
prevention and control measures, 193 health-care workers in medical laboratory
testing and 160 health-care workers in mental health and psychosocial support;
screening more than 519,000 people at points of entry; providing water and sanitation
assistance to 2.92 million people, psychosocial support to more than 301,000 people
and home-based education materials to nearly 119,500 children; and reaching more
than 4.7 million people with COVID-19 awareness-raising activities.
62. Between 4 August and 12 November, health partners provided medical
assistance to over 214,422 people, 58 per cent of whom were women and girls. The
number of trauma cases decreased in the first half of the year but increased from the
middle of the year onwards owing to renewed conflict. Between January and
November, the United Nations and partners provided emergency shelter, household
items and cash support to more than 581,300 people affected by conflict and natural
disasters.
63. As at 12 November, 54 polio cases had been confirmed sin ce 1 January,
compared with 29 cases in the whole of 2019. Most of the cases occurred in areas
where house-to-house vaccination campaigns had been banned since May 2018. Polio
has now spread to eight new provinces, indicating declining immunity among peopl e.
In addition to wild polio viruses, Afghanistan has also experienced an outbreak of
circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 following a spillover from an outbreak
in Pakistan, resulting in 136 confirmed cases.
64. Afghanistan is facing an acute food insecurity crisis, threatening the lives of
millions of people. Over the past five years, the percentage of food -insecure people
has almost doubled, while the proportion of people in a “crisis-level” or “emergencylevel” situation has increased fourfold. Currently, 16.9 million people are at “crisis”
and “emergency” levels of food insecurity – one of the highest figures in the world.
Diminishing food security in all provinces coincides with soaring household debt and
the ongoing socioeconomic impact of the pandemic, which has inflated market prices
20-16138

13/16

A/75/634
S/2020/1182

for staple commodities. Between 1 August and 15 November, the United Nations and
its partners provided 28,300 tons of food to food-insecure people, including 107,000
people displaced by conflict and 17,000 affected by natural disasters. To support
people affected by the socioeconomic impact of the pandemic, the United Nations and
its partners have provided additional food assistance to 1 million people.
65. The number of returnees arriving in Afghanistan in 2020, totalling more than
725,000, has now surpassed 2019 levels by 41 per cent and is anticipated to become
the largest ever return year for undocumented migrants. Between 4 August and
12 November, there were 1,316 documented and 239,501 undocumented returnees,
primarily from the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan. Deportees make up 37 per
cent of total returns from the Islamic Republic of Iran. A total of 9,062 Afghans have
been deported from Turkey in 2020, including 1,339 in October.
66. From July to September 2020, the Mine Action Service and partners cleared
2.82 km 2 of land contaminated by high-impact explosives, safely removing over 90
items of explosive ordnance, benefiting 21 communities. In addition, 212,141 people
in Afghanistan received explosive ordnance risk education during the reporting
period.
67. Widespread insecurity continued to present challenges for humanitarian access.
Since 1 January, humanitarian workers have reported 893 access -related incidents, a
57 per cent increase compared with the same period in 2019, 90 of which are related
to the pandemic. Between 4 August and 12 November, 5 aid workers were killed, 17
injured and 21 abducted.
68. The international air bridge established by the United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service primarily to facilitate the rotation of humanitarian personnel and supplie s
between Kabul and Doha continued to operate three times a week, transporting 310
passengers between 4 August and 15 November. The air bridge is scheduled to operate
until at least the end of December.
69. Under the 2020 Humanitarian Response Plan, $1.1 billion is requested to
provide humanitarian assistance to 11.1 million Afghans. As at 15 November, the plan
is 43 per cent funded, leaving a funding gap of $640 million. By the end of September,
the United Nations and non-governmental organizations had reached 7.6 million
people in 390 of 401 districts with humanitarian aid, representing 68 per cent of the
number planned for the year.

VI. Counter-narcotics
70. From 15 July to 14 November, law enforcement authorities conducted a total of
1,029 counter-narcotics operations, leading to seizures of 605 kg of heroin, 1,519 kg
of opium, 5,078 kg of hashish and cannabis, 640 kg of methamphetamine, 74 litres of
acetic anhydride, 320 litres of acetic acid, 2,029 kg of ammonium chloride, 995 kg of
potassium chloride, 250 kg of ammonium nitrate and 240 kg of
methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA). The seizures led to the arrest of 1,202
suspects and the confiscation of 175 vehicles and 61 weapons. In addition, 7 ha of
opium poppies and 7 ha of cannabis were eradicated in coordinated operations led by
the Ministry of the Interior.

VII. Mission support
71. As at 31 October, vacancy rates at UNAMA were at 13 per cent for international
staff, 7 per cent for National Professional Officers and 3 per cent for nation al staff,
compared with the approved rates of 8 per cent, 3 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively.
14/16

20-16138

A/75/634
S/2020/1182

The proportion of female staff remained low, at 36 per cent for international staff,
45 per cent for United Nations Volunteers, 13 per cent for National Prof essional
Officers and 9 per cent for national staff.
72. While sustaining the delivery of critical programmes and activities in response
to the COVID-19 pandemic, alternate work arrangements remained in place. UNAMA
and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes decided to gradually increase
the numbers of international personnel at the duty station and national staff reporting
to work, with numbers to be reviewed regularly considering potential changes in the
COVID-19 caseload.

VIII. Observations
73. Afghanistan has taken a significant step towards peace with the start of the peace
negotiations. I encourage the negotiating teams of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan and the Taliban to find the common understandings and agreements that
can begin to end the tragic decades of conflict. I am grateful for the international
commitments expressed at the 2020 Afghanistan Conference for building a shared,
prosperous and peaceful future, as well as recognition of the need for an Afghan -led
and Afghan-owned resolution to the conflict. It is my deep hope that a lasting
resolution can be achieved for the peaceful development of Afghanistan.
74. I am concerned that the continuing high level of violence could erode trust in
the peace process even at this early stage. De-escalation of the conflict is needed in
order to save lives and protect public confidence. Including the voices of victims in
the early stages of the peace process will be a critical step towards achieving true
reconciliation.
75. Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the armed conflict, with women and
children comprising more than 4 of every 10 civilian casualties recorded. The
continued indiscriminate use of improvised explosive devices, especially devices that
function as anti-personnel landmines, takes an appalling toll. Many victims feel that
too little is being done to address the short-term and long-term harm that they suffer.
76. If the peace negotiations are to offer hope, they must bring a commitment by the
parties to protect the human rights of all Afghans and uphold the international treaties
to which the country is a party. I urge the parties to make unequivocal statements in
this regard in order to contribute to an environment of trust and inclusivity. Women,
young people, civil society actors and victims of war must have opportunities to
contribute meaningfully to every step of the process. I call for an immediate cessation
of attacks on civilians, the recent victims of which have included religious leaders,
media representatives and civil society figures, and for the Government of
Afghanistan to ensure accountability for such egregious crimes. I reiterate my support
for the work of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission in protecting
and promoting the human rights of all Afghan women and men, including victims and
vulnerable groups.
77. Peace in Afghanistan will help to promote stability across the region and will
offer numerous political and economic opportunities, including enhanced trade and
investment, improved development cooperation and expanded people-to-people links.
In a year when in-person diplomacy has been constrained owing to the COVID -19
pandemic, I am heartened by the consistent messages from the regional partners of
Afghanistan affirming the importance of a peaceful resolution to the conflict.
78. Women and girls continue to face serious barriers to the full enjoyment of their
rights. The presidential decree stipulating that an individual’s mother’s name should
be included on national identity cards is an important step towards the empowerment
20-16138

15/16

A/75/634
S/2020/1182

of women in the public sphere, and I urge the Government to continue its efforts to
improve the legislative and institutional environment for women. The ongoing failure
to fully prohibit virginity testing in the Penal Code enables the continuation of this
practice, which constitutes a serious violation of women’s and girls’ human rights.
79. Earlier in 2020, the Government prevented the spread of COVID -19 in places
of detention by reducing prison populations through pardons and sentence reductions.
I encourage the Government to sustain this measure by keeping prison populations as
low as feasible, including consideration of pretrial detention and the use of alternative
sentencing, and to take urgent measures to address overcrowding.
80. I welcome the adoption at the 2020 Afghanistan Conference of the communiqué
affirming ongoing international support for Afghanistan, the Afghanistan Partnership
Framework and the finalization by the Government of the Afghanistan Na tional Peace
and Development Framework II, which will be key in guiding progress towards peace
and prosperity over the next four years. Continued international support, both
political and financial, will be a critical element of the country’s ongoing progr ess
towards peace and self-reliance.
81. Improving the accountability of public institutions will be essential to securing
the future prosperity of Afghanistan, including by prioritizing anti-corruption reforms
and strategy. By creating an independent anti-corruption commission, the
Government can streamline its structures and efforts to combat corruption in all
sectors.
82. I remain deeply concerned about the health and socioeconomic impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic, in particular on the most vulnerable groups in Afghanistan. The
pandemic has exacerbated humanitarian and development challenges, impeded access
to health care and education and stymied economic growth, affecting millions of
Afghans. As the winter season approaches, I am concerned that another spike in
COVID-19 cases will strain the country’s health system and economy, causing further
suffering. I call upon donors to increase funding for the Humanitarian Response Plan
to enable a robust and effective response to the pandemic, including measures to
increase social protection for the most vulnerable people during the long recovery
period.
83. I thank all United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative and Head of UNAMA, Deborah Lyons, for their continued dedication
under challenging conditions to fulfilling commitments in support of the Government
and people of Afghanistan.

16/16

20-16138
