TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

MEETING: 29 FEBRUARY 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1394) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

Page
1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _
The quest.ion of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq,
Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines,
Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan,
Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper
Volta and Yemen (S/8398 and Add. l/Rev.1 and Add.2) . . . , . . . . . . . . , .

S/PV. 1394

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND NINETY-FOURTH

Weld in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. Miguel SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay).

MEETING

29 February 1968, at 3 p.m.
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Yemen (S/8398
and Add.llRev.1 and Add.2)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In accordance with the decisions taken previously by the Security
Council, if I hear no objection I propose to invite the
representatives of Guyana, Turkey, Chile, Indonesia, Yugoslavia, Nigeria, the United Arab Republic, Zambia and
Colombia to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber, it being understood that when any of
them wishes to speak he will be invited to take a place at
the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 394)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia
and Zambia (S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya,
Madagascar, MaIaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Yemen (S/8398
and Add.llRev.1 and Add.2).

At the PresidentS invitation Mr. E. A. Braithwaite
(Guyana), Mr. N. Eren (Turkey), Mr. J. PiEera (Chile),
Mr. H. R. Abdulgani (Indonesia), Mr. K PavZeviC (Yugoslavia), Mr. A. Clark (Nigeria), Mr. M. R. A bdel- Wahab
(United Arab Republic), Mr. I. R. B. Manda (Zambia}, and
Mr. A. Herrbn Medina (Colombia) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I wish to
draw the attention of the Council to the draft resolution
sponsored by seven delegations [S/8429/. I also wish to
inform the Council that we have received addenda 13 and
14 to document S/8357 of 25 January 1968 containing the
report. of the Secretary-General on replies received from
Member States regarding measures taken pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 2324 (XXII) and Security
Council resolution 245 (1968). The Council will continue
its examination of the item on the agenda.

Adoption of the agenda

3. I call on the representative of the United Kingdom on a
point of order.

The agenda was adopted.
The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of Chile,
Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi

4. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
amongst the papers before us, asyou have just reminded us,
is a draft resolution. Under your leadership we have already
had the opportunity of some discussion on the desirability
of consultations. I have already emphasized, and I am sure
it is in the minds of us a.& that we should if possible in this
matter act together. I believe, therefore, that it would be in
conformity with the wishes of the Council if we could
proceed to further consultations. We have no desire
whatsoever for delay; on the contrary, we believe that we
should proceed in this matter with all reasonable speed. I
would, however, suggest to you, Sir, and to the Council
that, following on the discussions which have already taken
place, there would be advantage if we could now proceed to
further urgent consultations among ourselves. That is the
suggestion, Sir, which I put to you this afternoon.
1

especially in view pf the reports in the news media toda
that South Africa has gone ahead and arrested more peopl
in South West Africa-this, of course, in complete disregan
of the decision of the Council and in further defiance of th
United Nations. This shows that the problem that we face i
indeed a very urgent one, and I do hope that we ca
expedite our consultations with a view to arriving at som’
constructive conclusion of this important task that we hav
undertaken together.

5. The &RESIDENT ftranslated from Spanish): The members of the Security Council h&e just heard the United
Kingdom representative’s suggestion that this meeting be
adjourned so as to allow further time for urgent informal
consultations among the members of the Council.
6. It is my impression that the suggestion has the approval
of the Council. Consequently, if no member wishes to
speak at this moment, I shall declare the meeting adjourned, and my successor the new President will, I am
sure, get in touch with all the members of the Council so as
to arrange the date and time of the next Council meeting.

8. The PRESIDENT (tramlated from Spanish): No objet
tion has been raised to the United Kingdom representative’
suggestion.

7. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): I appreciate
the sincerity and good intentions that motivate our
colleague Lord Caradon in the suggestion that he has just
made to us, and the necessity therefor. My delegation, for
its part, has always maihtained that consultations among
members of this Council serve a very useful purpose and
that we should always try to encourage them as a most
important aspect of our work here in the Council. But at
the same time, and while accepting the suggestion that the
United Kingdom representative has made, I cannot help
reiterating the urgency of the problem that is before us,

9. However, I myself should like to add, at this stage, ;
special appeal for any informal consultations held to bl
carried out with the urgency that the circumstances require
These are only too well known, and I need not dwell 01
them; but I do feel that the consultations should bl
undertaken with the urgency of the situation in mind.
10. Having made
adjourned.

this point,

I declare the meetin)

The meeting rose at 3.50 p.nz

2
Litho

in U.N.

Price:

$U.S. 0.50

(or equivalent

in other

currencies)

35181-February

197i-2,2a
