178

General Assembly-Forty-nnh Session

1. Calls upon all States to make every effort to use
the achievements of science and technology in order to
promote peaceful social, economic and cultural development and progress;
2. Recalls the historic responsibility of the Governments of all countries of the world to preserve civilization and to ensure that everyone enjoys his or her inherent right to life, and calls upon them to do their
utmost to assist in implementing the right to life
through the adoption of appropriate measures at both
the national and the international levels;
3. Also calls upon all States, appropriate United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned
to take the necessary measures to ensure that the results of scientific and technological progress and the
material and intellectual potential of mankind are used
for the benefit of mankind and for promoting and encouraging universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-sixth session the item entitled "Human rights and
scientific and technological developments".

68th plenary meeting
14 December 1990
45/94.

Need to ensure a healthy environment for the
well-being of individuals

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in accordance with the provisions of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 5 and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,33 everyone has the right to an adequate
standard of living for his or her own health and wellbeing and that of his or her family and to the continuous
improvement of living conditions,
Recognizing the need to promote universal respect
for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental
freedoms in all their aspects,
Considering that a better and healthier environment
can help contribute to the full enjoyment of human
rights by all,
Reaffirming that, in accordance with the Declaration
of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment,36 men and women have the fundamental
right to freedom, equality and adequate conditions of
life in an environment of a quality that permits a life of
dignity and well-being, and that they bear a solemn responsibility to protect and improve the environment for
present and future generations,
Bearing in mind the fact that increasing environmental degradation could endanger the very basis of life,
Bearing in mind also that the economic growth and
development of the developing countries are essential
in order to address the problems of the degradation and
protection of the environment,
Emphasizing the increasing role of the United Nations in addressing global environmental problems,
36 Report ofthe United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, Stockholm, 5-16 June 1972 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.73.lI.A.14 and corrigendum), chap. I.

Recalling that the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, to be held in Brazil in
1992, will elaborate strategies and measures to halt and
reverse the effects of environmental degradation in the
context of strengthened national and international efforts to promote sustainable and environmentally
sound development in all countries,
Stressing the importance for all countries to take effective actions for the protection and enhancement of
the environment in accordance with their respective capacities and responsibilities and taking into account the
specific needs of developing countries and that, as the
major sources of pollution, the developed countries
have the main responsibility for taking appropriate
measures urgently,
Welcoming Commission on Human Rights resolution
1990/41 of 6 March 199()3 and Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities
resolution 1990/7 of 30 August 1990,37 in which they decided to study the problems of the environment and its
relation to human rights,
1. Recognizes that all individuals are entitled to live
in an environment adequate for their health and wellbeing;

2. Calls upon Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations dealing with
environmental questions to enhance their efforts towards ensuring a better and healthier environment;
3. Encourages the Commission on Human Rights,
with the assistance of its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, to
continue studying the problems of the environment and
its relation to human rights, with a view to submitting
lo the Preparatory Committee of the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development,
through the Economic and Social Council, a report on
the progress made on the matter;
4. Believes that appropriate organs of the United
Nations, within their respective competences, should
pursue active efforts in seeking to promote a better and
healthier environment.
68th plenary meeting
14 December 1990
45/95.

Guidelines for the regulation of computerized
personal data files

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 44/132 of 15 December 1989,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 1990/42 of 6 March 19903 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1990/38 of 25 May 1990, entitled
"Guidelines on the use of computerized personal files",
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Rapporteur of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, Mr. Louis Joinet,
for his report containing a revised version of the draft
guidelines for the regulation of computerized personal
data files;38

37 See E/CN.4/1991/1.E/CN.4/Sub.2/1990/59.
38 E/C"I.4/1990/7Z.
