United Nations

S/PV.6603

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6603rd meeting
Friday, 26 August 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Messone
Mr. Berger
Mr. Salam
Mr. Onowu
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Peacekeeping: taking stock and preparing for the future
Letter dated 5 August 2011 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/496)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-48151 (E)

*1148151*

S/PV.6603

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to
take the floor.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Bombing of the United Nations compound in
Abuja, Nigeria
The President: I request the members of the
Security Council to observe a minute of silence in
commemoration of the tragic bombing of the United
Nations compound in Abuja, Nigeria.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Peacekeeping: taking stock and preparing for
the future
Letter dated 5 August 2011 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/496)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh,
Canada, Croatia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Guatemala, Hungary,
Indonesia, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Kyrgyzstan,
Malaysia, Morocco, Nepal, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, the
Philippines, Senegal, Serbia, Slovenia, Sri Lanka,
Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine, Uruguay and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head
of Delegation and Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Téte António,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/496, which contains a letter dated
5 August 2011 from the Permanent Representative of
India addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
a concept paper on the item under consideration.

2

The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of India and Ambassador Puri for their leadership and
initiative in scheduling this debate on peacekeeping.
But let me begin with this morning’s most
immediate developments. As members of the Council
know, United Nations House in the Nigerian capital,
Abuja, was struck by a car bomb around 11 a.m. local
time this morning. These buildings house 26
humanitarian and development agencies of the United
Nations family. I met with our staff in Abuja during a
visit just two months ago.
In a statement to the media, I described this
terrible act as an attack on those who devote their lives
to helping others. We condemn it utterly. We do not yet
have precise casualty figures, but they are likely to be
considerable. Many people are dead; many more are
wounded. Nigerian and international search and rescue
teams have mobilized and are moving the injured to
hospitals and providing emergency aid.
I have asked the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro, to go Nigeria immediately, and
I am mobilizing the United Nations system to respond
to this emergency. The Deputy Secretary-General will
be accompanied by the United Nations security chief,
Under-Secretary-General Gregory Starr, and will meet
with Nigerian authorities upon arrival in Abuja.
On this very sad occasion, I extend my deepest
sympathies to the victims and their families. The
United Nations will undertake every possible effort to
assist them during this difficult time. Let me say
clearly: These acts of terrorism are unacceptable. They
will not deter us from our vital work for the people of
Nigeria and the world. This outrageous and shocking
attack is evidence that United Nations premises are
increasingly being viewed as soft targets by extremist
elements around the world.
Peacekeeping is one of the most visible, difficult
and critical roles played by the United Nations. It is
also a role that only the United Nations can play in a
truly global sense. Peacekeeping is an essential tool for
overcoming threats to international peace and security
and supporting complex transitions from conflict to
stability. It requires a variety of approaches to respond
to various local needs and a wide range of political

11-48151

S/PV.6603

realities. To be successful, peacekeeping operations
must have a clear and achievable mandate, unified
political support from the Security Council, and
adequate, predictable human, material and financial
resources. Where this has occurred, we have seen
considerable success, such as in Liberia and TimorLeste, or with the referendum in the Sudan. Where we
have struggled, we have also learned.
Since 2001, the number of uniformed personnel
has doubled, reaching a high point of more than
101,000 early last year. Although the rate of growth
slowed in 2010, the complexity of missions remains
high, requiring ever more flexible and adaptable
uniformed and civilian personnel. Indeed, we may be
entering a new phase, with diverse and multifaceted
situations where peacekeeping may play a role.
Peacekeeping will need to evolve to meet specific
demands in a variety of environments and to flexibly
and nimbly bring together multiple capabilities in a
coherent and effective manner.
Notwithstanding the responsibility of host
Governments, peacekeepers are increasingly tasked to
take on the protection of civilians — placing higher
demands on their work, greater scrutiny on their
performance, and a growing need for sufficient
resources to properly carry out such mandates. With
these shifts in mind, the New Horizon initiative of
2009 set out an agenda for strengthening peacekeeping.
This has served to build a common vision and stronger
partnership linking the resources of the Secretariat, the
Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the wider membership of the
Organization. Unfortunately, some aspects of this
partnership are under increasing pressure. The current
financial climate, differing perspectives on mandated
tasks, and, in some instances, the loss of host
Government consent have all created tensions in our
relationships.
Achieving a collective response is also
complicated when key stakeholders — such as those
who mandate missions, those who contribute
uniformed personnel and those who are major
funders — are separate groups. If these groups remain
distinct even as mandates become more demanding,
tensions and divisions are inevitable, with potentially
negative impacts on our operations. We must continue
to improve the peacekeeping partnership. We have a
common responsibility to make sure that our

11-48151

peacekeepers are up to the task, which means ensuring
both adequate support and equipment.
One way forward is outlined in the draft
presidential statement to be adopted today, in which the
Council requests that the Secretariat ensure that troop
and police contributors are engaged early, with
appropriate
information,
to
enable
effective
consultations between the Council and the Secretariat.
I agree with this approach and look forward to working
with the Council to implement it.
We also recognize the restrictive context in which
we operate, such as that presented by the global
financial situation. The impact on Member States is
well understood. The Secretariat will continue to seek
ways to yield efficiencies. The global field support
strategy is a central part of this picture. The strategy is
designed to optimize efficiencies in the management of
resources entrusted to the Organization by Member
States through a global approach. This is a
comprehensive response to key logistical and
administrative challenges, and is aimed at enabling
timely mission start-up and drawdown, improved
provision of support, and increased transparency and
accountability for resources.
The enormous role of civilian peacekeepers is
also critical. Close to 20,000 civilians within
peacekeeping operations are currently implementing
activities in support of peace processes, encompassing
security sector reform, rule of law and local
governance development, human rights monitoring,
disarmament, demining and the provision of complex
mission support. The implementation of the findings of
the recent civilian capacity review will increase our
capabilities in this regard, and we look forward to the
Council’s support for this effort. Early peacebuilding
tasks have also become an integral part of many
operations and should be implemented in an integrated
manner.
Partnership is the cornerstone of peacekeeping.
Let us build on the relationships that now exist, and
overcome potential frictions that could hinder our
work. Through increased engagement, extensive
dialogue and a shared understanding of our common
goals, we can uphold the aims of the Charter and live
up to the expectations of the people who look to us in
their time of need.
In closing, I would like to acknowledge the
sacrifice of the thousands of colleagues and friends

3

S/PV.6603

who have given their lives in the line of duty, and to
pay tribute to all those working in peacekeeping today
for their commitment to this noble cause.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Onowu (Nigeria): I thank you, Sir, for the
initiative of convening this open debate and the
excellent concept paper (S/2011/496, annex) that
provides the basis of our discussions today. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing.
Peacekeeping, a rather recent concept that is not
reflected in the Charter, has evolved as the United
Nations flagship endeavour. As a nation from the
continent with the highest concentration of current
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Nigeria
places a special premium on this subject. Informed by
our national experiences, my contribution this morning
will focus on the outlook for United Nations
peacekeeping operations from three perspectives.
The first is the issue of mismatch between
resources and mandates. Meeting the demands of
modern peacekeeping operations has stretched the
United Nations capacity to its limits and put a strain on
the effectiveness of peacekeeping. In this context, it is
not surprising that several peacekeeping missions
cannot deliver the results expected of them. There is a
need to strike a balance between the expectations of the
Council and the resources given to enable
peacekeeping missions to implement their mandates.
Our mandates must not only be clear but also
adequately resourced, in terms of both personnel and of
international outlay. Hence, there is a need for accurate
assessment of mission requirements, the optimal use of
available resources across our missions, and the firm
commitment of Member States to United Nations
peacekeeping.
The second issue relates to partnerships and
capacity-building. The multidimensional nature of the
new generation of peacekeeping operations requires
improved collaboration and coordination among
peacekeeping actors, including regional organizations.
It is vitally important to better align the objectives and
performance criteria of the various peacekeeping
missions. In keeping with the spirit and letter of
resolution 1353 (2001), partnership also implies

4

seeking the views and benefiting from the experiences
of the troop- and police-contributing countries in the
deliberations on and design of peacekeeping missions.
In this regard, I wish to reiterate the strategic role of
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations. We
strongly believe that the platform of the Working
Group can be better harnessed in synchronizing the
efforts of the troop-contributing countries and the
Security Council in the formal atmosphere it provides.
As regards capacity-building, we note the
considerable progress that has been made in several
missions — such as the United Nations Mission in
Liberia and the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste, among others — in strengthening the
capacity of host countries in various areas, including
police, judicial and corrections capacities. However,
the real test of the success of these various missions’
support to the host countries is the degree to which the
host authorities are able to sustain efforts initiated by
the peacekeeping operations after their departure.
Following the independence of South Sudan on
9 July, UNMIS was brought to a successful close and
the Council shepherded the establishment of two new
peacekeeping missions. Drawing on the lessons for
missions that have had to contend with national
conflicts with subregional dimensions, such as
MONUSCO, we believe that the authorities of the new
missions — the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei — should work more closely together with
host nations in deterring and eliminating threats posed
by armed groups and focus efforts on disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation,
resettlement
and
reintegration. Such collaboration would make
significant contributions to improving daily lives of the
residents of Abyei and South Sudan.
Thirdly, I wish to seize this opportunity to remind
ourselves that peacekeeping has become a valuable
instrument for maintaining international peace and
security. As with all valuable instruments, the integrity
of peacekeeping operations must be protected and
preserved.
We must ensure that the principles relating to the
use of force do not by themselves jeopardize a
mission’s objective. Indeed, when force is deployed,
the operational mandate should adapt to the local
context and the requirements of the field. It is equally
important to emphasize respect for the principle of

11-48151

S/PV.6603

national sovereignty. A peacekeeping operation should
be considered only in situations in which parties
previously at war have agreed to sheathe their swords
and to involve the United Nations in enforcing a peace
accord. The United Nations must remain one hundred
per cent neutral in conflicts.
Guided by these principles and practices, Nigeria
remains fully committed to the principle of collective
security, as enshrined in the Charter. It will remain a
reliable contributor of troops to the United Nations
operations.
In concluding, we would like to thank Council
members, the Secretary-General and the international
community for their words of support following the
bombing incident that occurred in Abuja today.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): On
26 August the United Nations compound in Abuja
suffered a serious attack, with colossal human
casualties. China strongly condemns this terrorist act
and expresses its condolences and sympathies to the
families of the deceased and to the wounded and their
families, and to the United Nations and the
Government of Nigeria. China will continue to work
with the international community in combating all
forms of terrorism.
I highly appreciate India’s initiative in convening
today’s open debate. I also welcome the statement by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
Since the United Nations peacekeeping
operations were launched more than 60 years ago, they
have become one of the important means for the
maintenance of international peace and security by the
United Nations. Lately United Nations peacekeeping
operations have been growing in scale, with ever-wider
mandates and increasing challenges. I want to focus on
the following.
First, it is imperative to continue to adhere to Dag
Hammarskjöld’s
three
principles
governing
peacekeeping. They constitute the premise and the
foundation for the smooth conduct of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and they must be adhered to.
On that basis, China approves and supports the
adoption of a prudent and responsible attitude in light
of developments and the necessary development and
improvement of the peacekeeping theories and
practices.

11-48151

Secondly, greater attention should be given to
integrated coordination between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Peacekeeping is an important
component of the peacemaking exercise, and greater
attention should be given and greater efforts be made
to address the issues at the root of conflicts, including
issues relating to economic and social development. In
peacekeeping it is imperative to formulate and
gradually improve transition and exit strategies and to
improve dovetailing with peacebuilding.
The third matter is effective implementation of
the mandate for the protection of civilians. In carrying
out this mandate in peacekeeping operations, there
should be stricter observance of Security Council
resolutions and the principle of neutrality by avoiding
siding with one particular party or becoming a party to
the conflict. Much less should we cause more civilian
casualties while implementing this mandate. We should
also respect the sovereignty of the countries concerned
and do more to improve the political process and
national reconciliation and give full play to the
political advantage of the United Nations.
Fourthly, we should improve capacity-building
for United Nations peacekeeping operations. We hope
that countries able to do so will increase their input and
provide the necessary resources and technical
guarantees for peacekeeping operations. We support
greater attention to strategic design in peacekeeping
operations, greater communications and coordination
with the countries concerned, improvement of logistic
mechanisms and optimizing resource allocation, and
improvement of the effectiveness and efficiency of
peacekeeping operations, including their deployment,
planning and management.
Fifthly, there should be better coordination
between the Security Council on the one hand, and the
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and the Secretariat
on the other. At all stages of the establishment and
implementation of peacekeeping operations, the
Council should pay attention to maintaining regular
consultations with the TCCs. We support closer
partnerships between the Council on the one hand and
the troop contributors and the Secretariat on the other.
We hope the Secretariat will continue to provide
relevant information to the TCCs in a timely and
accurate manner. We also support the United Nations in
improving the partnerships with the countries
concerned and with regional organizations in particular
in supporting the peacekeeping efforts of the African

5

S/PV.6603

Union and in supporting the latter and improving its
capacity.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): Before I begin, I would
like to briefly express my country’s indignation at and
unequivocal condemnation of the senseless and
abhorrent act of violence that occurred this morning in
Abuja against innocent civilians and against United
Nations officers and property. I wish to present our
heartfelt condolences to and solidarity with the victims’
relatives, to the Government of Nigeria and, through
the Secretary-General, to the whole United Nations
family.
Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
timely debate. It is most suitable that we address this
issue under the chairmanship of India, one of the
countries that has most contributed to United Nations
peacekeeping — a fact that deserves our recognition. I
also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
important intervention and for his continuous
commitment to peacekeeping and the high priority he
has assigned to it.
Peacekeeping is the flagship activity of the
United Nations, its most visible face. As we speak, one
hundred thousand women and men are serving the
United Nations as military and police personnel in
17 missions, from Timor-Leste to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, from Southern Sudan to Haiti.
They are implementing the resolutions we approve in
this room, turning our words into actions and our
objectives into realities. Several of these women and
men have given their lives for the United Nations.
Therefore, they deserve our utmost respect and humble
tribute.
Portugal has continuously assumed its part in the
common effort of peacekeeping. Over 20,000 military
and 3,000 police Portuguese women and men have
served in peace operations. We are currently
participating in the United Nations peacekeeping
missions in Timor-Leste and in Lebanon, as well as in
several European Union and NATO operations.
When discussing peacekeeping, we should bear in
mind three of its cornerstone principles.
The first is consent of the parties — essential to
assure the sustainability of a mission. It implies, on the
one hand, a shared strategic understanding of the
objectives, as well as a continuous dialogue and
constructive cooperation between the national

6

authorities and the mission. On the other hand, this
consent encompasses the responsibility of the national
authorities to collaborate with the United Nations
mission so that the latter has the proper conditions to
fulfil its mandate.
The second principle is impartiality. As Sergio
Vieira de Mello said, “In the UN, we cannot surrender
our impartiality. It is perhaps our greatest asset.”
Third is the non-use of force except in selfdefence and in defence of the mandate. In that regard,
we see with satisfaction that the defence of mandates is
becoming increasingly effective, or robust. Regardless
of the preferred term, what is important is the end
result.
Passing from principles to practice, and bearing
in mind that this Council, as the executive board for
international peace and stability, shoulders a
responsibility that is legitimately bestowed upon us by
the whole membership of the United Nations, I would
like to briefly address seven points that we deem
essential to the success of United Nations
peacekeeping.
First, we must continue our efforts to provide
peacekeeping operations with clear, credible and
achievable mandates. Subsequently, those mandates
must be implemented in a precise, full and effective
way.
Second, we must provide peacekeeping
operations with the means required to achieve the
objectives defined by the Council. The capacities on
the ground must match the mandated tasks; otherwise,
the credibility of the United Nations will be
undermined. In that regard, we call upon those
members that possess more resources to contribute
accordingly, be it in terms of force generation or
equipment, such as helicopters.
Third, the combination of widespread and
growing peacekeeping objectives, on the one hand,
and, on the other, the limited resources available
imposes the need for efficient and effective
management and use of those resources. We welcome
the Secretariat’s efforts in that regard and encourage it
to continue improving its management performance.
Fourth, the Security Council must also continue
to promote interaction with the relevant peacekeeping
stakeholders. In that regard, we underline the unique
role of troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and police-

11-48151

S/PV.6603

contributing countries (PCCs), who match our words
with deeds through their boots on the ground.
Therefore, we are committed to further enhancing the
triangular cooperation among TCCs and PCCs, the
Security Council and the Secretariat in the decisionmaking process and throughout the implementation of
the mandates.
Fifth, bearing in mind the various United Nations
presences in areas such as the Great Lakes, or the
Sudan and South Sudan, we highlight the value of
inter-mission cooperation with a view to maximizing
potential synergies and the advantages that arise from a
strategic regional perspective. Moreover, the missions
must enhance their capacity to coordinate the activities
of the different actors on the ground, namely, regional
and subregional organizations, development agencies
and non-governmental organizations.
Sixth, the role of international organizations in
peace and security, in accordance with Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter, is increasingly important.
In that regard, we highlight the efforts being made by
the African Union, NATO and the European Union, as
well as those of the Community of Portuguesespeaking Countries, which is increasingly active in the
promotion of democracy, human rights, political
stability and social and economic development,
namely, in Guinea-Bissau and Timor-Leste.
Seventh, peacekeepers are ever more early
peacebuilders. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are to
be implemented within a comprehensive approach, no
longer as sequential activities but rather as integrated
efforts, with obvious synergies. Peacebuilding
efforts — such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, security sector reform and the
relaunching of the economy — should be considered
from the genesis of a peacekeeping operation and
carried out as soon as the situation on the ground
permits and throughout the cycle of a mission.
Moreover, a mission should also pave the way for a
smooth transition to long-term development assistance
with a view to a successful exit strategy for
international actors and self-sustained peace and
stability.
The protection of civilians is the paradigmatic
example of the shared responsibility that binds all
Member States of the United Nations, in particular
those serving on this Council. Peacekeeping operations
have a key role to play in protecting civilians in danger

11-48151

when Governments are unable or unwilling to fulfil
their responsibility. It is incumbent upon the Council to
assure that they will continue to do so. Basic human
rights and, ultimately, the lives of populations at risk
depend upon it.
In our time, failing to protect civilians is
unacceptable and would deeply affect the credibility of
the United Nations. Therefore, we must continue
striving to fully implement resolution 1894 (2009).
Moreover, we welcome the contribution of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to the
definition of a coherent operational approach to the
protection of civilians in United Nations operations.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, missions have been
mandated, with significant success, to boost women’s
participation in electoral and post-conflict processes, to
prevent sexual violence, and to increase the presence of
female peacekeeping personnel and peacekeepers
trained to address gender issues. DPKO has made
enormous progress in mainstreaming gender in
peacekeeping, but we need to strive harder in some of
those areas.
As Graça Machel stated in her report on the
impact of armed conflict on children, “The protection
of children must be central to the humanitarian,
peacemaking and peacekeeping policies of the United
Nations”(A/51/306, para. 281). We commend the fact
that currently seven peacekeeping missions have
advisers working on the needs of children.
Peacekeeping is an instrumental element in the
promotion of peace, aimed at creating security
environments conducive to comprehensive political
processes through which sustainable solutions to
conflicts can be achieved. In our quest for sustainable
peace, the Council must also increase its focus on
preventive diplomacy and, thus, pay close attention to
new challenges to human security.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia shares the grief affecting the international
community and the United Nations family at the tragic
attack that occurred in Nigeria this morning. In
condemning that attack and all terrorist actions, we
convey our heartfelt condolences to the families of the
victims.
I wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his presence and for his presentation on the matter

7

S/PV.6603

before us. I congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
initiative in organizing a debate on peacekeeping
operations, based on a document (S/2011/496, annex)
of great interest and importance.
We concur with the view stated in that document
that although the notion of peacekeeping does not
appear explicitly in the Charter of the United Nations,
it has become one of the main tools of the
Organization. Furthermore, we agree that despite the
shortcomings that still occur, peacekeeping operations
represent perhaps the most tangible manifestation of
the collective and joint efforts of the Member States to
maintain international peace and security.
Colombia closely follows the discussions on
restructuring and enhancing the functioning of
peacekeeping operations. Convinced of the necessity of
promoting
peaceful
coexistence,
we
always
constructively participate in tasks that the Organization
develops in that area, particularly in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations such as the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, the Multinational Force
and Observers in the Sinai and the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.
For Colombia, the fundamental principles of
peacekeeping — such as consent of the parties,
impartiality, and the use of force only in the case of
self-defence or defence of the mandate — must be
observed. We believe it appropriate to reiterate the
validity of such principles and to highlight the fact that
they must be taken into account when analysing the
options for responding to the challenges imposed by
reality.
We are encouraged by initiatives that seek to
improve the approaches between the Security
Council — the organ that plans and adopts mandates
for peacekeeping operations — and those that must
implement them, particularly troop-contributing
countries. We agree with the view that in establishing
the mandates of peacekeeping operations the political
context must be addressed and there must be clear and
realistic objectives that are in keeping with the
available resources. In that regard, the contributions of
the broad membership represented in the General
Assembly, especially the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee, are
fundamental to seeking greater efficiency and
transparency in the tasks of peacekeeping operations.

8

I believe it is important to highlight three key
elements for the effective and efficient functioning of
peacekeeping operations. The first is collaboration on
purposes, focusing on the political and planning
aspects of peacekeeping operations. Second is
collaboration in action, oriented to operational aspects
in the field. A third key issue is collaboration for the
future, focused on the development of sustainable
capacities to meet the challenges ahead.
One essential element in creating genuine
collaboration is engaging in timely dialogue before the
approval and renewal of mandates. In this context, I
note the established practice of the Security Council of
convening meetings with troop-contributing countries
prior to the renewal of the mandate of a mission. We
encourage the Council to resort to that procedure on a
regular basis.
We should strike a balance between the
significance and scope of United Nations peacekeeping
missions and review and, when necessary, rethink the
nature and purpose of those missions. We should also
be bolder in the deployment of troops and the civilian
component, which is particularly relevant because the
dynamics of conflicts have changed substantially, due
to factors such as organized crime, mass displacement
and human rights violations, among others. It is well
known that peacekeeping missions cannot merely
deploy military and police elements, but must also
have a strategic plan that takes into account the host
countries’ national capacities and that includes social,
political and self-sustaining development programmes
based on the principles of respect, the protection of
civilians — who are the most vulnerable — and the
sovereignty and self-determination of peoples, as
enshrined in the Charter.
Finally, I note the ongoing willingness and
openness to dialogue that my delegation has found in
the officials of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations during the coordination of my country’s
various contributions in Haiti, both bilaterally and
through the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti. Colombia reconfirms its readiness to take part in
the evolving peacekeeping framework; to continue to
contribute to peacekeeping operations to the extent that
our domestic conditions allow; and to participate
actively in discussions on restructuring and
strengthening the United Nations capacity in this field.

11-48151

S/PV.6603

Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): Gabon
echoes the condemnations of the attack in Abuja,
Nigeria. We extend our condolences to the families of
the victims and to the United Nations family as a
whole. We support the Secretary-General in this matter
and express our solidarity with Nigeria.
I concur, Mr. President, with previous speakers in
welcoming both your initiative in organizing this
debate and the fact that it comes from your country,
India, which is currently one of the largest troop
contributors to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. That stands as yet further proof of your
country’s commitment to the maintenance of
international peace and security. I also welcome the
presence of the Secretary-General here today, and
thank him for important contribution to our
deliberations.
Peacekeeping operations lie at the heart of the
United Nations actions in peacemaking and postconflict reconstruction. The emergence of other
challenges to peace, such as violence against civilians,
has made peacekeeping operations increasingly
important. New demands require missions to be
allocated
resources
commensurate with their
challenges and expectations.
I shall address the question of peacekeeping
operation mandates and relationships among the
various stakeholders in their success, especially the
Security Council and the troop-contributing countries.
In recent years, the United Nations has considerably
improved the planning and conduct of missions. That
evolution is largely due to greater United Nations
awareness of the need to define mandates that are clear,
credible and achievable and that will lead to successful
missions.
My delegation welcomes the increasingly
multidisciplinary approaches to mission mandates, as
emphasized by the Secretary-General in his 2008
report. Those include the protection of civilians,
strengthening the rule of law, mechanisms to prevent
the resurgence of conflicts, support for electoral
processes, and peacebuilding and reconstruction
programmes, such as in the cases of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, to mention only a
few.

11-48151

All of those many dimensions were a response to
the need for the Council to provide missions with
mandates that are based on clear goals and measurable
results, and that are provided with sufficient resources
to fulfil all their tasks. Still, certain shortfalls and gaps
remain that the Council must address. Missions such as
MONUSCO, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) are still lacking in logistical and
human resources, whether it be aerial, financial or
material resources. That point was made clear at the
Council’s meeting last month with Force Commanders
on the ground (see S/PV.6592). My delegation
encourages the international community to allocate to
missions material and financial resources that are
consistent with realities and actions on the ground.
As others have noted, we continue to believe that
a good mandate must take into account the causes of
conflict, and that its implementation should be founded
on rigorous planning of the different phases and
sequences of the process, and on the identification of
criteria for ending a mission at the right time. That
would keep the United Nations from slipping into an
occupying role and from wasting resources that would
be better spent elsewhere.
Regarding relations among the various actors in
peacekeeping operations, my delegation welcomes the
fact that the Council has enhanced its dialogue with its
partners in peacekeeping operations over the years. We
welcome, for example, the Council’s regular
consultations with the troop-contributing countries,
including non-members. The same is true of the
ongoing consultations of the President of the Council
with the President of the General Assembly and States
that are not members of the Council on matters that
affect international peace and security.
To increase the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations, it is important to continue and strengthen
consultations between the Council and the troopcontributing countries. Such regular exchanges allow
the Council to better understand the situation on the
ground and to make better decisions. In that vein, we
welcomed the Council meeting on 27 July with the
Force Commanders. The briefings we heard that day
clearly reflected the daily reality of peacekeeping
operations as a whole and the difficulties they
encounter on the ground. In this context, we also
support the recommendation contained in the draft
presidential statement that we are to adopt today,

9

S/PV.6603

whereby the Council requests the Secretariat to provide
troop- and police-contributing countries all necessary
information and documentation by the 15th of each
month.
Because the maintenance of international peace
and security is at the heart of the political, strategic and
ideological system of the United Nations, it is
important to continue to work with regional and
subregional organizations, especially regarding the root
causes of conflicts and strategies to settle conflicts.
Gabon would like once again to urge the United
Nations to continue to support the African Union,
especially by building its capacity and supporting its
peacekeeping missions on the ground. In the case of
the mission deployed in Somalia, the current
weakening of Al-Shabaab should encourage us to
strengthen the capacities of AMISOM in order to gain
ground and significantly reduce the threat of that
armed group.
While welcoming the significant progress
achieved in the area of peacekeeping, Gabon feels that
an additional effort should be made with regard to
conflict prevention. We have stated this and reiterate it
today. A culture of prevention would save enormous
resources that could then be channelled towards
economic and social development. Thus prevention
must become our priority in the maintenance of peace
and security.
Lastly, Mr. President, I would like to express my
delegation’s support for the draft presidential statement
prepared by your delegation.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I first join
colleagues in expressing horror and disgust at the
attack on the United Nations in Abuja today. I convey
the British Government’s condolences to the SecretaryGeneral and to the Nigerian delegation and through
them to all of the victims and to the whole United
Nations family and the Nigerian Government and
people. My Foreign Secretary, William Hague, has
issued a statement expressing his utter condemnation
of this brutal act. As he said in that statement, around
the world the United Nations works for peace, security
and international cooperation, and an attack on the
United Nations is an attack on these principles. The
United Kingdom stands ready to provide any assistance
we can to the United Nations and to the Nigerian
authorities to bring those responsible to justice.

10

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to take stock of recent progress in United
Nations peacekeeping and to review the variety of
challenges we currently face. The United Kingdom
believes that the presidential statement to be adopted
today will add important new ways to strengthen the
relationship between troop- and police-contributing
countries, the Secretariat and the Security Council in
our consideration of peacekeeping mandates.
United Nations peacekeeping is a complex and
unique
global
partnership.
United
Nations
peacekeepers help fragile nations emerge from conflict
to find new stability. They are a scarce asset, and we
have a responsibility to ensure that they are deployed
to maximum effect in the places where they are needed
most.
I welcome the opportunity today to hear views
from across the partnership about how we may
strengthen our collective effort. I will restrict my own
statement to three short comments about how the
Security Council may improve its role supporting
peacekeeping. I feel that they may not be new, but that
they are worth reiterating.
First of all, the Council must understand the
operational challenges standing in the way of success
for our peacekeeping operations. That means greater
participation from those on the ground— from troopand police-contributing countries — when we examine
peacekeeping missions and their mandates. And it
means that we must understand not only where gaps in
resourcing lie, but how these specific gaps affect the
ability of a peacekeeping operation to fulfil its
mandate.
Secondly, we must be fully aware of progress on
the ground from across the peacebuilding community
in order to mandate a complementary role for
peacekeepers. We know that today’s conflicts require a
complex range of responses from peacekeepers. They
are often called upon to help protect civilian
populations, monitor and protect human rights, work to
build fledgling police forces and judiciaries in support
of national authorities, and support electoral processes.
The Council must understand how to mandate
peacekeepers to play an appropriate role as part of a
longer-term effort to build sustainable peace. That
requires coordination with a wide range of partners
with specialist skills from within the United Nations
funds and programmes, international financial

11-48151

S/PV.6603

institutions and regional and subregional organizations.
In such a complex environment, in order to write clear,
achievable and realistic mandates — a well-worn
refrain — this Council must be apprised of progress on
the ground by all of these actors.
My third point is that we must ensure this
Council has access to appropriate military expertise.
The United Kingdom supports the emerging tradition
to invite heads of military components to address the
Council. And as the presidential statement suggests, we
look forward to a similar consultation with the heads of
police components in the future.
The Military Staff Committee has demonstrated,
through its discussion in November last year of the
draft concept of operations of the African Union
Mission in Somalia, and of other issues since, that it
has an important role to play. But we must not get
caught up in process. All Council members can
contribute military advice to the Military Staff
Committee without recourse to Charter redrafting by
making the most of the informal mechanism. We do not
need further discussion about process; we should just
do it.
In addition to today’s debate, a number of other
initiatives are already in place to take this work
forward. We welcome the ongoing efforts of the
Security Council’s Working Group of the Whole on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, chaired by
Nigeria, and underline the need for this Group and
other key actors — including the Fifth Committee and
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations —
to complement one other’s work on that shared agenda.
In the past eight months we have seen once again
the critical role that United Nations peacekeeping
operations play in the maintenance of international
peace and security. United Nations peacekeepers serve
with dedication and courage to create a safer and more
stable environment in conflict and post-conflict zones
around the world. We owe them our gratitude.
Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to join in condemning the
criminal terrorist actions carried out today in Abuja,
which we condemn unconditionally and steadfastly. We
express sincere condolences to the Nigerian delegation
and through it to the Government of Nigeria to the
families of the bereaved, and to all staff of the United
Nations Secretariat regarding this crime.

11-48151

We thank the Indian delegation for convening
today’s important and timely meeting on peacekeeping
operations. The Russian Federation attaches great
significance to United Nations peacekeeping and
considers it an important instrument in ensuring
international peace and security — hence our
willingness and desire to actively help in those efforts.
Russian peacekeepers participate in peacekeeping
operations in the Middle East, in various African
regions and in Haiti.
United Nations peacekeeping is needed as never
before. Recently the Council took a decision on
deploying a new peacekeeping operation in the region
of Abyei in the Sudan. There has been an important
reorganization in the presence of the blue helmets in
the young Republic of South Sudan.
Two thirds of the total number of peacekeepers
are uniformed and play a leading role in meeting such
complex challenges as supporting efforts of national
governments to stabilize a situation and strengthen
peace, ensuring the protection of civilians, and
monitoring ceasefire compliance.
United Nations peacekeeping efforts continue to
evolve both conceptually and operationally. That will
help in expeditiously handling emerging problems and
effectively reacting to new political realities. Given the
increased number of complex peacekeeping operations,
in the past few years the Organization has experienced
an ever-growing demand on its resources and
consequently encountered an unprecedented number of
challenges. It is clear that resolving these issues
requires the interest and involvement of Member
States.
The recent situations encountered by the blue
helmets have again confirmed the nature of
fundamental peacekeeping principles. Peacekeepers
must strictly follow their mandates and remain neutral
and must not be drawn into intra-political conflicts or
provide support to any of the parties in the conflict, as
that could jeopardize the reputation of the world
organization.
The problem of ensuring the required level of
military expertise has not yet been resolved in
measures taken within United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Once again we reiterate our proposal to
step up the work of the Military Staff Committee.

11

S/PV.6603

The task of improving United Nations
peacekeeping requires more effective use of the
resources of regional organizations. Of course, the
mandates of peacekeeping operations must be clear,
implementable and adequate for the situation. The lack
of financial and material resources dictates the need for
optimal use of existing capabilities. In current
peacekeeping mandates, it is important to clearly
delineate the functions of peacekeeping and support for
post-conflict
peacebuilding.
United
Nations
peacekeepers should be tasked only with initial
peacebuilding
duties.
Processes
supporting
socioeconomic development should be more actively
undertaken by specialized United Nations agencies and
regional organizations.
We share the view that there is a need for ongoing
dialogue between the Council and troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) on all aspects of the work of
peacekeeping operations, including at the planning and
mandate-development stages. Interaction with TCCs
will allow the Council to develop clearer and more
realistic peacekeeping goals, with strict monitoring of
their implementation, and to curb attempts to broaden
their interpretation.
We hope that today’s meeting will confirm our
common interest in further improving the effectiveness
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, which
must be undertaken in compliance with the Charter of
the United Nations, the norms of international law, and
unfailing regard for the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security. This is the political guarantee of the
successful conduct of operations.
We would like to thank India for having prepared
the draft presidential statement, which we fully
support.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to join previous speakers in condemning in the
strongest terms the reprehensible attack just carried out
against the United Nations in Abuja. We express our
compassion for and solidarity with the victims and
their families, to the Government of Nigeria and,
through the Secretary-General, to all United Nations
staff, who prove their dedication to peace on a daily
basis.
I thank you, Sir, for your initiative to hold this
meeting on the most important subject of
peacekeeping, a pillar of United Nations activity.

12

France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Peacekeeping operations have become one of the
most visible areas of United Nations activity. We have
seen a considerable increase in recent years of the
resources deployed on the ground and the goals to be
met. The growing complexity and diversity of missions
require enhanced cooperation between regional
organizations and strengthened synergy among
peacekeeping and peacebuilding stakeholders.
I recall the steadfast commitment of France to
building United Nations peacekeeping capacities.
France participates in seven of the 16 peacekeeping
operations, contributing more than 1,500 men and
women. Beyond this direct contribution, France also
contributes approximately 6,000 men and women to
United Nations-mandated peacekeeping operations of
the European Union, NATO or on a national basis. As
such, France has a presence off the coast of Somalia
and in Kosovo, Afghanistan and Côte d’Ivoire.
Above all, France supports the participation of
African States in peacekeeping operations through
African peacekeeping capacity-building programmes.
In the context of training and support for African
contingents, France has established national schools
with a regional focus to impart operational and
technical expertise adapted to the needs of African
armies. These schools provide the same quality of
teaching given in France, adapted to local conditions.
Since 1997, more than 14,000 European and African
students have been trained in the 16 schools we
support.
Since the Franco-British initiative of 2009, we
have continued to call for strengthened military
expertise, enhanced cooperation between the Council
and troop- and police-contributing countries, and better
cost-control in peacekeeping operations.
While a number of recommendations of the
Brahimi report (S/2000/809), published more than 10
years ago, remain valid, I would like to focus on three
aspects that we view as vital for improving
peacekeeping: the protection of civilians, inter-mission
cooperation, and the establishment of peacekeeping-topeacebuilding transition strategies.
First, the protection of civilians is one of the
primary objectives of peacekeeping mandates.
Peacekeepers must be trained in this task and behave

11-48151

S/PV.6603

beyond reproach on the ground. Peacekeepers are
tasked with establishing an environment of security to
allow for the resumption of political processes. This
requires the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes,
including for children affected by conflict, security
sector
reform
programmes,
and
programmes
strengthening the rule of law.

Peacebuilding priorities must be taken into
account at the earliest stages of crisis management so
as to anticipate the conditions and mechanisms needed
to emerge from the crisis. It is therefore necessary to
take into account as soon as possible emerging threats
such as drug and human trafficking, organized crime
and corruption, which have the potential to destabilize
fragile countries.

Women are among the main assets for
transforming societies, and it is therefore vital to
strengthen their participation in decision-making.
Integrating women into police and armed forces will
make it possible to fight sexual and gender-based
violence and to promote human rights in these
institutions. Advisors on the protection of children and
women must play an ever greater role in missions.

In conclusion, we recall that the success of
peacekeeping missions is the result of the joint efforts
of Council members, financial contributors, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat. These
efforts are futile, however, without the firm
commitment of the host country.

Secondly,
with
regard
to
inter-mission
cooperation, when unforeseen events threaten to
destabilize a country and to cast it back into the cycle
of violence, inter-mission cooperation provides for a
specific and effective response to strengthen missions
in a timely manner with the personnel and materials
they need. We saw this in Côte d’Ivoire, where
cooperation between the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire and the United Nations Mission in
Liberia
played
a
decisive
role.
Helicopter
reinforcements allowed heavy weaponry to be
neutralized and continue to allow traffic and the
movement of mercenaries at the Liberian border to be
monitored.
Similarly, cooperation among missions and
peacebuilding offices, as well as with regional
organizations, must allow us to be more effective in the
fight against such cross-cutting threats as the Lord’s
Resistance Army in Africa, piracy or trafficking, which
have the potential to destabilize entire regions.
Finally, cooperation and the sharing of resources
among neighbouring missions should allow us to make
economies of scale in order to meet the demands of
good management and budget constraints.
Beyond the primary need to protect civilians,
there are also the need to develop crisis exit strategies
that ensure a return to lasting peace, particularly on the
social, economic and political fronts in societies often
decimated by conflict. We count on the Peacebuilding
Commission to instil greater coherence in the actions
of the international community in post-conflict
situations.

11-48151

Finally, France pays tribute to the Blue Helmets
of all nationalities, who sometimes give their lives in
their dedication to peace.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, I would like
to join the Secretary-General and my colleagues in
condemning today’s terrorist attacks in Abuja in the
strongest terms and to express our deep sympathy and
heartfelt condolences to its victims, their families, the
people and Government of Nigeria, and the United
Nations and all its members.
I wish to express our appreciation to you, Sir, for
having organized this important debate and to extend
our thanks to the Secretary-General for his important
introductory remarks.
Lebanon aligns itself with the statement to be
made by Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The success of United Nations peacekeeping
requires partnership and regular consultation among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troopcontributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries (PCCs). These notions are at the heart of the
draft presidential statement to be adopted today, which
Lebanon fully supports. We advocate the further
involvement of TCCs and PCCs in all the planning and
deployment stages of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
Peacekeeping should be not an end in itself, but
rather part of a solution. The comprehensive resolution
of conflicts by dealing with their root causes, whether
political, social or economic, remains the objective. In
our region, an end to the Israeli occupation in
Palestine, Syria and Lebanon — the root cause of the

13

S/PV.6603

conflict — is a prerequisite to any comprehensive
resolution and successful transition of United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the Middle East.
Peacekeeping is not an alternative to an inclusive
political process. It rather provides space for such
processes that can guarantee the protection of civilians
and the achievement of sustainable peace. Respect for
the safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers
and positions is not only critical to the implementation
of their mandate, but is also a measure of the primacy
of international law and respect for Security Council
resolutions.
Lebanon considers that the main underpinning of
the success of a peacekeeping operation rests on the
following elements: first, developing clear and
achievable mandates matched with the required
resources and timely logistical support; secondly,
adherence to the general principles of peacekeeping;
thirdly, a strong link between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding — the interactions between security and
development are clearer than ever; and fourthly,
strengthening the role of regional and subregional
organizations, specifically the African Union, in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter.
Peacekeeping remains the most cost-effective
method to avoid conflict. The goal is the realization of
more efficient peacekeeping adapted to the new
complex realities of military, police, civilian and
humanitarian components all together, in some
missions and mandates that have less to do with
conflict between States and more with intra-State
conflict.

growth, it is high time to draw on lessons learned in
order to improve the critical early peacebuilding tasks
undertaken by peacekeepers. We should focus not only
on areas such as police, corrections, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and security sector
reform, among others, but also on economic revival
and sustainable development. It is clear today that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are not sequential. It
is also clear that transition should be based on
benchmarking against indicators in all fields.
On capability development, we all know where
the critical gaps are. We thus need a comprehensive,
capability-driven approach that addresses uniform
capability requirements, including force enablers such
as air assets, as well as civilian ones.
On global field support, we are glad that the
Secretariat has moved from a mission-centred to a
more global management approach.
Turning now to Lebanon, we reiterate the full
support of the Lebanese people and their Government
to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) and the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization (UNTSO). We would also like to reiterate
our condemnation in the strongest terms of all attacks
that have targeted UNIFIL and UNTSO. The Lebanese
people highly appreciate the important role that
UNIFIL plays in South Lebanon and fully recognizes
the grave sacrifices it has made. UNIFIL has been
steadfast in its support for the Lebanese people in their
efforts to end the Israeli occupation of their land.
UNIFIL is also our partner in mine clearance and in
development efforts in South Lebanon. The Lebanese
people and their Government express their sincere
thanks and appreciation to the peoples and
Governments of each and every troop-contributing
country.

To achieve that goal, and to ensure the creation of
a more predictable, professional and accountable
peacekeeping system, we should emphasize the key
role of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations in policy formulation and development. We
should also enhance regular coordination on
peacebuilding
tasks
with
the
Peacebuilding
Commission in a manner that stresses national
ownership and the prioritization of peacebuilding
needs. To also ensure that peacekeeping remains an
expression of our collective security actions, we should
enlarge the base of troop-contributing countries in a
manner that responds to the scope and scale of
peacekeeping needs.

Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): First and foremost,
echoing my Government’s note issued early this
morning, I would like to express my country’s
condemnation and regret regarding the terrible attack
against the United Nations in Abuja. We express our
condolences to the families of the victims, to the
people and Government of Nigeria and, through the
Secretary-General, to the whole United Nations family.
Brazil supports a firm condemnation by the Security
Council of this outrageous act.

As peacekeeping now appears to be entering a
period of consolidation after a substantial period of

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing this morning.

14

11-48151

S/PV.6603

I commend your delegation, Mr. President, for
promoting today’s debate and for the thoughtful
concept note that you have provided (S/2011/496,
annex). As one of the largest contributors to
peacekeeping today, India is particularly well placed to
lead a discussion on the future of these operations.
The complexities of the situations that Blue
Helmets encounter demand a constant effort to improve
the functioning of the peacekeeping system. At the
moment, we face two main challenges.
The first challenge is ensuring that peacekeeping
generates a truly sustainable peace. In the current
financial climate, there will always be pressure to do
less or to draw down earlier. However, especially in
times of straitened means, we must break the cycle of
violence and establish the basis for long-term peace.
Renewed attention must be given to early
peacebuilding and the promotion of political solutions
to conflict.
The second challenge is making our troops on the
ground more effective. Our performance can and
should be constantly improved. We must work harder
to build a common understanding of what is expected
of peacekeepers, including through the development of
baseline standards. We also support the Secretariat in
its continued efforts to elaborate more advanced,
scenario-based training, especially regarding the
protection of civilians and response to conflict-related
sexual violence.
The United Nations must also ensure that
countries willing to contribute have the material
conditions to prepare, train and equip them in an
adequate fashion. This must include both direct support
to troop-contributing countries and cooperation to
increase the capabilities of regional organizations such
as the African Union.
The draft presidential statement to be adopted
today signals the Council’s firm commitment to the
guiding principles of peacekeeping: consent of the
parties, impartiality, and use of force only in selfdefence or in defence of the mandate. It also underlines
that peacekeeping is built upon the concept of
partnership and highlights the central role of troopcontributing countries in that partnership.
Each country makes a distinctive contribution.
The individual capabilities and viewpoints that each
troop-contributing country has to offer must be

11-48151

recognized and encouraged. The Charter itself
underlines the need for the Council to consult countries
that provide armed forces to it.
Strengthening triangular cooperation between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the troopcontributing countries is therefore very important. The
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations can
make crucial contributions in this regard.
In Haiti and elsewhere, Brazil has sought to make
its distinctive contribution to peacekeeping. Brazilian
troops, police and military observers are present in
seven peacekeeping missions across four continents.
Brazil’s culture and experience have led us to give
particular emphasis to, for example, civil-military
cooperation, military engineering, and pairing military
operations with social action.
Brazil’s long-standing commitment to United
Nations peacekeeping reflects our determination to
make a positive contribution to maintaining
international peace and security. The United Nations
can continue to count on Brazil to maintain and enforce
the highest standards of conduct and discipline and to
send the most capable and qualified volunteers to serve
under the United Nations flag.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): Let
me begin, as others have, with a word on what
happened in Abuja, Nigeria, this morning. The United
States condemns in the strongest possible terms the
horrific attack on the United Nations offices in Abuja
this morning. The victims are humanitarians,
development experts, and members of our United
Nations family. We stand ready to offer whatever help
and assistance are needed by the United Nations and
our Nigerian friends to recover, to rebuild and to bring
the perpetrators to justice. We extend our deepest
condolences to the United Nations, to the people of
Nigeria and to the families, friends and colleagues of
the victims.
I am honoured to convey the United States warm
thanks to India and to you personally, Sir, for having
organized today’s open debate on peacekeeping
operations. It is particularly appropriate for India to
have organized this debate, given its decades-long
commitment as a leading contributor of troops and
police to United Nations operations across the globe.
We thank your for your country’s contributions and
sacrifice.

15

S/PV.6603

We would also like to extend our compliments on
the thought-provoking concept paper (S/2011/496,
annex) that you circulated to the Council to stimulate
discussion. The paper has helped to bring to the fore
issues on which we hold different perspectives, and has
also enabled us to see where we are all in clear
agreement.
First and foremost, we fully concur that the
success of United Nations peacekeeping is dependent
on a strong partnership among the Security Council
members, the troop-contributing countries (TCCs),
police-contributing countries (PCCs) and the
Secretariat. We are particularly pleased that today’s
draft presidential statement calls for concrete measures
to enhance the Council’s consultations with TCCs and
PCCs, and seeks more regular input from United
Nations force commanders, police commissioners and
other current and acting serving uniformed personnel
who can provide us with a critical understanding of the
challenges and realities they face on the ground. We
also welcome India’s suggestion that the Council more
regularly enlist the good offices and diplomatic
engagement of TCCs and PCCs in countries or regions
where peacekeeping operations are deployed and where
their engagement could bolster efforts to overcome
challenges and obstacles to a peace process.
As we take these steps, we concurrently renew
our commitment to the full peacekeeping reform
agenda that has been the subject of intense discussion
in the Security Council and the General Assembly’s
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
Several aspects of that reform agenda remain important
works in progress.
With respect to the protection of civilians, we
welcome the work being done by the Secretariat to
develop operational training and planning tools to
enhance the ability of United Nations peacekeeping
operations to effectively implement their protection of
civilians mandates. We encourage troop and police
contributors, as well as missions in the field, to use this
material and provide feedback.
With respect to helicopters, we share the concerns
of the Secretariat and the TCCs that the chronic lack of
military helicopters significantly hampers the ability of
United Nations peacekeeping operations to implement
their mandates, including for the protection of
civilians. We believe that addressing this strategic gap
should remain a high priority and requires a

16

multifaceted response and creative thinking from
Member States and the Secretariat alike.
On mission leadership, we appreciate the
Secretary-General’s recent efforts to strengthen the
appointment process for senior field personnel. The
quality of mission leadership can sometimes mean the
difference between success and failure. We support
measures to equip and empower mission leaders to
implement their mandates and to hold them
accountable for results. But this responsibility is not
the Secretary-General’s alone. We, the Member States,
must put forward our very best and most qualified
candidates for senior leadership positions.
On standards and capabilities, properly equipping
mission leaders means providing them with troops able
to meet clear performance standards. We welcome the
Secretariat’s recent work to develop model standards
for infantry battalions.
On the rule of law, we believe that equal if not
greater attention is required to enhancing the United
Nations performance standards in the areas of police,
justice and corrections. The work to strengthen local
rule of law institutions is critical to building a selfsustaining peace. Further, the different parts of the
United Nations system engaged in the rule of law need
to strengthen their partnership and deliver as one.
On civilian capacity, the rule of law is one but not
the only area where there is much work to be done to
ensure that the United Nations has qualified civilians
available as and when needed. The Senior Advisory
Group report on civilian capacity (S/2011/85)
illuminated the issues that we must address to provide
post-conflict countries and special representatives of
the Secretary-General with the best deployable civilian
expertise to support political processes and develop
national capacities. The United States welcomes the
work of Under-Secretary-General Malcorra and her
team to develop implementable measures from the
Guéhenno report’s recommendations.
There is a lot of good work being done to
improve United Nations peacekeeping, but there are
equally some serious challenges and gaps. As we go
forward, we encourage the Secretary-General to give
us candid assessments of what missions can and cannot
do within the capabilities available to them. If a
mission is unable to effectively discharge its mandate
for the protection of civilians because it lacks
adequately trained and equipped troops, is missing

11-48151

S/PV.6603

desperately needed helicopters, suffers from deficient
command, control and communications systems, or
struggles with certain TCCs maintaining national
caveats, then we need to know. And while it is true that
gaps may exist between mandates and means, let us
also recognize that a third key ingredient is the
political will of individual missions or troop
contingents to take robust action when they have the
means and the mandate to do so.
We look forward to further discussion among all
peacekeeping stakeholders on providing peacekeepers
with the mandates and means they need, as well as the
resolve that host populations rightfully demand and
expect. The United States applauds the many
achievements of United Nations peacekeeping over
more than 60 years. We honour the sacrifices of the
men and women — military, police and civilian — who
have served under the blue United Nations flag in the
furtherance of peace, and especially remember with our
deepest gratitude those who have lost their lives in
service.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of my Government, allow me to express our
deep sorrow and concern in regards to the bombing of
the United Nations building in Abuja. This act must
certainly be strongly condemned. Allow me also to
express our condolences to the Government of Nigeria,
the Nigerian people, the United Nations family and, of
course, the families of all the victims.
At the outset, we would like to thank India for
having organized this important debate, and the
Secretary-General for his important contribution today.
As the key instrument of the Security Council and
a collective undertaking of Member States committed
to maintaining international peace and security,
peacekeeping has evolved into an enterprise complex
in the scope of its mandates, size and nature. In order
to retain their credibility and effectively discharge their
mandate, missions must be based on a clear and
common understanding of the guiding principles of
peacekeeping: the consent of the parties, non-use of
force except in self-defence, and impartiality.
Peacekeeping missions must be provided with
clear, credible and achievable mandates, matched with
adequate resources, in order to fulfil their mandated
tasks. With significant peacebuilding tasks in their
mandates, such multidimensional peacekeeping
missions now include diverse activities and require

11-48151

manifold expertise. Coordination between the
peacekeeping mission and other stakeholders must be
exercised in a coherent and integrated manner.
From its inception phase, the mission needs to
anticipate and analyse which structures of the host
Government should be supported in order to provide
sufficient
capacity
to
gradually
take
over
responsibilities from a peacekeeping mission. The
issue of consent and its possible implications for the
concept of State sovereignty are of vital importance
where the concerns and priorities of the host
Government must be taken into account.
Building the capacities of regional and
subregional organizations is an important additional
aspect, in which the transfer of knowledge, training
and the application of lessons learned from previous
peacekeeping missions are crucial. Additionally,
integrating mission expertise and experience and
improving the consideration of and reflection on early
peacebuilding tasks in the mandates and composition
of peacekeeping operations will lead towards a better,
more successful and effective transition from a
peacekeeping mission to other forms of United Nations
presence.
More efficient exchange of information and
consultations among the Council, the Secretariat and
troop- contributing countries (TCCs) and policecontributing countries (PCCs) are indispensable. In that
way, the Council can receive credible information from
the field that is relevant to the decision-making
process, while TCCs and PCCs can optimize their
contributions. We believe that regular meetings
between the Council members and TCCs and PCCs
before the mandate renewal should include a detailed
agenda to encourage discussions on operational
challenges and mandate implementation on the ground.
The Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
has an important role as a forum for the exchange of
views on enhancing cooperation among the TCCs and
PCCs, the Secretariat and the Security Council. We
believe
that
the
concrete
and
practical
recommendations of the forum should be taken into
consideration by all relevant stakeholders. Briefings by
heads of military components or on the mandate
implementation of individual peacekeeping missions
should contribute not only to a better understanding of
operational challenges, but also to how available
capabilities influence mandate implementation.

17

S/PV.6603

Member States should continue to improve their
efforts in responding to requests for the provision of
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping operations.
They need to be fully aware of requirements related to
the force generation process, particularly in the early
stages of mandate formulation.
As a troop- and police-contributing country,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has always emphasized the
importance of cooperation, consultations and exchange
of views with troop- and police-contributing countries
in order to reach a common understanding of a
mission’s mandate and implementation. That is also
necessary for mobilizing and generating the support of
Member States with regard to skills, equipment or
capacity.
In order to make peacekeeping more effective, all
stakeholders must be meaningfully engaged. They need
to optimize their performance, increase or make the
best use of available resources, and, finally, constantly
assess, build upon and advance that complex enterprise
mandated to perform tasks for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Mr. Berger (Germany): Germany strongly
condemns the terrorist attack against United Nations
House in Abuja. We convey our heartfelt condolences
to the families of the victims, the Government of
Nigeria and the whole United Nations family.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his insightful briefing and you, Mr. President, for
organizing today’s important debate. As we all know,
India is one of the countries that has most contributed
to peacekeeping over many decades. Germany aligns
itself with the statement to be made by the European
Union observer a little later. We commend the active
and useful role of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations in this field, and we would like to thank
Ambassador Ogwu for her able chairmanship.
Peacekeeping operations are at the heart of the
United Nations role to maintain international peace and
security. We need a comprehensive and coherent
approach. That includes the need to continually adapt
preventive diplomacy, peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding to changing circumstances. In recent
years, much has been achieved in terms of reforming
United Nations peacekeeping, including doctrine and
capability review. Building on those efforts to adapt
and to strengthen effective peacekeeping, we consider
it vital to continuously review and develop its key

18

areas, in particular the design and management of
missions; delivery in the field, including enhanced
deployment; clarifying and delivering on critical roles;
and improving mission impact and building for the
future. Against that backdrop, I would like to highlight
some specific aspects that are of particular concern to
us in those key areas.
First, designing mandates and missions should
build on an inclusive planning process, involving at an
early stage a broad range of experts and potential
capability providers, notably including troopcontributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries (PCCs), as well as the main financial
contributors. The role of corrections in peacekeeping
settings should also be taken into account. A decisionmaking process that includes interaction with major
stakeholders at an early stage could contribute to
managing expectations and facilitate an effective force
generation process. Such procedures are mandatory in
other international organizations. To that end, the role
of the Military Staff Committee should be revitalized
and strengthened.
Furthermore, from the beginning, whenever
possible, peacekeeping mandates should have clear
benchmarks inserted and monitored in order to lay the
ground for transition towards exit, based on sustainable
political solutions. Partnership in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding is crucial. We fully support initiatives to
improve communication and to find a better system for
consistently pooling information from TCCs, military
experts, PCCs, the main financial contributors and
other key stakeholders in peace processes.
Secondly, with regard to delivery in the field,
including enhanced deployment, peacekeeping requires
adequate means and efficient structures. In that
context, we strongly support the implementation of the
global field support strategy.
In reference to the deployment of staff, let me
add two points on civilian staff and police. Civilian
staff have a critical role to play in the peacekeeping
context as they provide political, humanitarian, human
rights and leadership roles, as well as management and
related administrative functions. In that context, I
would like to reiterate our support for the swift
implementation of the civilian capacities review. We
should build on existing local capacities and the
capacities
of
Member
States
and
regional
organizations. Internal United Nations rules and

11-48151

S/PV.6603

regulations need to be adapted in order to improve
conditions for Member States that wish to support the
United Nations with their civilian capacities.
Police generation, however difficult, remains
crucial. While the global commitment of trained police
is high, the challenge to source sufficient numbers of
police to ensure that well-trained police officers are
sent to secure the sustainability of their effort remains.
Thirdly, with regard to delivering on critical
roles, the protection of civilians has increasingly
become a yardstick for measuring the success of
peacekeeping operations. That represents both an
opportunity and a challenge. It is an opportunity since
the protection of civilians is now widely accepted as a
part of peacekeeping mandates, while respecting the
primary responsibility of States to protect their
civilians. However, it also represents a challenge with
regard to the discrepancy between aspirations, also
contained in mandates of the Security Council, and the
reality on the ground, notably with respect to the
capabilities of missions to effectively implement
protection tasks. We therefore advocate strengthening
the evaluation of protection measures, fostering intermission exchange and drawing on lessons learned more
intensively.
In the context of the protection of civilians,
children in armed conflict deserve our special
attention. They are the most vulnerable members of
societies, both as victims and as coerced participants in
conflicts. Special protection from violence, including
sexual violence, and for schools and hospitals is
necessary, as stated in the recently adopted resolution
1998 (2011), as are specific approaches in the field of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
Peacekeepers transform mandates into concrete
actions on the ground and keep hope for peace alive.
Clearly defined mandates, adequate resources and
reliable command and control structures are crucial for
successful peacekeeping. They are also crucial for a
successful
transition
from
peacekeeping
to
peacebuilding.
Germany remains committed to all initiatives
supporting more efficient and effective peacekeeping.
There are no alternatives to peacekeeping operations.
However, we should keep in mind that their
deployment should be a last resort. The prevention of
conflicts needs to be the priority.

11-48151

To conclude, let me take this opportunity to thank
all United Nations military and civilian personnel
involved in past and current peacekeeping operations
for their duty and to express our deepest appreciation.
I thank the Indian delegation for preparing the
draft presidential statement, which we fully support.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa joins
the Secretary-General in condemning in the strongest
possible terms the bombing of the United Nations
building in Abuja. We express our deep sympathy and
condolences to the victims of this heinous crime, to
their families, to the people and Government of our
sister country Nigeria and to the United Nations family.
We thank the Indian delegation for organizing
this important debate on the state of United Nations
peacekeeping. We also thank the Secretary-General for
sharing his views on this flagship activity of the
Organization.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Morocco on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
This debate highlights once again the urgency of
meaningfully and collectively addressing the
complexity of peacekeeping today. Peacekeeping is one
of the major means at the disposal of the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council, in fulfilling
its Charter-mandated responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security.
We would like to stress that peacekeeping is not
by itself a panacea for conflict resolution. It must be an
integral part of the broader political solution to the
underlying causes of conflict. South Africa therefore
supports efforts to promote and strengthen political
solutions to conflicts, including through mediation,
conflict
prevention
and
management
and
peacebuilding. That is clearly espoused in Chapter VI
of the Charter of the United Nations.
In light of the changing nature of conflict
characterized by intra-State conflicts, strong military
States and well-resourced opposition groups, the
Security Council must emphasize making full use of
political processes, including those initiated by
regional organizations. In that way, peacekeeping
missions can simultaneously help to support efforts to
achieve sustainable peace.

19

S/PV.6603

My delegation wishes to reiterate that United
Nations peacekeeping missions must consistently be in
consonance with the principles and goals enshrined in
the United Nations Charter. The principles of consent
of parties, the non-use of force except in self-defence,
clear and robust mandates, and impartiality must be
faithfully adhered to. We must ensure that United
Nations peacekeeping is not politicized or misused in
any manner other than that mandated by the Council.
We must guard against the perception that United
Nations peacekeeping is partisan, as that undermines
the credibility of the United Nations.
The issue of flexible, predictable and sustainable
resources for peacekeeping operations — especially as
it relates to the African continent — is critical. The
African Union continues to play a leading role in
conflict prevention and management and the resolution
of conflicts on the continent, in line with Chapter VIII
of the United Nations Charter. It will be necessary for
this Council to take bold steps and move beyond wellknown rhetoric to ensure that African Union missions
that are authorized by the Council, including the
African Union Mission in Somalia, are provided with
sufficient resources, enablers and capabilities to carry
out their mandates.
While we are further encouraged by the
Secretary-General’s observation in his report on
support to African Union peacekeeping operations
(S/2009/470), which acknowledges the African
contribution to peacekeeping, the report also highlights
Africa’s needs in the area of conflict management. We
believe the report also reaffirms the role of regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security, as provided for in Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter.
My delegation is of the view that burden-sharing
is key to dealing with the complex challenges of
peacekeeping. While many of us acknowledge the
importance of our collective responsibility for effective
peacekeeping, that should be guided by political will
and matched by actual actions on the ground. For that
reason we encourage the general membership of the
United Nations to generously contribute to all
peacekeeping operations, both in personnel and
equipment.
South Africa supports the enhancement of the
triangular cooperation among the Security Council,
troop-contributing
countries
(TCCs)
and
the

20

Secretariat, aimed at improving the effectiveness of
peacekeeping from the planning through to the exit
stages. We also commend the role of the Security
Council Working Group of the Whole on Peacekeeping
Operations, under the chairmanship of Nigeria, which
has been integral to enhancing the Council’s
relationship with TCCs.
It is common knowledge that peacekeepers are
early peacebuilders, as they primarily provide a secure
environment conducive to the implementation of early
peacebuilding tasks. South Africa maintains that
integrated peacekeeping and peacebuilding can play an
important role in establishing the foundations for
sustainable peace, rule of law and good governance.
Creating, maintaining and sustaining peace require an
integrated
approach
that
incorporates
early
peacebuilding activities during the start-up of
peacekeeping missions.
We believe that gender mainstreaming in peace
missions ensures that women’s concerns and
experiences are at the forefront of the policy aspects of
peacekeeping operations. We commend the work that
has been done so far by the Secretary-General to
ensure that the number of women in leadership
positions is increased. South Africa welcomes the
strategic role that UN-Women will play in facilitating
the integration of gender perspective in the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates.
We look forward to the adoption of the draft
presidential statement before us, as it will add impetus
to the Council’s peacekeeping efforts and build on its
relationship with TCCs.
Finally, we pay tribute to all the men and women
who have served and to those who will continue to
serve in United Nations peacekeeping operations. We
commend their dedication and courage to keep the
world a safer and better place. We pay special tribute to
those who have paid the ultimate price in the service of
peace and humanity.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
participation and statement in today’s open debate. I
also want to join the Secretary-General and other
colleagues members of the Security Council in
condemning in the strongest terms the bombing of the

11-48151

S/PV.6603

United Nations building in Abuja, Nigeria, this
morning. It caused numerous deaths and injuries, and I
join others in expressing our deep sympathy and
condolences to the victims of this heinous crime and to
their families and to the people and Government of
Nigeria. I also join the Secretary-General in conveying
to the larger United Nations family our deepest
sympathies on this tragic terrorist action.
Peacekeeping is a term that does not find mention
in the United Nations Charter. Yet it has become the
face of the United Nations. It consumes more
resources, employs more people and occupies a greater
share of the Security Council’s time than any other
single issue, and no other Council instrument has had a
greater impact on the provenance and application of
international law and international humanitarian law
than its peacekeeping mandates. Peacekeeping has also
generated a reputation of impartiality and fairness for
the United Nations.
India is proud to have been associated with
United Nations peacekeeping from its very inception.
As a country that has contributed more than 100,000
peacekeepers to virtually every United Nations
peacekeeping operation over the past six decades, we
are also conscious that much has changed since the
first peacekeeping missions were launched more than
five decades ago.
The
geopolitical
environment
in
which
peacekeeping is conducted today is vastly different
from that of those days. Global capabilities —
economic, political and military — have also shifted
significantly. Moreover, today peacekeeping missions
deal predominantly with intra-State issues rather than
play the classic role of interposing troops between
warring States. The peacekeeping agenda has also
added new dimensions to various civilian and policing
domains, and United Nations initiatives on
peacebuilding demand close examination of the entire
enterprise of peacekeeping.
The challenge before the international community
is to build on the legacy of peacekeeping and ensure
that it remains relevant to current realities. Today,
United Nations peacekeeping faces a number of
challenges, including the central resource gap
challenge and peacekeepers being asked to do more
with less. Ambitious agendas are not being backed by
the necessary financial, operational and logistical
resources. That lack of resources affects the

11-48151

operational effectiveness of peacekeeping and casts a
shadow on the credibility of the Council’s mandates.
Mandates also need to be relevant to realities in the
ground.
Suggestions that the Council adopt a two-stage
mandate-creation process that takes into account the
complexities on the ground and matches those with
resource requirements need to be seriously and
urgently considered by the Council. In-depth
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries should be an integral part of the mandategeneration process.
India also notes the slow and cumbersome
process of recruitment for key positions. This process
will not only be speeded up by greater reliance on
seconded capacities from Governments of Member
States, but will also benefit from their real experiences
in nation-building. This holds true not only for field
positions but also in the management structures of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support.
Given the importance of Africa on the United
Nations peacekeeping agenda, India supports the
capacity-building of the African Union (AU) peace and
security architecture so that the AU may become a
more effective and capable partner of the United
Nations system.
Peacekeeping is a partnership involving members
of this Council, the General Assembly, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the host country. It is
critical that the guiding principles of consent, the
non-use of force except in self-defence or the defence
of the mandate, and impartiality be strenuously
guarded. This is important to ensure that United
Nations peacekeeping retains its credibility and
universal acceptability.
Of late, several United Nations peacekeeping
mandates have included tasks that raise questions on
the fundamental tenet of consent, placing peacekeepers
in difficult legal circumstances and thereby hampering
their effectiveness. The principle of national ownership
needs to occupy centre stage in all peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities of the United Nations.
I would like to conclude by paying homage to
those peacekeepers, including from my country, who
have laid down their lives while serving in United
Nations missions.

21

S/PV.6603

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

generation in the early stages of mandate
formulation.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

“The Security Council believes that United
Nations peacekeeping is a unique global
partnership that draws together the contribution
and commitment of the entire United Nations
system. The Security Council stresses the need to
improve the communication between the Security
Council, the troop-contributing countries and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat
and other stakeholders in accordance with
resolution 1353 (2001) to foster a spirit of
partnership, cooperation, confidence and mutual
trust and to ensure that the Security Council has
the benefit of the views of those serving in the
field when making its decisions about
peacekeeping mandates. The Security Council
also underlines the importance of an improved
system of consultations amongst these actors, in
order to promote a common understanding of the
situation on the ground, of the mission’s mandate
and of its implementation. The Council welcomes
practical suggestions to improve this relationship
and underscores the useful role of its Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations.

“The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
“The Security Council affirms that respect
for the basic principles of peacekeeping,
including consent of the parties, impartiality and
the non-use of force except in self-defence and
the defence of a mandate authorized by the
Security Council, is essential to the success of
peacekeeping operations.
“The Security Council stresses the role of
the United Nations peacekeepers in supporting
efforts to promote political processes and
peaceful settlements of disputes. The Security
Council underlines the need for precise, full and
effective implementation of mandates and its
intention to continue to review and monitor such
implementation on a regular basis. The Security
Council recognizes the role of regional
organizations in peacekeeping in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charier.
“The Security Council recognizes the
importance of providing peacekeeping operations
with clear, credible and achievable mandates. It
also recognizes the need for an adequate
provision, management and efficient and
effective use of operational and logistical
resources for peacekeeping operations, in
congruence with approved mandates and based on
a realistic assessment of the situation. The
Security Council also requests that the SecretaryGeneral include a realistic assessment of how
available capabilities and logistic planning affect
implementation of the various mandate elements
in briefings regarding specific peacekeeping
operations.
“The Security Council welcomes efforts by
Member States to respond more quickly to
requests for the provision of personnel to take
part in United Nations peacekeeping operations
and underlines the importance of swift force

22

“The Security Council reaffirms the
recommendations made in its resolutions 1327
(2000) and 1353 (2001) and in the statements of its
President dated 3 May 1994 (S/PRST/1994/22),
4 November 1994 (S/PRST/1994/62), 28 March
1996 (S/PRST/1996/13), 31 January 2001
(S/PRST/2001/3), 17 May 2004 (S/PRST/2004/16)
and 5 August 2009 (S/PRST/2009/24) and the note
by its President of 14 January 2002 (S/2002/56)
and confirms its intentions to strengthen further
efforts to implement fully these recommendations.
“The Security Council recalls, in particular,
the statement of its President dated 4 November
1994 (S/PRST/1994/62) and its resolution 1353
(2001) and the decision contained therein to
circulate an informal paper setting out the
agenda, including issues to be covered and
drawing attention to the relevant background
documentation to troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs)
when they are invited to attend meetings with the
Council or the Secretary-General. The Council
requests that the Secretariat circulate to troopcontributing countries and police-contributing

11-48151

S/PV.6603

countries by the 15th of each month notice of and
invitation to the Council’s upcoming TCC/PCC
meetings that are anticipated to take place during
the following month on individual peacekeeping
mission mandates. This routine notification
mechanism shall not constrain the Council from
convening additional special, emergency or shortnotice TCC/PCC meetings as circumstances may
make appropriate.
“The Security Council recognizes the need
to improve its access to military advice, including
from troop-contributing countries, and intends to
pursue its work on mechanisms to that effect. The
Council will continue to review the role of the
Military Staff Committee. The Security Council
recognizes the benefit of maintaining regular
contact with mission senior leadership, including
through an annual briefing by heads of military
components. The Council would welcome similar
briefings by heads of police components in order
to improve understanding of operational
challenges.
“The Council expresses its commitment to
continuing to improve its consideration of and
reflection on early peacebuilding tasks in the
mandates and composition of peacekeeping
operations. In this context, the Council notes with
appreciation the contribution that peacekeepers
and peacekeeping missions make to early
peacebuilding and recognizes the need to
integrate mission expertise and experience into
the development of peacebuilding strategies.
“The Council also recognizes the important
work conducted by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping
Operations
and
the
Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly.
“The Council commits to making progress
on the issue of more meaningful engagement with
troop-contributing
countries
and
policecontributing countries and to reviewing progress
in 2012.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2011/17.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes

11-48151

in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Guatemala.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala wishes to join the delegations that have
expressed their horror at the attack carried out this
morning in Abuja. We offer our profound condolences
to the United Nations family and the Government and
people of Nigeria.
Allow me, Sir, to thank you for having convened
this open debate on the subject of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and in particular for the very
pertinent concept note you prepared to guide our
debate (S/2011/496, annex). I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his presentation to us this
morning.
Guatemala is a country that has benefited from
United Nations peacekeeping, especially in the area of
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
immediately after our peace accords were signed in late
1996. We have also participated actively in
peacekeeping operations as a troop-contributing
country. In other words, we have been both a
beneficiary of and contributor to peacekeeping, and the
topic is therefore of more than passing interest to us.
We agree with the concept note that peacekeeping
operations have been a central enterprise of our
Organization, and, on balance, highly successful. Their
nature and scope have changed considerably over the
years, especially since the landmark report of Lakhdar
Brahimi of 2000 (S/2000/809). We note from the
United Nations website on peacekeeping that, since
then, the Secretariat has prepared 21 major reports on
the subject, covering many areas that had not
previously been taken into account. There is also a
forward-looking agenda thanks to the New Horizon
process, of which the concept note curiously makes no
mention.
Peacekeeping
also
dovetails
into
peacebuilding, which widens and deepens this thematic
topic.
I would like to address only one aspect of this
broad and complex topic, which relates to the
distribution of responsibilities among Member States in
peacekeeping operations. The issue is mentioned in the
concept note, but my inspiration comes primarily from
my personal experience chairing the discussions in the

23

S/PV.6603

Fifth Committee on the peacekeeping budget for July
2011 to June 2012. My main point is that, so long as
roughly 90 per cent of the budget is provided by less
than 10 industrialized countries, while roughly 90 per
cent of the troops are provided by a different set of 10
developing countries, we will have a great deal of
accumulated tension that is tantamount to an accident
waiting to happen, or, if you will, a potential collision
between States that could compromise the future of
such endeavours.
A statement of only five, or rather four, minutes
does not leave much room for elaboration, and even
less for formulating proposals. But the diagnosis is
clear. We must rationalize the manner in which the
rates of reimbursement for costs undertaken by troopcontributing countries are calculated. On the other side
of the equation, we may want to revisit the scale of
assessments to finance peacekeeping.
My main concern, however, arises from the troop
contributor’s point of view. There is no rational
explanation of how the rates for compensating troop
and equipment contributors are calculated, and no
rational cost-benefit analysis on United Nations
peacekeeping as a whole. Of course, the benefit of
saving lives and keeping the peace cannot be expressed
in dollars and cents, but the costs of doing so do have
precise numerical values. The only thing we have to go
on for now is that, clearly, the United Nations is getting
value for money when it comes to peacekeeping.
In our judgment, it is not useful to view
peacekeeping as a large-scale outsourcing exercise
through which developed countries contract lower-cost
troops from developing countries to carry out the hard
and dangerous work. Among other things, this is quite
degrading for troop-contributing countries.
Speaking for my own country at least, we
perceive participation in peacekeeping not as a wellremunerated service, but as a genuine partnership
under the flag of the United Nations in order to
accomplish what the Charter intended — the noble aim
of keeping the peace. It is the sense of pride and
professionalization of our armed forces, as well as a
sense of commitment, that motivate us to participate in
peacekeeping, even in countries far from our own, such
as the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Having said that, we expect to recuperate the cost
of our participation in peacekeeping, in the spirit
reflected in General Assembly resolution 63/285 and

24

further developed in paragraphs 69 and 70 of
resolution 65/289 on the review of the methodology for
rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I would like to express my country’s most
vigorous condemnation of the attack on United Nations
House in Abuja, and extend our condolences to the
families of the victims, the Government of Nigeria and
the United Nations family.
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on the work
you have carried out in presiding over the Security
Council during the month of August and to thank you
for having convened this open debate on an issue to
which Argentina attributes great importance.
Argentina supports the development of a
transparent and democratic peacekeeping system
within the framework of the United Nations, with
consolidated multilateral institutions and mechanisms
that serve to ensure respect for international law. Since
peacekeeping operations are the essential United
Nations tool for maintaining international peace and
security, our active participation in these operations is
clear evidence of our commitment to that system,
which in our view must be progressively improved and
strengthened.
In addition to contributing to strengthening the
peacekeeping system, another fundamental reason for
our participation in peacekeeping missions is the close
link between peacekeeping and the protection of
human rights, particularly through the rebuilding of
institutions and the strengthening of democracy and the
rule of law in countries where increasingly complex
multidimensional operations are deployed. In this
regard, we believe that the move towards this type of
more complex and integrated mission, with a clear
mandate and robust rules of engagement, constitutes
one of the greatest achievements of the last decade and
one which we must preserve and improve.
Argentina is currently participating in six
peacekeeping operations with both military and police
personnel. Recently, together with Chile, we offered
the United Nations the Cruz del Sur combined joint
peacekeeping force, which, as of 2012, will be
available to the United Nations standby arrangements
system. Also in 2012, along with Peru, we expect to

11-48151

S/PV.6603

have an engineer contingent ready to offer for
deployment to the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
All that I have just said regarding the future of
peacekeeping operations is contingent on their having
adequate financing. In this regard, as Chair of the
Group of 77 and China, my country has just
painstakingly negotiated, in the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly, a draft resolution that reflects the
consensus on the next measures to be adopted, given
the need for the efforts of troop- and policecontributing countries to be met by an equivalent
commitment by those countries with higher financial
responsibilities. This is not merely a budgetary matter,
but a political one that affects the performance and
credibility of the Organization in the critical field of
peacekeeping and that must therefore be duly taken
into consideration when evaluating and planning any
future peace mission.
My country discussed this and other matters this
year in the troubled substantive session of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and in the
General Assembly, and has adopted a constructive
approach in this respect. The founding principle of our
position is respect for national participation by the
societies in which the peacekeeping missions are
deployed. On this basis, Argentina favours any
improvement to the missions’ mechanisms that
contributes to the effective discharge of their mandates
and allows for better performance and conditions for
the personnel deployed on the ground. In this respect,
we believe that the creation of the Department of Field
Support and the progressive implementation of the
field support strategy are wise moves that will allow us
to optimize resources and make peacekeeping more
effective.
There is consensus among the Members of the
Organization regarding the need to improve the United
Nations capacity to carry out peacekeeping operations
by strengthening the cooperative partnership that, in
practice, comprises Security Council members —
which design the missions’ mandates — the
Secretariat, the General Assembly, the host country and
the troop- and police-contributing countries, which
implement the mandate on the ground. In this regard,
my country believes that, in order to make that
partnership more efficient, it will be necessary to
continue to improve communication and coordination
among its members. In this context, we highlight the

11-48151

importance of convening the Security Council’s
informal meetings with the troop- and policecontributing countries sufficiently in advance of the
expiration of their mandates.
Finally, I would like to point out the importance
of the groups of friends in that partnership framework.
The Group of Friends of Haiti, of which Argentina is a
member together with other members of the Council
and several countries of the region, is a clear example
of the relevant role that such an informal mechanism
can play. Through its participation in the drawing up of
the draft resolutions renewing the mandate of the
mission in Haiti, among others, the Group contributes
to maintaining Member States’ support of the Mission
by ensuring a continuity of efforts and unity of
objectives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): Before I
begin, I would like to extend my deepest sympathies
and condolences to the victims and families who lost
lives and sustained injuries in today’s terrorist attack at
the United Nations offices in Abuja. The Government
of the Republic of Korea condemns this attack and
stands by the people of Nigeria and the United Nations
during this difficult moment. At the same time, I would
like to reaffirm my Government’s support for
continuing international efforts to eradicate terrorism
around the world.
At the outset, I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to you, Sir, for having organized this
meaningful open debate on United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeeping operations are considered to be
among the most visible areas of the United Nations.
They have evolved steadily over the past six decades to
successfully address diverse challenges that have
arisen from various conflicts. In particular, my
delegation is encouraged by the recent efforts of
peacekeeping operations in Côte d’Ivoire, which have
contributed to the successful democratic transition and
stabilization in the region, as well as in the Sudan
during the peaceful referendum procedures. However,
at the same time, we must admit that there is still a
long way to go to ensure greater success and harness
the full potential of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

25

S/PV.6603

As the New Horizon non-paper depicted in 2009,
the environment of peacekeeping operations has
changed significantly and quickly since the landmark
Brahimi report (S/2000/809) was published in 2000.
Peacekeeping operations have expanded more than
fivefold since 2000 in terms of numbers of personnel.
Additionally, mission mandates have expanded from
monitoring military ceasefires to the protection of
civilians, governance, human rights, the rule of law and
early peacebuilding. In this rapidly-changing
landscape, new challenges have continued to surface
and mandates have steadily become more difficult to
discharge. In this regard, my delegation would like to
make several recommendations with a view towards
the overall improvement of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
First of all, there should be an enhanced effort to
mobilize resources in the most efficient way while
simultaneously encouraging increased support from
Member States. Today, growing demand on United
Nations peacekeeping operations is not met with an
equivalent supply from Members States, which
sometimes leads to a lack of vital resources such as
military helicopters. This is a critical impediment to
the overall effectiveness and safety of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and personnel. In this regard,
my delegation welcomes the conceptual idea of a
global field support strategy laid out in the report of
the Secretary-General contained in document
A/64/633, which is expected to contribute to a
significant savings in peacekeeping operations and the
full utilization of existing capacity.
Secondly, it would be desirable to examine
plausible and achievable mechanisms for rapid
deployment. For example, the recent case of intermission cooperation arrangements between the United
Nations Missions in Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire could be
a good example to be further developed. At the same
time, Member States are highly encouraged to shorten
their crisis response time. With that in mind, the
Government of the Republic of Korea adopted
domestic legislation in 2009 that enables the
deployment of standby forces on short notice.
Thirdly, it is imperative to bolster the availability,
deployment and appropriateness of civilian capacities
across the board. With the expansion of non-military
components of peacekeeping operations, the role of
civilians has become more important in key areas such
as the rule of law, human rights and elections.

26

Currently, United Nations peacekeeping employs
approximately 22,000 civilians, including United
Nations volunteers, who constitute 18 per cent of
personnel across 16 missions. In this vein, my
delegation welcomes the recommendations in the
report of the Senior Advisory Group on civilian
capacity in the aftermath of conflict (S/2011/85), which
aims at improving international civilian capacity.
Fourthly, there should be broader coordination
between the United Nations and receiving countries,
and between the United Nations and regional
organizations. This is particularly important when a
new mission is created or an existing mission is being
expanded, as mandates should be matched to the needs
on the ground and there should be a clear agreement on
the concept of mandates themselves. Considering that
the majority of the new demands for United Nations
peacekeeping operations are arising in Africa, my
delegation highlights the significance of coordination
efforts to strengthen the peacekeeping capacities of
African countries and the African Union.
Lastly, there should be enhanced awareness that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are not separate
phases. Peacekeeping alone cannot cure all the
challenges facing post-conflict societies. A long-lasting
peace can be achieved only when peacekeeping is
transformed effectively into longer-term peacebuilding.
In this regard, my delegation encourages continuity
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions and
close coordination between the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the various United
Nations
bodies,
including
the
Peacebuilding
Commission, in identifying the proper sequencing and
prioritization of activities.
Since its first contribution in 1993, the Republic
of Korea has been a strong supporter of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Today, it has around 640
troops and police in the field, which is the largest
number since the Republic of Korea became a Member
of the United Nations. My delegation takes this
opportunity to reiterate our steadfast support for United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
Before concluding, my delegation would like to
extend our sincere condolences to the countries and
families whose peacekeepers have made the ultimate
sacrifice for the noble ideals of United Nations
peacekeeping, and to reiterate our respect for those

11-48151

S/PV.6603

who continue to face the risks intrinsic in this
inherently difficult work.
The President: I give
representative of Morocco.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco): I have the honour to
speak on behalf the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
In so doing, I would like to condemn in the strongest
terms the despicable terrorist act targeting the United
Nations compound in Abuja, and to convey our deepest
condolences to the people and Government of Nigeria,
the United Nations and the families of the victims.
NAM expresses its appreciation for India’s
initiative to devote this meeting to a thematic debate
that is timely and forward-looking and represents a
collective-thinking exercise on the future of
peacekeeping as the flagship activity of the United
Nations. Let me also take this opportunity to thank His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon for his
personal participation and comprehensive briefing on
the issue at hand.
Peacekeeping is dynamic in nature and has
developed incrementally, evolving from classic
peacekeeping operations with mandates limited to
ceasefire monitoring, mostly in inter-State conflicts,
into complex, multidimensional peacekeeping missions
combining military, police, civilian and humanitarian
components often operating in intra-State contexts.
This evolution has been managed, in large part with
continued adherence to the long-standing fundamental
principles of United Nations peacekeeping.
The history of peacekeeping derives mainly from
the fact that it remains the most cost-effective means to
avert conflict and represents a genuine expression of
the principle of collective security. Member States are
accordingly vested with the responsibility to continue
to abide by the guiding principles of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. These guiding principles —
the consent of the parties, the non-use of force except
in self-defence and in defence of the mandate, and
impartiality — constitute the ethical and moral
foundations of United Nations peacekeeping. NAM
also emphasizes that respect for the principles of
sovereign equality, political independence, territorial
integrity of all States and non-intervention must be
upheld in this regard.
The Movement underscores that United Nations
peacekeeping should not be used as a substitute for

11-48151

addressing the root causes of conflict, which should be
addressed in a coherent, well planned and
comprehensive manner, with relevant political, social,
economic and developmental instruments. Peacekeeping
cannot substitute for a comprehensive political process.
The current debate on the future of peacekeeping
highlights the necessity to take a bolder stance on the
interaction between security and development, among
other challenges.
NAM appreciates the growing acknowledgment
by all of the relevance of its consistent position that
peacekeeping should be provided from the outset with
the required political support, sufficient human,
financial and logistical resources, and clearly defined
and achievable mandates and exit strategies.
NAM contributes 87 per cent of deployed
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping missions,
and counts among its 120 member States the majority
of countries host to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Those facts, among others, entitle troopcontributing countries (TCCs) to be fully involved in
the planning process and in all aspects and stages of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Since
mandates are implemented in the field by troopcontributing countries, those countries should be
involved as major partners from the policy formulation
and decision-making process to deployment. NAM
members’ first-hand experience as TCCs and host
countries would contribute to an objective assessment
of where and when to deploy and where to strengthen,
cut or draw down, with the achievement of peace and
security as the main objective and indicator of the
success of peacekeeping missions.
Since we now have a broad consensus on the
need for better interaction with TCCs, we believe that
it is time to seek innovative ways to translate intentions
into actions. We look forward to engaging in a more
focused debate on options for a more structured
dialogue and interaction among TCCs, the Security
Council and the Secretariat.
In that regard, we should strive to further enlarge
the TCC base by encouraging new TCCs to engage and
old TCCs to return to the fold of United Nations
peacekeeping. The flagship activity of the United
Nations cannot continue to be supported by only a
portion of the United Nations membership. To ensure
the appropriate level of response in terms of the scope
and scale of peacekeeping, the entire membership

27

S/PV.6603

should deal with the difficulties arising from
deployment in hostile environments and difficult
political contexts. Furthermore, much broader sharing
and contribution by all Member States would ensure
unity of vision to reach our common goal of peace and
security. The issue of troop cost should enjoy sustained
attention.
Peacekeeping missions have become heavily
mandated and under-resourced. The mismatch between
mandates and resources has in turn raised the risk of
United Nations peacekeeping facing overstretched
capacity, coupled with the increasing demand for
expanded operations, which present a strategic
challenge for the United Nations. NAM stresses with
concern that many deployed troops are being stretched
to cover geographic areas that exceed their capacities.
NAM also stresses that the improvement of
peacekeeping entails a proactive management of the
logistics and support of peacekeeping missions. At the
core of that challenge is the need to address the
capability gaps that are well known to all. NAM
regrets that enablers are still not available to critical
peacekeeping missions, be they air assets, field
hospitals, transport companies, night-vision devices or
other critical equipment.
The peacekeeping budget has reached an all-time
record of $8 billion. That shows not only that there is a
diversification of tasks in field support, but also that
multidimensional
and
integrated
peacekeeping
missions are more demanding in terms of financial
resources,
equipment
and
capabilities.
That
demonstrates the need to treat questions related to field
support in a holistic way.

of the scope and the limitations of the use of force. In
that regard, it is worth mentioning here that the report
clearly states that “force alone cannot create peace; it
can only create a space in which peace can be built”.
(S/2000/809, para. 3)
Since we constantly strive to improve
peacekeeping, we should at the same time be cautious
in peace enforcement. The use of force in peacekeeping
must under no circumstance jeopardize the strategic
relation between the host country and the peacekeeping
mission.
With regard to the notion of credible deterrence,
NAM stresses that it is already part of peacekeeping
that peacekeepers have been doing for a while when
they operate under a Chapter VII mandate. In its
existing form, peacekeeping is robust or firm enough to
the extent allowed by the fundamental principles of
peacekeeping and intended by political will, within the
capability of the force and limited to the geographic
jurisdiction.
The challenges of peacekeeping are well known
and the fundamentals for improving this important task
of the United Nations have been constantly stated by
our Movement. They are, first, political will that
translates into clear, realistic and achievable mandates;
secondly, resources; and thirdly, capacity-building
through training.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I
therefore intend, with the concurrence of the members
of the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3.30 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 12.45 p.m.

The 2000 Brahimi report on United Nations
peacekeeping operations dwells on the sensitive issue

28

11-48151
