Resolutions adopted on .the reports of t,he Third Committee

Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions
830 A (XXXII) and 830 H (XXXII) of 2 August
1961 concerning the Report on the World Social Situation,4 and balanced co-ordinated economic and social
development,
1. Endorses the decision of the Economic and Social
Council to continue the study of the question of balanced and co-ordinated economic and social development,
2. Recommends that the Economic and Social
Council, the regional economic commissions, th{! Committee for Industrial Development, the Social Commissioi;i and the specialized agencies concerned should
continue to pay special attention to problems of balanced economic and social development, taking into
account the interaction of economic growth and social
development and all valuable experience of countries
of various economic and social systems;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
recommend, after appropriate studies, measures which
may be helpful primarily to the less developed countries in planning for balanced and co-ordinated economic
and social development ;
4. Recommends further that the Special Fund
should take this question into consideration when providing assistance to requesting countries ;
5. Expresses the wish that the regional institutes
of economic development which are in the process of
being created in the various regions under United
Nations auspices would include in their terms of reference the study of social factors affecting economic development;
6. Believes that an exchange of experience in the
field of co-ordination of economic and social development will be fruitful.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1675 (XVI). Strengthening of the work of the
United Nations in the social field
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1392 (XIV) of 20 November
1959 in which it rec;ognized that economic development
and social development are interrelated and that social
progress is an end in itself as well as a means of
furthering economic development,
Recalling further its resolutions 1393 (XIV) of 20
November 1959 on low-cost housing and 1508 (XV) of
12 December 1960 on low-cost housing and related
community facilities,
Taking note of recommendation No. 115 concerning
workers' housing adopted by the International Labour
Organisation at its forty-fifth Conference on 28 June
1961,
Having considered chapters VI and VIII of the
report of the Economic and Social Council to the
General Assembly,11
1. Notes with satisfaction the action taken by the
Economic and Social Council to strengthen the activities
of the United Nations in the social field, particularly
'United Nations publication, Sales No.: 61.IV.4.

• Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session,
SuppTe~t No. 3 (A/4820).

29

the decision to enlarge the Social Commission and to
convene it annually, the establishment of the ad hoe
group of experts on the relation of community development programmes to national development programmes
including land reform, the establishment of the ad hoe
group of experts on housing and urban development,
and the Council's request that the Social Commission
reappraise its basic direction with a view to giving
increased attention to matters. of social policy;
2. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 841 (XXXII) of 3 August 1961 designed to bring
about close co-ordination between the programmes of
industrialization, rural development, urbanization and
housing;
3. Calls the attention of Governments of Member
States and the appropriate authorities of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies to the necessity
of closely co-ordinated action in dealing with the problems relating to those programmes ;
4. Expresses its satisfaction that the Economic and
Social Council will give consideration, at its thirtythird session, to having a combined plenary debate on
world economic trends and the world social situation
at its thirty-fourth session, thus giving practical recognition to the interdependence of eqmomic and social
factors in development ;
5. Requests that the Economic and Social Council,
on the basis of the information gathered in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1508 (XV),
consider proposals to expand and co-ordinate international programmes and give assistance, at the request
of Governments, to national programmes in the field
of low-cost housing and related community facilities;
6. Expresses its strong support of the hope expressed in Economic and Social Council resolution
840 J (XXXII) of 2 August 1961 that all necessary
provision will be made to enable the Department of Economic and Social Affairs to discharge effectively its
responsibilities in the social field, in particular those
relating to research, operational programmes, United
Nations Children's Fund projects concerned with social
services for children and those arising from the increased activities in the social field of the regional economic commissions.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1676 (XVI). Urbanization
The General Assembly,
Having noted Economic and Social Council resolution 830 B (XXXII) of 2 August 1961 in which the
Council approved the proposal for concerted international action in the field of urbanization,
Recognizing the magnitude of problems stemming
from the growing concentration of population in urban
and metropolitan areas, inter alia, the increasing volume
of investment required to provide sufficient employment
and to establish and maintain social and physical
services and facilities in those areas,
Recognizing further the difficulty of adaptation to
urban life of people from rural areas, the inadequacy
of urban institutions designed to fadlitate such adaptation and transition, and the lack of basic research,
studies and evaluation of successful techniques in those
fields,
