S/2018/977

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 October 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 29 October 2018 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to the request of the Security Council in its resolution 2409 (2018),
concerning the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I have the honour
to submit the 30-day update, covering the period from 29 September to 26 October
2018, on political and technical progress towards the holding of elections on
23 December 2018 and obstacles to the implementation of the 31 December 2016
political agreement (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

18-18306 (E)

071118

*1818306*

S/2018/977

Annex
Update of the Secretary-General on progress in the electoral
process and implementation of the 31 December 2016 political
agreement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
26 October 2018
1.
The present update, which covers developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo from 29 September to 26 October 2018, is submitted pursuant to resolution
2409 (2018), in which the Security Council requested the Secretary-General to
provide a written update every 30 days on political and technical progress towards
the holding of elections on 23 December 2018 and on obstacles to the implementation
of the 31 December 2016 political agreement.

I. Key political developments related to the electoral process
and the implementation of the political agreement
2.
Political developments were marked by ongoing preparations for the
23 December elections. Following the publication, on 19 September, of the final list
of candidates for the presidential and national legislative elections, political parties
and groupings have been gearing up for participation in the upcoming polls.
3.
Subsequent to the invalidation of the presidential candidacies of some
opposition leaders, as well as the inability of Moïse Katumbi of Ensemble pour le
changement to submit his candidacy, opposition parties strove to define a joint
programme and to rally behind a single presidential candidate. Those efforts
culminated in a political rally in Kinshasa, organized on 29 September by the leaders
of seven opposition parties, namely Adolphe Muzito of Unis pour la République,
Félix Tshisekedi of Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social, Freddy Matungulu
of Congo Na Biso, Jean-Pierre Bemba of Mouvement de libération du Congo, Martin
Fayulu of Engagement pour la citoyenneté et le développement and Moïse Katumbi
and Vital Kamerhe of Union pour la nation congolaise. The leaders called for the
timely holding of elections on 23 December, but strongly rejected the use of the voting
machines and requested a further review of the voter registry to examine why 16 per
cent of voters had been registered without finger prints. The opposition leaders also
declared their commitment to presenting a single presidential candidate in the
upcoming elections.
4.
Many civil society organizations also expressed reservations about the voting
machines. In a communiqué dated 5 October, the Comité laïc de coordination
announced the launch of an information and sensitization campaign to challenge the
use of the voting machines, highlighted the need to revise the voter registry and
warned of the risk of post-electoral chaos. That same day, the Episcopal Conference
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo encouraged the Government to implement
the confidence-building measures contained in the 31 December 2016 political
agreement and urged the Independent National Electoral Commission to fi nd a
consensus on the contentious issues surrounding the electoral process. In a similar
vein, the President of the National Council for Monitoring the Agreement and the
Electoral Process, Joseph Olenghankoy, met with key national stakeholders to
advocate for consensus on the voting machines and the voter registry.
5.
On 4 October, the Independent National Electoral Commission held a meeting
with the 21 presidential candidates or their representatives to exchange information
and views on the electoral process. The President of the Commission, Corneille
Nangaa, assured the participants that the Commission would take steps to address the
2/6

18-18306

S/2018/977

concerns that were raised, including by providing support to political parties for the
training of their electoral observers on the use of the voting machines. Participants
agreed to pursue efforts through a technical commission to address points of
disagreement.
6.
A follow-up meeting was held on 10 October between the Commission and
political interlocutors. However, no consensus was reached on the terms of reference
for the activities of the technical commission. Following this meeting, presidential
candidates Félix Tshisekedi, Freddy Matungulu, Martin Fayulu and Vital Kamerhe
issued a statement reiterating, inter alia, their concerns about the voting machines and
the voter registry and warning against a constitutional void if the elections were not
held on 23 December. Subsequently, in a declaration issued on 11 October on behalf
of the Congolese political opposition, Mr. Muzito, Mr. Tshisekedi, Mr. Matungulu,
Mr. Bemba, Mr. Fayulu, Mr. Katumbi and Mr. Kamerhe reiterated their determination
to participate in credible, transparent and inclusive elections on 23 December,
condemned “the contemptuous attitude” of the President of the Commission and
called upon the Congolese people to mobilize and demand the use of paper ballots in
lieu of the voting machines. In a statement dated 15 October, another nine presidential
candidates, Jean-Philibert Mabaya, Joseph Mba Maluta, Marie-Josée Ifoku, Tryphon
Kin-Kiey Mulumba, Noël Tshiani, Radjabho Tebabho Soborabo, Seth Kikuni, Sylvain
Masheke and Théodore Ngoy, also called for the non-use of voting machines, an audit
of the procurement process of the machines and the removal from the voter re gistry
of all voters without fingerprints.
7.
On 19 October, the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Joseph
Kabila, chaired a meeting with government officials, members of Parliament, the
National Council for Monitoring the Agreement and the Electoral Process and the
Independent National Electoral Commission to discuss progress made in the electoral
process.
8.
Meanwhile, the Front commun pour le Congo geared up its activities in support
of its presidential candidate, Emmanuel Ramazani Shad ary. On 1 October,
Mr. Ramazani Shadary returned from a visit to South Africa, where he met with the
President of South Africa, Cyril Ramaphosa, senior government officials and the
leadership of the African National Congress to discuss, among other issues, the
ongoing electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

II. Key electoral developments related to the implementation of
the political agreement
A.

Electoral developments
9.
The display of provisional voter lists started on 3 September at some branches
of the Independent National Electoral Commission and was progressively extended
to all branches for a period of 30 days. However, owing to technical constraints, not
all 171 branches published the provisional lists, and roll-out at the polling centres was
slow. On 4 October, the Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior, Henri Mova
Sakanyi, held a meeting on the participation of women in the electoral process, during
which he committed to enhancing security for women candidates.
10. On 4 October, the Commission received 20 containers with approximately
11,900 voting machines that had been delivered to the port of Matadi. The
Commission stated that the remaining voting machines were expected to arrive in
multiple shipments at the ports of Matadi, Dar es Salaam (United Republic of
Tanzania) and Mombasa (Kenya) by 5 November. The Vice-President of the
Commission announced on 12 October that the Government had disbursed an

18-18306

3/6

S/2018/977

additional $56 million to the Commission, bringing the total amount disbursed to
more than $300 million out of the $432 million budgeted for the elections.
11. The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) continued to provide technical assistance to the
Commission. Through its field sections covering 18 of the 26 provinces, the Mission
provided advisory support to the Commission in the areas of warehousing, data
management and development and implementation of training strategies and
procedures for 440,000 polling staff. MONUSCO also assisted the Commission in
supporting the participation of women and put in place training modules on
networking and ways to strengthen the communication skills of female c andidates.

B.

Restrictions on political space and violence related to the
implementation of the political agreement in the electoral context
12. Restrictions on democratic space continued, with some exceptions. Several
public events were banned by the Congolese authorities, and several cases of arbitrary
arrests and intimidation relating to the exercise of fundamental freedoms were
reported.
13. A demonstration organized by the Lutte pour le changement on 1 October in
Kananga, Kasai Central, and an opposition rally held in Kinshasa on 29 September
took place peacefully. The Episcopal Conference of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo commended the peaceful demonstration in Kinshasa as a positive and
encouraging sign. However, on 13 October in Lubumbashi, Haut-Katanga, local
authorities, citing security concerns, reversed their initial decision to allow a rally by
Ensemble pour le changement.
14. Meanwhile, opposition and civil society groups denounced the misuse of State
resources, including the media and security services, for pre-campaign purposes by
the Majorité présidentielle, as provincial authorities reportedly supported outreach
activities in favour of the Front commun pour le Congo.
15. Restrictions on freedom of expression remained a source of concern, with new
incidents documented. On 29 and 30 September, journalists were intimidated in
Bukavu, South Kivu, and in Kisangani, Tshopo, while exercising their functions.
Furthermore, access to media remained restricted, and in Lisala, Mongala, autho rities
reportedly suspended programmes produced by local radio stations allegedly
affiliated to the political opposition.

C.

Confidence-building measures
16. No meaningful progress was made in the implementation of the confidence building measures contained in the 31 December 2016 political agreement. According
to the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office, no political prisoners from among
the cases mentioned in the agreement were released and at least 130 political prisoners
remained in detention, including civil society activists and human rights defenders.
In contrast, the Government claimed that no political prisoners remained in custody
and asserted that some political actors were serving sentences for criminal
convictions. On 10 October, the trial of Moïse Katumbi on charges of recruiting
mercenaries resumed at the Court of Cassation but was subsequently suspended on
procedural grounds.

4/6

18-18306

S/2018/977

III. Good offices efforts for the implementation of the
political agreement
17. During the period under review, my Special Representative held separate
meetings with several presidential candidates to encourage constructive participation
in the electoral process. In the same vein, she met with the Chief of Staff of the
President and the Chair of the Strategic Committee of the Front commun pour le
Congo, Néhémie Mwilanya Wilondja, and held consultations with Ambassadors of
the Southern African Development Community who were based in Kinshasa.
Discussions with these stakeholders revolved, inter alia, around building confidence
in the electoral process with a focus on ways to resolve disagreement over the voting
machines, the integrity of the voter registry and implementation of the confidence building measures envisaged in the 31 December 2016 political agreement.
18. At the regional level, my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region continued
to engage key signatory countries of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region in suppo rt of the country’s
political and electoral process.
19. Regional organizations also continued to pursue advocacy efforts. At the ninth
meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Framework, held in Kampala
on 8 October, Heads of State of the region “encouraged the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and all concerned national stakeholders to
continue with their efforts to create conducive conditions for credible, inclusive and
peaceful elections on 23 December, in full respect of the 31 December 2016
agreement”. At the invitation of Congolese authorities, the African Union
Commission and the Southern African Development Community are preparing to
deploy electoral observers.

IV. Observations
20. I welcome the steady progress made in the implementation of the electoral
calendar and the fact that all national stakeholders are actively engaged in the
electoral process, in the spirit of the 31 December 2016 political agreement. This
reflects the genuine aspiration of the Congolese people to choose their leaders in
credible and peaceful elections on 23 December 2018, culminating in the country ’s
first ever democratic handover of power.
21. I am concerned by the level of distrust felt by civil society actors and opposition
parties regarding the electoral management bodies and key elements of the electoral
process, as demonstrated by their rejection of the voting machines and lack of
confidence in the voter registry, both of which have become a rallying point for the
opposition. I welcome the consultations between the Independent National Electoral
Commission and the presidential candidates that began on 4 October. I remain
convinced that common ground can be found through dialogue and I urge all national
stakeholders to put their partisan interests aside and work towards building a
consensus on the way forward.
22. Equally worrying are reports of continued restrictions imposed by the
Government on the political space, of intimidation of political activists and human
rights defenders and of their lack of access to public media. These constraints work
against the creation of a conducive environment for credible and peaceful elections.
I commend the restraint demonstrated by opposition party activists and the security
services during the opposition meetings of 29 September in Kinshasa and stress that
this should be the norm. I therefore reiterate my call upon the national authorities to

18-18306

5/6

S/2018/977

lift the general ban on public demonstrations and uphold the rights of Congolese
citizens to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly.
23. With the elections less than two months away, the process has entered a critical
phase. Trust in the fairness of the process and the credibility of the polls are key
prerequisites for acceptance of the results. There is an urgent need for meaningful
action to build confidence among key stakeholders, in line with the provisions of the
31 December 2016 political agreement. The release of political prisoners and
prisoners of opinion would be a positive development in this reg ard. In this context,
I encourage regional actors to continue supporting the political and electoral process
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to remain engaged in the post -electoral
period.
24. I respect the commitment of the Congolese authorities to fully funding the
electoral process from national resources and call upon them to ensure that
disbursements to the Independent National Electoral Commission are made in a
timely and transparent manner. I reiterate the readiness of the United Nations to
provide technical and logistical support for the upcoming polls, as mandated by the
Security Council.

6/6

18-18306
