SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICI ELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 20
113eme seance
26 fevrier 1947

113th meeting
26 February 1947

Lake Success

New York

..\

TABLE DES MATIERES

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Cent-treizieme seance

Hundred and thirteenth meeting
Page

Pags!

77. Provisional agenda
407
78. Adoption of the agenda
407
79. Discussion of the draft trusteeship agreement for the former Japanese mandated
islands
. . . . . . .. 407

77. Ordre du jour provisoire
" 407
78. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
" 407
79. Discussion du projet d'accord de tutelle
sur les lles anterieurement sous mandat
407
japonais

Document.

Document
Annex

The following document is relevant to the one
hundred and thirteenth meeting and appears
in Supplement No. 8, Second Year:
Letter from the representative of the
United States of America to the Secretary-General dated 17 February 1947
and enclosed draft trusteeship agreement
for the former Japanese mandated islands
17
(document S/281)

Annexe

Le document suivant se rapportant a la centtreizieme seance figure dans le Supplement No 8, Deuxieme Annee:
Lettre en date du 17 fevrier 1947 adressee
au Secretaire general par le representant
des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, et projet
d'accord de tutelle sur les lles anterieurement sous mandat japonais annexe a
cette lettre (document S/281/Corr. 1).. 17

-UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
No. 20

DEUXIEME ANNEE

No 20

HUNDRED AND THIRTEENTH MEETING

CENT-TREIZIEME SEANCE

, Held at Lake Success) New York)
on Wednesday, 26 February 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le mercredi 26 fevrier 1947, a15 heures.

President: Mr. M. F. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium).

President: M. M. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgique) .

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-U nis
d'Amerique.

77. Provisional agenda

77. Ordre du jour provisoire

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter from the representative of the United
States of America to the Secretary-General
dated 17 February 1947 and enclosed draft
trusteeship agreement for the former Japanese mandated islands (document S/
281) .1

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Lettre en date du 17 fevrier 1947 adressee
au Secretaire general par le representant
des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, et projet d'accord de tutelle sur les lIes anterieurement
sous mandat japonais annexe a cette lettre
(document S/281/Corr.l )1.

78. Adoption of the agenda

78. Adoption de I'ordre du jour

The agenda was adopted.
79.

Discussion of the draft trusteeship
agreement for the former Japanese
mandated islands

Mr. AUSTIN (United States of Am~rica):
The United States, like other nations adhering
to the United Nations Declaration of 1 January
1942, subscribed to the Atlantic Charter principle that they "seek no aggrandizement, territorial or otherwise."
It was for the purpose of making clear that
States adheres unswervingly to this
principle that on 6 November 1946, the President of the United States declared our intentions
regarding Pacific islands whose control by Japan
enabled her to attack the United States. The
President said:
"The United States is prepared to place
under trusteeship, with the United States as

t~e United

. I See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 8, Annex 17.

L'ordre du jour est adopte.
79.

Discussion du projet d'accord de
tutelle sur les ties anterieurement
sous mandat japonais

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Comme les autres nations
qui ont adhere a la Declaration des Nations
Unies en date du ler janvier 1942, les EtatsUnis ont souscrit au principede la Charte de
l' Atlantique qui proc1ame qu'elles "ne re-cherchent aucun agrandissement territorial ou
autre" .
C'est pour bien preciser que les Etats-Unis
sont indefectiblement attaches a ce principe que
le President des Etats-Unis, le 6 novembre 1946,
a declare nos intentions en ce qui concerne les
Iles du Pacifique dont le controle a permis au
Japon d'attaquer les Etats-Unis.
"Les Etats-U nis, a dit le President, sont
a placer sous tuteIle, etant eux-memes

pr~ts

I Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du. Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 8, Annexe 17.

408
the administering authority, the Japanese
mandated islands and any Japanese islands
for which it assumes responsibility as a result
of the second world war. So far as the
Japanese mandated islands are conccrned, this
Government is transmitting for information to
the other members of the Security Council:
Australia, Brazil, China, Egypt, France,
Mexico, the Netherlands, Poland, the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United
Kingdom, as well as to New Zealand and the
Philippine Republic, a draft of a strategic
area trusteeship agreement which sets forth
the terms upon which this Government is
prepared to place those islands under trusteeship. At an early date we plan to submit this
draft agreement formally to the Security
Council for its approval."

l'aut6rite chargee de l'administration, les lies
sous mandat japonais et toutes autres iles
japonaises dont ils assument la responsabilite
a la suite de la seconde guerre mondiale. En
ce qui concerne les iles sous mandat japonais,
le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis transmet a
titre d'information aux autres membres du
Conseil de securite, l' Australie, le Bresil, la
Chine, l'Egypte, la France, le Mexique, les
Pays-Bas, la Pologne, le Royaume-Uni et
l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, ainsi qu'a la NouveIle.:Zelande et ala
Republique des Philippines, un projet. d'accord de tutelle sur les zones strategiques, qui
enonce les conditions dans lesqueIles notre
Gouvernement est dispose a placer ces iles
sous tuteIle. Nous avons l'intention de soumettre prochainement ce projet d'accord a
I'approbation du Conseil dq securite, a titre
offide!'"

Final disposition of the islands belonging to
Japan must, of course, await the peace settlement with Japan. The draft trusteeship ~gree­
ment submitted to the Security Council for its
approval relates only to the former Japanese
mandated islands, which never belonged to
Japan, but were a part of the League of Nations
mandate system. The United States has consistently and strongly supported the position of
the General Assembly that former mandated
territories should be placed under the trusteeship
system as soon as possible.

I1 faut evidemment attendre la conclusion du
traite de paix avec le J apon pour regler definitivement le sort des iles qui lui appartiennent.
Le projet d'accord de tuteIle soumis a l'approbation du Conseil de securite ne parte que sur
les iles anterieurement sous mandat japonais,
qui n'ont jamais appartenu au Japon mais auxquelles s'appliquait le regime de mandat de la
Societe des Nations. Les Etats-Unis ont constamment et energiquement approuve l'attitude
adoptee par I'AssembIee generale qui etait d'avis
que les anciens territoires sous mandat devraient
ctre places le plus tot possible sous le regime de
tutelle.

The General Assembly, during the first part
of its first session, called on those Members of
the United Nations which are "administering
territories now held under mandate to undertake
practical steps . . . for the implementation of
Article 79 of the Charter".l Since the United
States was, and is, occupying the territory formerly ~andated to Japan, the United States
desires to play its part in attaining the objectives
of the General Assembly's resolution, so that
trusteeship agreements for all former mandated
territorie~ should be concluded promptly and the
trusteeship system organized as soon as possible.

Au cours de la premiere partie de sa premiere
session, l'Assemblee generale a invite "les Mem·
bres des Nations Unies qui administrent actuellement des territoires sous mandat a prendre
des mesures d'ordre pratique pour la mise en
reuvre de l'Article 79 de la Charte1 " . Les EtatsUnis, en raison du fait qu'ils ont occupe et
occupent encore les territoires anterieurement
sous mandat japonais, desirent prendre part a
la realisation des fins recherchees par la resolution de l'AssembIee generale, qui prevoit que
des accords de tutelle pour tous les territoires
anterieurement sous mandat devront etre conclus rapidement et que le regime de tutelle
devra etre organise aussitot que possible.
Les iles sous mandat japonais-iles Marshall,
lIes Carolines et lIes Mariannes-comprennent
environ quatre-vingt-dix-huit lIes et agglomera- .
tions d'lIots d'une superficie totale de 846 milles
carres seulement; leur population globale n'est
que d'environ 48.000 indigenes et les ressources
economiques locales sont d'importance negligeable.
L'importance strategique considerable que
representaient pour le Japan les lIes sous son
mandat ressort d'une manihe evidente de la
maniere dont il les a utilisees pour la realisation
de la partie fondamentale de ses projets d'agres-

The Japanese mandated islands, the MarshaHs, Marianas and Carolines, consist of some
ninety-eight islands and island clusters with a
total area of only 846 square miles, a total population of only about 48,000 native inhabitants
and negligible indigenous economic resources.

The tremendous strategic value of the mandated islands to Japan is evident, however, from
the way these islands were used in carrying out
its basic plan of aggression. Before Japan entered the war on 7 December 1941, she had
I Resolution of the. General Assembly regarding NonSelf-Governing Peoples adopted at its twenty-seventh
plenary meeting, 9 February 1946.

J Resolution
de l' Assemblee generale relative aux
populations qui ne s'administrent pas eIIes-memes,
adoptee lors de la vingt-septieme seance pICnierc, le
9 fevrier 1946.

409
established fortified posItIOns, naval bases and
air bases in these islands. As a whole, the islands
formed a deep, well-defended barrier between
the United States on the one hand and Guam,
the Philippines, and its British and Dutch Allies
in the Far East on the other.
Most of the Japanese submarines which participated in the attack on Pearl Harbor staged
through Kwajalein in the Marshall Islands.
From this same base, Japanese submarines continued for years to carry out extensive operations
against the United States' shipping in the eastern
half of the Pacific Ocean.
Air bases and amphibious staging points in the
Marianas facilitated the capture of Guam in
December 1941.
Air forces and naval forces operating from the
Marshalls were used in the capture of Wake
Island,
At the -outbreak of war, the Japanese mandated islands, with their naval and air forces and
their shore defences, served to screen and protect
the southward advance of the Japanese against
the Philippines and British and Dutch possessions
in the south-western Pacific Ocean.
The Palau group in the western Carolines
served as the main forward support base for the
attack on the Netherlands East Indies and
Timor.
It was tllls interlocking network of naval and
air bases in the mandated islands that prevented
the sending of early and effective support to
China except by circuitous and highly difficult
routes.
The atoll of Truk was used by the Japanese
as a great naval and air base from which they
launched their attacks on New Britain, New
Ireland, New Guinea and the islands of the
Solomons chain. It was a base for their projected attack against Australia. From Truk and
other bases, Japanese naval and air forces could
and did penetrate eastward to threaten the allied
lines of communication between the United
States, Australia and New Zealand. Until they
were reduced, or by-passed and rendered innocuous by air and naval attack, the mandated
islands threatened our lines of communication
to Australia and prevented our early return to
the aid of the Philippines and China. It was
only after neutralization of Truk and capture of
Peleliu and Angaur in the Palaus that it was
feasible to return to the Philippines, and it was
only after the capture of the Marianas that
serious military pressure could be brought to
bear on Japan itself by our B-29 bombers.

Tens of thousands of American lives, vast
expenditure and years of bitter fighting were
needed to drive the Japanese aggressors from
these islands, which constitute an integrated

sion. Avant son entree en guerre, le 7 decembre
1941, le Japon avait etabli dans ces lles des positions fortifiees, ainsi que des bases navales et
aeriennes. Leurensemble constituait une barriere
bien defendue s'etendant en profondeur entre les
Etats-Unis d'une part, et Guam, les Philippines
et les territoires de nos allies britanniques et hollandais en Extreme-Orient, d'autre part.
La plupart des sous-marins japonais qui ant
participe a l'attaque de. Pearl Harbor avaient un
point de ravitaillement a Kwajalein, dans les
lles Marshall. C'est de cette mcme base que les
sous-marins japonais ont poursuivi, pendant des
annees et sur une grande echelle, leurs operations
contre les navires des Etats-Unis, dans la partie
orientale de l'ocean Pacifique.
L'existence de bases aeriennes 'et de bases de
ravitaillement pour la guerre amphibie aux lles
Mariannes a facilite la prise de Guam en decembre 1941.
Des forces navales et aeriennes basees aux lles
Marshall ont ete utilisees pour la prise de Wake.
Au moment ou la guerre a &late, les lles sous
mandat japonais, avec leurs forces navales et
aeriennes et leurs defenses cotieres, ont servi
d'appui et de protection a l'avance des Japonais
vel'S le sud contre les Philippines et les possessions
britanniques et hollandaises du sud-ouest de
l'ocean Pacifique.
Le groupe des lles Palaos, dans les Carolines
occidentales, a servi au Japon de principale base
avancee pour pousser son attaque vel'S les Indes
neerlandaises et Timor.
C'est ce reseau scrre de bases navales et aerien-·
nes etablies dans les lles sous mandat qui nous a
empeches d'apporter a la Chine un appui immediat et efficace et nous a contraints a emprunter
des routes detournees et tres perilleuses.
Les Japonais ant transforme l'atoll de Truk en
une grande base navale et aerienne d'ou ils ant
lance leurs attaques contre la Nouvelle-Bretagne,
la Nouvelle-Irlande, la Nouvelle-Guinee et les
lles Salomon. Cc meme atoll a servi de base pour
l'attaque qu'ils projetaient contre l'Australie. A
partir de Truk et d'autres bases, les forces navales
et aeriennes japonaises pouvaient penetrer, et ant
effectivement penetre, vel'S l'est pour menacer
les lignes de communication alliees entre les
Etats-Unis, l'Australie et la Nouvelle-Zelande.
Jusqu'au jour ou dIes ont ete reduites cJU tournees
et mises hors d'etat de nuire par des attaques
aeriennes et navales, les lles sous mandat ant
menace nos lignes de communication vel'S I'Australie et nous ont empechCs d'aller rapidement
porter secours aux Philippines et a la Chine. Ce
n'est qu'apres la neutralisation de Truk et la
prise de Peleliu et d'Angaur, dans les lles Palaos,
qu'il nous a ete possible de reprendre pied aux
Philippines, et c'est seulement apres la prise des
Mariannes que nos bombardiers B-29 ont pu
exercer une serieuse pression militaire sur le Japan
proprement dit.
Il a fallu sacrifier des dizaines de milliers de
vies d'Americains, engager d'enormes depenses
et livrer des annees de durs combats pour
chasser l'agresseur japonais de ces lles. Ces lles

410
strategic physical complex vital to the ~ecurity
of the United States. The American people are
firmly resolved that this area shall ~ever a~ain
be used as a springboard for aggresSIon agamst
the United States, or any, other M ember of the
United Nations.
Most of the strategically important areas of
the world including those in the Pacific, are at
present u~der the exclusive sovereignty of various
of the larger nations. The United, States, however, is proposing trusteeship rather than annexation as the basis for its administration of these
highly strategic islands.
In undertaking to place under trusteeship a
territory of such strategic importance to the
United States as these islands, the United States
is expressing its faith in the Un.ited Nation~.Our
purpose is to defen~ the sec;mty of these I~la~ds
in a manner that wIll contnbute to the bUIldmg
up of genuine, effective and enforceable col.lectivc security for all Members of the Umted
Nations.
The first of the four basic objectives of the
trusteeship system set forth in Article 76 of the
Charter is "to further international peace and
security." Since the area of the former Japanese
mandated islands is of paramount strategic
importance, the United States proposes, in
accordance with Article 82 of the Charter,
that the trust territory "be designated . . . a
'
strategic area."
In preparing this draft trusteeship agreement,
the Government of the United States gave long
and careful study not only to the Charter as a
whole, and to its specific provisions for strategic
needs in special areas, but also to the draft agreements for 'non-strategic areas recently submitted
to the General Assembly by five of the mandatory Powers. This draft trusteeship agreement is
viewed by the Government of the United States
as conforming, in substance and in form, with
the Charter, and as promoting the interests both
of the inhabitants of the islands and of the
United Nations. It contains the terms upon
which the United States is prepared to administer the former Japanese mandated islands as a
trust territory.
In conformity with the provisions of the
Charter for strategic areas, the trust territory
will contain bases. Many atolls in the territory
have potential values as base sites or as anchorages. Few such sites, however, are being developed and maintained at present.
The United States will administer this strategic trust territory in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter. In particular, the
United States will administer the territory in
accordance with the obligation contained in
Article 2, paragraph 4, and, according to which
"All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence

forment un tout du point de vue geographique
et strategique, et elles ont, une importance vitale
pour la securite des Etats-Unis. Le peuple
americain est fermement resolu a faire en sorte
que cette region ne serve jamais plus de tremplin
pour une agression contre les Etats-Unis Oll
contre tout autre Membre des Nations Unies.
La plupartdes regions strategiques importantcs
du monde, notamment celles du Pacifiquc, se
trouvent actuellement placecs sous la SQuverainete exclusive de l'une ou l'autre des grandes
nations. Cependant l'intention des Etats-Unis
est non point d'annexer ces iles d'une haute
valeur strategique, mais de les administrer dans
le cadre du regime de tutelle.
En pla~ant sous tutelle un territoire qui a
pour eux une aussi grande importance strategique, les Etats-U nis proclament leur foi dans
les Nations Unies. Notre but est de defendre la
securite de ces iles de maniere a l'etablissemcnt
d'une securite collective reelle et efficace pour
tous les Membres des Nations Unies.

La premiere des quatre fins essentielles du
regime de tutelle exposees a l'Article 76 de la
Charte est "d'affermir la paix et la securite internationales". Comme la region OU se trouvent
les iles anterieurement sous mandat japonais est
d'unc importance strategique primordiale, les
Etats-Unis proposent, conformement a l'Article 82 de la Charte, que le telTitoire sous tutelIe
soit proclame zone strategique.
En preparant ce projet d'accord de tuteIle,
le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis a longuement
et mo.rement etudie, non seulement la Chartc
tout entiere, avec les dispositions particulieres
qu'elle contient sur les besoins strategiques dans
des zones determinees, mais aussi les projets
d'accord relatifs aux zones non strategiques recemment soumis a l'AssembIee generale par cinq
des Puissances mandataires. Le Gouvernement
des Etats-Unis estime que le projet d'accord de
tutelle qu'il presente est, dans le fond et dans
la forme, en harmonie avec la Charte et tient
compte des interets des habitants des iles et des
interets des Nations Unies. Il enonce les conditions dans lesquelles les Etats-U nis sont disposes
a administrer comme. territoire sous tutelle les
lIes anterieurement sous mandat japonais.
Conformement aux dispositions de la Charte
relatives aux zones strategiques, le territoire sous
tutelle contiendra des bases. De nombreux atolls
de cette region peuvent ctre utilises comme bases
ou comme mouillages. Les bases actuellement
exploitees et entretenues sont cependant peu
nombreuses.
Les Etats-Unis administreront ce territoire
strategique sous tutelle conformement aux dispositions de la Charte. En particulier, les EtatsU nis, pour administrer ce territoire, se conformeront aux obligations enoncees a l'Article 2, paragraphe 4, suivant leque!: "Les Membres de
l'Organisation s'abstiennent, dans leurs relations
internationales, de recounr 'a la menace ou a
l'emploi de la force, soit contre l'integrite terri·

411

of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations."
The United States, as administering authority,

""ill ensure that this trust territory shall play
its part in the maintenance of international
peace and security, in accordance with its obligation under Article 1 of the Charter: " ... to
take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace and
for the suppression of acts of aggression or other
breaches of the peace . . ." Its administration
will also be in accordance with Article 84 of
the Charter, relating to the part to be played by
trust territories "in carrying out the obligations
towards the Security Council" of the administering authority.
The United States, therefore, intends to include this trust territory· as fully as those territories under its sovereignty in the special agreement or agreements which it will conclude with
the Security Council for the provision of the
United Nations with armed forces, assistance
and facilities, including rights of passage, necessary for the purpose of maintaining international
peace and security as envisaged under Article
43 of the Charter.
Pending conclusion o'f these permanent agreements under Article 43, the United States will
undertake that the islands play their part in
vvhatever action the United States may be called
upon to take in accordance with the obligations
imposed by Article 106 relating to transitional
security arrangements.
The. United States draft agreement provides
that the administering authority may, from time
to time, specify certain areas as closed for
security reasons. This provision will not, of
course, prejudice the full application to the
entire trust territory of all international control
and inspection measures that may become part
of a system of international control of atomic
energy, other weapons of mass destruction and
conventional armaments.

The United States is willing to submit to international supervision, as provided for in the
agreement, the political, economic, social and
educational development of the inhabitants of
the trust territory. It is equally willing to submit
military and naval installations to whatever
d~gree of supervision and control may be proVIded by agreements for the international control of armaments and armed forces.
In preparing this draft trusteeship agreement,
the Government of the United States bore
constantly in mind Article 73 of the Charter:
C<Members of the United Nations which have
Or assume responsibilities for the administration
of territories whose peoples have not yet attained
a ful~ measure of self-government recognize the
pnnclple that the interests of the inhabitants of
these territories are paramount, and accept· as

toriale ou l'independance politique de tout Etat,
soit de toute autre maniere incompatible avec
les buts des Nations Unies."
Les Etats-Unis, en tant qu'autorite chargee de
1'administration, veilleront a ce que le territoire
sous tutelle apporte sa contribution au maintien
de la paix et de la securite internationales, conformement aux obligations qui leur incombent,
aux termes de l'Article 1 de la Charte, de "prendre des mesures collectives efficaces en vue de
prevenir et d'ecarter les menaces a la paix et de
reprimer tout acte d'agression ou autre rupture
de la paix". Ils administreront aussi le territoire
conformement a l'Article 84 de la Charte, relatif au role que doivent jouer les territoires sous
tutelle pour "remplir les obligations contractees
a cet egard envers le Conseil de securite" par
1'autorite chargee de l'administra,tion.
Les Etats-Unis ont donc l'intention d'inclure
ce territoire sous tutelle, au meme titre que les
territoires places sous sa souverainete, dans l'accord special ou les accords speciaux qu'ils
concluront avec le Conseil de securite pour mettre a. la disposition des Nations Unies les forces
arrnees, 1'assistance et les facilites, y compris le
droit de passage, necessaires au maintien de la
paix et de la securite internationales, comme il
est prevu a I' Article 43 de la Charte.
En attendant la conclusion des accords permanents prevus a1'Article 43, les Etats-Unis s'engageront a faire apporter par ces lles une contribution a toute action qu'ils pourraient etre appeles
a entreprendre conformement aux obligations
imposees par l'Article 106, relatif aux dispositions transitoires de securite.
Le projet d'accord soumis par la delegation
des Etats-Unis stipule que l'autorite chargee de
1'administration pourra, a un moment donne,
restreindre 1'acces a certaines zones pour des
raisons de securite. Cette disposition ne saurait
naturellement empecher l'application pleine et
entiere, a l'ensemble du territoire sous tutelle,
de toutes mesures internationales de controle et
d'inspection qui rentreront dans le cadre du
systeme de contrale international de l'energie
atomique ainsi que des· autres anTIes de destruction massive et des armements de type c1assique.
Les Etats-Unis 80nt disposes a soumettre a un
contrale international, comme le prevoit raccord, le developpement politique, economique,
social et culturel des habitants du territoire sous
tutelle. Les Etats-Unis sont egalement disposes
a soumettre les installations militaires et navales
a toutes mesures de surveillance ou de controle
qui pourraient etre demandees en vertu des accords relatifs au contrale international des
armements et des forces armees.
En preparant ce projet d'accord de tutelle, le
Gouvernement des Etats-Unis a constamment a
l'esprit les dispositions de I' Article 73 de la
Charte qui stipule que: "Les Membres des
Nations Unies qui ont ou qui assument la responsabilite d'administrer des territoires dont les
populations ne s'administrent pas encore completement elles-memes, reconnaissent le principe
de la primaute des interets des habit ants de ces

412
a sacred trust the obligation to promote to the
utmost, within the system of international peace
and security established by the present Charter,
the well-being of the inhabitants." The United
States Government believes that the draft trusteeship agreement now before you conforms
fully to this principle in its provisions for the
political, economic, social and educational a~­
vancement of the inhabitants of the trust terntory.
Although this is a strategic area vital to that
system of international peace and security to
which Articles 73 and 76 refer, the United
States draft agreement goes beyond the requirements of the Charter in strategic areas. It provides that Articles 87 and 88, relating to reports,
petitions, visits and questionnaires in non-strategic trusteeship areas, shall be applicable to
the whole of this trust territory, except that the
administering authority may determine the extent of applicability in any areas which may,
from time to time, be specified by the administering authority as closed for security reasons.
This exception has been made in recognition of
the fact that an administering authority of a
strategic trust territory should have the necessary
authority to safeguard the instalbtions established in the discharge of its responsibilities for
the maintenance of international peace and
security.

It is true that the fulfillment of the basic
objectives of the trusteeship system will depend
in all trust territories-and this territory is no
exception-upon the good faith of the administering authority as well as upon effective supervision by the United Nations.
I can assure you, on behalf of the Government
of the United States, that the United States will
faithfully support the principle of effective supervision by the United Nations as fully in this
trust territory as in any other trust territory,
within the limits imposed by its obligation to
administer this area in such a way as to preserve the security of the United States and to
strengthen collective security under the United
Nations.
Articles 6 and 7 of the draft trusteeship agreement submitted to the Security Council contain
strong provisions relating to the political, economiC, social and educational advancement of
the inhabitants of this territory and to guarantees
of their basic human rights. Apart from the
strengthening of international peace and security,
these are the fundamental objectives of the
trusteeship system.
The United States is glad to invite the members of the Security Council to make a searching
examination of the provisions contained in these
articles, not only in relation to the requirements
of the Charter but in relation to the comparable
provisions of the trusteeship agreements ap-

territoires. 11s acceptent comme une missio f1
sacree l'obligation de favoriser dans toute 1~1.
mesure du possible leur pl'osperite, dans le cadre
du systeme de paix et de securitc international CS
etabli par la presente Charte." Le GouverO e ment des Etats-Unis estime que le projet d'n.ccord de tutelle qu'il vous presente est tOllt
fait conforme ace principe, en raison des dispOsitions qu'il contient sur le· progres politiql1C,
economique, social et culturel des habitants dl 1
territoire sous tutelle.
Bien qu'il s'agisse d'une region strategiq II C
d'une importance vitale pour le systeme de'pnis
et de securite internationales auquel se referell t
les Articles 73 et 76, le projet d'accord sourrtis
par les Etats-Unis va au deHt des exigences de
la Charte en ce qui concerne les regions stratcgiques. 11 preyoit en dIet que les dispositions
des Articles 87 et 88, relatifs aux rapport~,
petitions, visites et questionnaires dans les zones
non strategiques placees sous tutelle, seront applicables a tout le territoire sous tutelle en question, avec cette reserve que l'autorite chargee
de l'administration pourra determiner clans
queUe mesure ces dispositions sont applicables a
des regions qu'elle pourrait, a un moment donne.
declarer interdites pour des raisons de sccurite.
Cette exception a ete prevue pour tenir compte
du fait que l'autorite chargee de l'administration d'un territoire strategique place sous tlltd le
doit avoil' l'autorite necessaire pour prote,~el' lcs
installations qu'elle a creees pour s'acquitter d(~'s
devoirs qui lui incombent pour le maintien de
la paix et de la securite internationales.
11 est vrai que la realisation des fins essentidles du regime de tutcIle dependra, dans tOllS lt~s
territoires sous tutelle-et le territoire en qU(~S­
tion ne fait pas exception-de la bonne foi de
l'autorite chargee de l'administration, ainsi que
de l'eflicacite du contrale exerce par les Nations
Unies.

a

Je vous donne l'assurance, au nom de mon
Gouvernement, que les Etats-Unis soutiendl'ont
ficlelement le principe d'ul1 controle efficace
de la part des Nations U nies, tant dans le tCl~ri_
toil'e sous tuteUe en question que dans tout au t rt~
territoire sous tuteUe, dans les limites que k~\. r
impose l'obligation d'administrer cette region ch.
maniere it protegeI' la securite des Etats-TT tli!'
et a renforcer la securite collective clans le cad.'e
des Nations Unies.
Les articles 6et 7 du projet d'accord de illh" le
soumis au Conseil de securite contienncnt dt~~
dispositions tl'es nettes sur le progres politi'lIIP
cconomique, social et culturel des habitant~ lh;
territoire et leur garantissent la jouissanCl' {It,,,
droits fondamentaux de la personne hum:lh 1l:
Ce sont Ht, outre l'affermissement de la rai:.: ~~
de la securite internationales, les fins essentiel1es
du regime de tuteUe.
'
Les Etats-Unis sont heureux d'inviter les l11(~tll_
bres du Conseil de securite a proceder a un e~n_
men approfondi des dispositions figurant dillts
ces articles, en les rapprochant, non seulen)~ tt~
des stipulations de la Charte, mais aussi des cl i~_
positions cornparables conten ues dans les acc()t'Qs

413
proved by the General Assembly last December. de tutelle approuves par l'Assemblee genera1e en
The United States bcli.eves that these articles, decembre dernier. Les Etats-Unis sont persuades
together with other provisions of the draft agree- que ces articles, ainsi que les autres dispositions
ment, provide a maximum degree of protection du projet d'accord, protegent au maximum le
for the welfare and advancement of the inhabi- bien-etre et le progres des habitants de ces iles.
tants of these islands.
The United States believes it has conformed'
Les Etats-Unis estiment qu'ils se sont con.'
to the requirements of Article 79 of the Charter, formes aux termes de l'Article 79 de la Charte,
first, by transmitting copies of a draft trusteeship tout d'abord en communiquant le texte d'un
agreement for the former Japanese mandated projet d'accord de tutellepour les iles anterieureislands to all Members of the United Nations ment sous mandat japonais, a tous les Membres
which, in the view of the Government of the des Nations Unies qui, de l'avis du GouverneUnited States, may have special interests in ment des Etats-Unis, pourraient avoir des interets
these islands and, now, by formally submitting speciaux dans ces iles, et en soumettant mainthe draft agreement to the Security Council for tenant officiellement ce projet d'accord a l'approbation du Conseil de securite.
its approval.
The United States Government does not
Le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis considere
consider that there is any obstacle to the placing qu'il n'existe aucun obstacle ala mise sous tutelle
of these islands under trusteeship in accordance de ces lles, conformement a la Charte, des que
with the Charter as soon as the Security Council le ConseiI de securite aura approuve le projet
d'accord.
approves the draft agreement.
As a result of the war, Japan has ceased to
En consequence de la guerre, le Japon a
exercise, or to be entitled to exercise, any au- cesse d'exercer, ou d'etre habilite a exercer, une
thority in these islands. These islands were autorite quel<;:onque sur ces iles. Elles lui ont ete
entrusted to Japan under mandate from the confiees, en vertu d'un mandat de la Societe des
League of Nations after the first world war. Nations, apres la premiere guerre mondiale. Au
In utter disregard of the mandate, Japan, con- mepris total de ce mandat, le Japan s'est servi de
trary to the law of nations, used the territories ce territoire pour mener une guerre d'agression,
for aggressive warfare against the United States contraire au droit des gens, contre les Etats-Unis
and other Members of the United Nations. et d'autres Membres des Nations Unies. Du fait
Japan, by her criminal acts of aggression, forfeited de ses actes criminels d'agression, le Japon a
the right and capacity to be the mandatory perdu tout droit et tout titre a la qualite de
Power of the islands. The termination of Japan's mandataire. On a affirme a plusieurs reprises
status as the mandatory Power· over the islands que le Japon n'avait plus qualite de mandataire
has been frequently affirmed: in the Cairo a l'egard de ces iles, par exemple dans la declaDeclaration of 1943, subsequently reaffirmed ration du Caire de 1943, et plus tard dans la
in the Potsdam Declaration and in the instru- Declaration de Potsdam et dans l'instrument de
ment of surrender accepted by the Powers capitulation accepte par les Puissances qui ont
vaincu le J apon.
responsible for Japan's defeat.
All authority in these islands is now exercised
Toute l'autorite dans ces iles est maintenant
~y the United States. The United States, in exercee par les Etats-Unis. En repoussan~
repelling Japanese aggression occupied, and is l'agression japonaise, les Etats-Unis ont oCCllpe
in possession of, the former Japanese mandated les iles anterieurement sous mandat japonais et
ces iles sont actuellement en leur possession.
islands.
Tous les Membres des Nations Unies qui pourAll. the Members which may have special
interests in the islands have been sent copies raient avoir des interets speciaux dans ces lles
of the draft agreement which the United States, ont rec;;u le texte du projet d'accord que les Etatsas the responsible administering authority in the Unis, en tant qu'autorite responsable de l'admiislands, has submitted to the Security Council. nistration de ces lles, ant sournis au Conseil de
My Government is not aware that any other securite. :Mon Gouvernement n'a pas connajs-,
Member of the United Nations has asserted any sance qu'aucun autre Membre ait revendique~
en aucune maniere, la tutelle de ces Hes.
claim for trusteeship of these islands.
In the above circumstances, it is the view of
Etant donne les faits que je viens d'exposer,
my Government that the conclusion of a trustee- mon Gouvernement estime qu'on peut, des
ship agreement, pursuant to the Charter, for maintenant, conc1ure conformement aux disposithe former Japanese mandated islands clearly tions de la Charte, l'accord de tutelle pOUf les
can take effect at this time, and does not depend iles anterieurement sous mandat japonais, et qu'il
upon, and need not await, the general peace n'est ni necessaire, ni utile, d'attendre, pour le
faire, la conclusion du traite de paix avec le
settlement with Japan.
Japon.
Le Gouvernemcnt des Etats-Unis estime qu'il
The United States Government considers that
it has fulfilled its immediate responsibility to s'est acquitte de son devoir immediat envers les
the United Nations by having responded on 6 Nations Unies en repondant, le 6 novembre
November last to the call of the General Assem- dernier, a l'appel adresse par l'Assemblee gebly and by taking this occasion today, to submit nerale, et en saisissant aujourd'hui l'occasion de
the draft agreement to the Security Council and soumettre un projet d'accord au Conseil de se-

414
to present comments on some of the more im~
portant aspects of the agreement.
The United States Government will continue
to administer the former Japanese mandated
islands in the spirit of the proposed trusteeship
and in conformity with the provisions of the
draft agreement which implement the basic
objectives of the trusteeship system, during the
time these proposals are under consideration.
It is the profound belief of the United States
Government and of the American people that
the administration of these islands by the United
States, in accordance with the terms of this draft
agreement, would contribute both to the maintenance of international peace and security and
to the well-being and advancement of the inhabitants of the islands.
For the benefit of the Security Council, we
have prepared comments on the various articles
and distributed copies of them.

curite et d'expliquer certains des aspects les plus
importants de ce projet.
Dans la periode pendant laquelle ce projet
sera examine, le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis
continuera d'administrer les iles anterieurement
sous mandat japonais, en s'inspirant des principes
du regime de tutelle et des dispositions du projet
d'accord qui tendent a la realisation des fins
essentielles de ce regime.
Le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis et le peuple
americain sont fermement convaincus que l'administration de ces iles par les Etats-U nis, conformement aux dispositions du present projet
d'accord, contribuera a la fois au maintien de la
paix et de la securite internationales et au bienetre et au progres des habitants de ces lles.

MR. HASLUCK (Australia): The Australian
delegation has listened with very deep interest to
the statement which has just been ,made by the
representative of the United States. If I may, I
should like to take this early opportunity to
express our appreciation of the way in which the
United States representative has borne in mind
the needs of this Council, ,and placed before it
both the statement of the case and the relevant
documents, in 'particular the commentary on the
draft agreement which has been circulated to
members.
The position is now that the case in support
of the United States submission has been put
to the Council. For our part we should like to
have an opportunity to study it in all its details,
and in particular the statement presented to us
~day.
'
Therefore, we would suggest to the Council
that perhaps its convenience might be suited,
and the wishes of the United States delegation
would be in no way affected, if we adjourned
the opening of a full debate on this subject, and
fixed a date, let us say towards the end of next
week, when we could take up this subject again.
That would give us an opportunity for further
consultation with our Governments and for
further study of the material.
The adjournment that I am suggesting would
do no harm of any kind, since the situation in
the territory which we are considering is fortunately stable, and thus would not be affected in
any way by a short adjournment for further
consideration.

M. HASLUCK (Australie) (traduit de l'anglais) : La delegation de l'Australie a ecoute avec
le plus vif interet l'expose que vient de faire le
representant des Etats-Unis. Je voudrais, des
maintenant, declarer que nous lui sommes reconnaissants d'avoir si bien compris les besoins
du Conseil et de lui avoir soumis son expose ainsi
que les documents qui s'y rapportent, notamment le commentaire du projet d'accord qui a
ete communique aux membres du Conseil.

MR. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I have
no objection to the postponement of this question. I only want to say a few words on the
substance of the case.
The Soviet delegation considers that this question of the former Japanese 'mandated islands
is within the competence of the Security Council
and that the Council is entitled and able to take
an appropriate decision on this matter, without
delay.

Nous avons prepare pour le Conseil de securite
un commentaire des divers articles du projet
d'accord et nous en avons fait distribuer des
exemplaires.

Les Etats-Unis ont fourni au Conseil un bon
expose de leur these. Pour notre part, nous VDU,
drions pouvoir examiner cette these dans tous
ses details et etudier, en particulier, l'expose que
nous venons d'entendre.
Nous suggerons done au Conseil qu'il serait
peut-etre opportun et nullement contraire aux
desirs de la delegation des Etats-Unis de rcmettre
a une date ulterieure, peut-etre vel'S la fin de la
semaine prochaine, l'ouverture d'un debat ge·
neral sur la question. Nous aurions ainsi l'occasion de nous mettre en rapport avec nos Gouvernements respectifs et d'etudier plus a fond les
documents que l'on nous a presentes.
Je ne crois pas qu'il y ait d'inconvenient a
remettre la discussion: la situation dans les territoires en question est heureusement stable et ne
saurait souffrir d'un retard de que1ques jours que
nous consacrerions a un plus ample examen.

M. GROMYKO (Union des RepubIiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je ne vois
pas d'inconvenient a ce que l'examen de la
question soit ajourne. Toutefois, je voudrais
dire que1ques mots quant au fond de la question.
La delegation sovietique estime que la question des tIes anterieurement sous mandat japo·
nais releve de la competence du Conseil de securite. Ce dernier est competent pour prendre
sans autre delai, une decision en la matiere.

415
As regards the substance of the proposal submitted by the Government of the United States
of America to the Security Council, the Soviet
Government considers that it would be fair to
place the former j apanese mandated islands
under the trusteeship of the United States. In
doing so the Soviet Government takes into consideration the fact that the armed forces of the
United States played a decisive role in the victory over japan and that the United States made
incomparably greater sacrifices than other Allied
Powers in the war against Japan.
The Soviet delegation proposes some changes
in the text of the draft agreement submitted by
the United States setting forth the terms of
administration of the former Japanese mandated
islands. These changes are as follows:

Quant au fond de la proposition que le Gauvernement des Etats-Unis d'Amerique a soumise
au Conseil de securite, le Gouvernement sovietique estime qu'i! serait juste de placer sous la
tutelle des Etats-Unis les lies anterieurement sous
mandat japonais. En prenant cette attitude, le
Gouvernement sovietique tient compte du fait
que les forces armees des Etats-Unis ont joue
un role decisif dans la victoire remportee sur le
japon et que, dans la guerre contre ce pays, les
Etats-Unis ont fait des sacrifices incomparablement superieurs a ceux des autres Allies.
La delegation sovietique propose d'apporter
quelques modifications au texte du projet d'accord presente par les Etats-Unis, texte qui fixe
les conditions dans lesquelles seraient administrees les iles anterieurement sous mandat japonais. Ces modifications sont les suivantes:
1. Supprimer a l'article 3 les mots "comme
partie integrante des Etats-Unis";
2. Ajouter al'article 6, paragraphe 1, apres
les mots "la capacite a s'administrer euxmemes", les mots "ou l'independance";
3. Rediger l'article 15 de la maniere suivante: "Les termes du present accord pourront etre modifies, completes ou abroges par
decision du Conseil de securite."
Avec les amendements prevus aux paragraphes
1 et 2 de la proposition sovietique dont le texte
va etre distribue a tous les membres du Conseil,
le projet d'accord serait plus conforme ala
Charte des Nations Unies et a ses dispositions
concernant les territoires sous tutelle.

1. Delete the words "as an integral part of
the United States" from article 3 ;
2. Insert the words "or independence"
after the words "toward self-government" in
article 6( 1) ;
3. Re-draft article 15 as follows: "The
terms of the present agreement may be altered,
supplemented or terminated by decision of the
Security Council."
With the amendments provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Soviet document, which
will shortly be distributed to all representatives
on the Council, the text of the draft agreement
would be more in conformity with the Charter
of the United Nations and the appropriate
clam;es of this Charter concerning trust territories.
With regard to the amendment in paragraph
Avec l'amendement qui fait l'objet du para3 of the Soviet document, the proposed new graphe 3 de la proposition sovietique, le nouveau
wording of article 15 of the draft agreement texte de l'article 15 du projet d'accord tiendrait
would be in closer conformity with the rights compte de fa<;on plus exacte des droits et des
and powers which the Security Council has in pouvoirs que possede le Conseil de securite
deciding questions concerning strategic trust pour regler les questions interessant les territerritories.
toires strategiques sous tutelle.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):

May I take it that there is no objection to the
proposal for adjournment submitted by the
representative of Australia?
The proposal was adopted.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):

As we are all in agreement, this subject will be
taken up again on 7 March.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

Le PRESIDENT: Puis-je considerer qu'il n'y
a pas d'opposition a la proposition d'ajournement soumise par le representant de l'Australie?
La proposition est adoptee.

Le PRESIDENT: Puisque nous sommes taus
d'accord, l'examen de cette question est ajourne
au 7 mars.
La seance est levee

a16 h. 25.
