General AINIDbly-Foarteenth Sesaioa

48

desirability of having further attention given by the
Advisory Committee to such matters.,

I
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for
its reports, in particular the report on the administrative budgets of the specialized agencies for 1960211 and
the over-all report on the special studies made by
the Advisory Committee at the headquarters of the
agencies ;26
2. Extends its appreciation to the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency for
the co-operation and courtesies offered to the Advisory
Committee in connexion with its studies and visits;
3. Invites the atiention of the International Atomic
Energy Agency and the International Telecommunication Union to the reports of the Advisory Committee
on its special studies made at those agencies ;27
4. Also invites the attention of all the specialized
agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency
to the over-all report of the Advisory Committee and to
the report on the 1960 administrative budgets of the
agencies;
5. Requests the Advisory Committee to keep under
review the growth and developments of the offices,
operations and conferences of the United Nations and
of the agencies, at locations away from their headquarters, and to report to the General Assembly, at its
fifteenth session, on the possibilities of further administrative and budgetary co-ordination;
II
1. Authorizes the Advisory Committee on Administrative ;:ind Budgetary Questions to examine and report
on co-ordination and on the administrative and budgetary aspects of special programmes of the United
Nations, at the request of a principal organ or of the
body responsible for the special programme;
2. Authorises the Advisory Committee also, in fulfilment of its functions under rule 158 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, to meet as it deems
necessary and appropriate at the various offices of the
United Nations and at the headquarters of the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy
Agency, and at the request of those agencies, to advise
them on administrative and financial matters.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.

1438 (XIV). Panel of External Auditors

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGenera128 on the Joint Panel of Auditors established
by General Assembly resolution 347 (IV) of 24 November 1949,
Decides that the provisions annexed to the present
resolution shall replace those set out in annex B of
resolution 347 (IV).
.846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.
211 /bid., agenda item 49, document A/4257.

ANNEX
1. The members of the United Nations Board of Audi.tor~
and the appointe,t exter 11al auditors of the specialized agencies
and of the International Atomic Energy Agency shall constitute a Panel of External Auditors, the purpose of which
shall be to further the co-ordination of the audits for which its
members are responsihle and to exchange information on
methods and findings.
2. The Panel may submit to the executive heads of the participating organizations any observations or recommendations
it may wish to make in relation to the accounts and financial
procedures of the organizations conrerncd.
3. The executive heads of the participating org-,mizations
may, through their auditor (or auditor~), submit to the Panel
for ;1s opinioll or re<'.otnmendation any matter within its competence.
4. The Panel shall elect its chairman and adopt its rules of
procedure. Meetings shall be held when necessary, but normally
not less frequently than once every two years.
5. Costs of the meetings of the Panel shall be borne by the
participating organizations.

1439 (XIV). United Nations International School

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations International School29
as well as the report by the Board of Trustees of the
School, 30
Recalling its resolution 1297 (XIII) of 5 December
1958 requesting the Secretary-General to use his good
offices to assist the School to find suitable permanent
accommodation and approving a grant-in-aid in respect
of the school year 1958-1959,
Recognizing the increasing urgency of providing permanent accommodation for the School,
Believing it necessary that the financial solvency of
the School should be assured,
Noting the suggestion of the Secretary-General that
a continuing fund should be established for assistance
to the International School to be financed by the net
proceeds from the operation of the United Nations
Gift Centre,
1. Reaffirms its hope that steps will be taken to make
the United Nations International School available to
the children of the largest possible number of members
of delegations, United Nations staff members, and
others associated with the United Nations;
2. Invites the Board of Trustees of the School to
establish an International School Fund;
3. Decides to contribute to the Fund for a period
of five years such continuing financial assistance as the
General Assembly may consider necessary;
4. Decides to make a contribution of $100,000 to
the Fund in 1960 for the purpose of liquidating the
operating deficit at the end of the 1959-1960 school
year and for such other purposes of the School as the
Board of Trustees deems fit;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to use
his good offices to assist the Board of Trustees of the
School in finding suitable permanent accommodation for
the School in the immediate vicinity of United Nations
Headquarters, in developing plans for a building, and
in pursuing its efforts to raise funds from private

~ Ibid., document A/4172.
21 Ibid., documents A/4135 and A/4148.

28 /l;,id., document A/C.5/795.

51, document A/4'293.
so Ibid., document A/4'293, annex.

29 /bid., agenda item

Reeolutiom adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

sources for the construction of the building, and, if
necessary, for the acquisition of a site therefor;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to present to the
General Assemblr at its fifteenth session:
(a) A report by the Board of Trustees of the School
on the establishment and operations of the Fund;
( b) His recommendations, together with the comments of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, on future contributions to the
Fund and on the means of financing such contributions,
including the suggestion contained in paragraphs 8 and 9
of his report ;
( c) A report on the progress which has been made
in finding permanent accommodation for the School.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.

1440 (XIV). Report of the Negotiating Committee
for Extra-Budgetary Funds
A
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds81 appointed at the
thirteenth session of the General Assembly,
Decides that:
1. An ad hoe Committee of the whole Assembly,
under the chairmanship of the President of the session,
shall be convened as soon as practicable after the opening of the fifteenth session, where pledges of voluntary
contributions for the refugee programmes for the following year would be announced ;
2.- States not Members of the United Nations, but
members of one or more of the specialized agencies,
shall be invited to attend the meetings of the ad hoe
Committee for the purpose of announcing their pledges
to the refugee programmes ;
3. In order to ensure maximum attendance, as great
advance publicity as possible shall be given to the meetings of the ad hoe Committee and they shall be so
scheduled that no other meetings are held at the same
time.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.

B
The General Assembly
1. Requests the President of the General Assembly to
appoint a Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary
Funds consisting of not more than ten members, with
the same terms of reference as those laid down in
Assembly resolution 693 (VII) of 25 October 1952,
to serve from the close of the fourteenth session to the
close of the fifteenth session of the Assembly ;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its fifteenth session the item entitled "Report of the
Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds".
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.

•

•

•

Al lhe 84fJlh Plenary meeting on 5 December 1959, the President of the General Assembly appointed a Negotiating Com-

mittee for Extra-Budgetary Funds to serve until the close of
the fifteenth session of the Assembly. The Committee is composed as follows: ARGENTINA, BRAZIL, CANADA, FRANCE,
LEBANON, NEW ZEALAND, PAKISTAN, UNITED KINGDOM OF
GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND and UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA,

1441 (XIV). United Nations Emergency Force8 2
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1089 (XI) of 21 December
1956, 1151 (XII) of 22 November 1957 and 1337
(XIII) of 13 December 1958,
Having considered the observations made by Member
States concerning the financing of the United Nations
Emergency Force,
Having examined the budget estimates for the Force
submitted by the Secretary-General for the year 19603 3
and the observations and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions thereon in its eleventh84 and twenty-eighth 3 ~
reports to the General Assembly at its fourteenth
session,
Having noted with satisfaction that special financial
assistance in the amount of about $3,475,000 has been
pledged voluntarily towards the expenditures for the
Force in 1960,
Considering that it is desirable to apply voluntary
contributions of special financial assistance in such a
manner as to reduce the· financial burden on those Governments which have the least capacity, as indicated by
the regular scale of assessments, to contribute towards
the expenditures for maintaining the Force,
1. Authorizes the Secretary-General to expend up to
a maximum of $20 million for the continuing operation
of the United Nations Emergency Force during 1960;
2. Decides to assess the amount of $20 million against
all Members of the United Nations on the basis of the
regular scale of assessments, subject to the provisions
of paragraphs 3 and 4 below ;
3. Decides that voluntary contributions pledged prior
to 31 December 1959 towards expenditures for the
Force in 1960 shall be applied as a credit to reduce by
SO per cent the contributions of as many Governments
of Member States as possible, commencing with those
Governments assessed at the minimum percentage of
0.04 per cent and then including, in order, those Governments assessed at the next highest percentages until
the total amount of voluntary contributions has been
fully applied ;
4. Decides that, if Governments of Member States
do not avail themselves of credits provided for in paragraph 3 above, then the amounts involved shall be
credited to section 9 of the 1960 budget for the Force.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.
82 See also resolution 1442 (XIV) and "Allocation of agenda
items", footnote 6.
88 Official Rtcords of the General Assembly, Fourtemtlt
Session, Annexes, agenda item 28, documents A/4160 and
A/C.5/800.

H Ibid., document A/4171.

81 [bid., agenda item 46, document A/4267.

49

811 [bid., document A/4284.
