General Assembly-Tenth Special Session

III.

S-10/2.

RESOLlITION ADOPTED ON TIIE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITIEE
OF TIIE TENTH SPECIAL SESSION3

beginning with a reduction in the present level of armaments. The ending of the arms race and the achievement of real disarmament are tasks of primary importance and urgency. To meet this historic challenge
is in the political and economic interests of all the
nations and peoples of the world as well as in the
interests of ensuring their genuine security and peaceful future.
2. Unless its avenues are closed, the continued
arms race means a growing threat to international
peace and security and even to the very survival of
mankind. The nuclear and conventional arms build-up
threatens to stall the efforts aimed at reaching the goals
of development, to become an obstacle on the road of
achieving the new international economic order and
to hi~der the solution of other vital problems facing
mankind.
. 3. The dynamic development of detente, encompassmg all spheres of international relations in all regions of
the world, with the participation of all countries,
would create conditions conducive to the efforts of
States to end the arms race, which has engulfed the
world, thus reducing the danger of war. Progress on
detente and progress on disarmament mutually complement and strengthen each other.

Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Alarmed by the threat to the very survival of mankind posed by the existence of nuclear weapons and
the continuing arms race, and recalling the devastation
inflicted by all wars,
Convinced that disarmament and arms limitation,
particularly in the nuclear field, are essential for the
prevention of the danger of nuclear war and the
strengthening of international peace and security and
for the economic and social advancement of all peoples, thus facilitating the achievement of the new international economic order,
Having resolved to lay the foundations of an international disarmament strategy which, through co-ordinated and persevering efforts in which the United
Nations should play a more effective role, aims at
general and complete disarmament under effective international control,
Adopts the following Final Document of this special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament:

4. The Disarmament Decade solemnly declared in
1969 by the United Nations is coming to an end. Unfortunately, the objectives established on that occasion
by the General Assembly appear to be as far away
today as they were then, or even further because the
arl?s race is not diminishing but increasing and outstnps by far the efforts to curb it. While it is true that
some limited agreements have been reached, "effective
measures relating to the cessation of the nuclear arms
race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament"
continue to elude man's grasp. Yet the implementation
of such measures is urgently required. There has not
been any real progress either that might lead to the
conclusion of a treaty on general and complete disarmament under effective international control. Furthermore, it has not been possible to free any amount,
however modest, of the enormous resources, both material and human, which are wasted on the unproductive and spiralling arms race and which should be
made available for the purpose of economic and social
development, especially since such a race "places a
great burden on both the developing and the developed
countries".

FINAL DOCUMENT OF THE TENTH SPECIAL
SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
CONTENTS
Page

Section

I.
II.
III.
IV.

Introduction
Declaration
Programme of Action
Machinery

I.

3
4

7
12

INTRODUCTION

1. The attainment of the objective of security,
which is an inseparable element of peace, has always
been one of the most profound aspirations of humanity.
States have for a long time sought to maintain their
security through the possession of arms. Admittedly,
their survival has, in certain cases, effectively depended on whether they could count on appropriate
means of defence. Yet the accumulation of weapons,
particularly nuclear weapons, today constitutes much
more a threat than a protection for the future of mankind. The time has therefore come to put an end to
this situation, to abandon the use of force in international relations and to seek security in disarmament,
that is to say, through a gradual but effective process

5. The Members of the United Nations are fully
aware of the conviction of their peoples that the question of general and complete disarmament is of utmost
importance and that peace, security and economic and
social development are indivisible, and they have therefore recognized that the corresponding obligations and
responsibilities are universal.

3 For the report of the Ad Hoe Committee, see Official
Records of the General Assembly, Tenth Special Session,
Annexes, agenda items 9, 10, 11 and 12, document A/S-10/23.

3

4

General Assembly-Tenth Special Session

6. Thus a powerful current of opinion has gradually formed, leading to the convening of what will go
down in the annals of the United Nations as the first
special session of the General Assembly devoted entirely to disarmament.
7. The outcome of this special session, whose deliberations have to a large extent been facilitated by
the five sessions of the Preparatory Committee which
preceded it, is the present Final Document. This introduction serves as a preface to the document which
comprises also the following three sections: a Declaration, a Programme of Action and recommendations
concerning the international machinery for disarmament negotiations.
8. While the final objective of the efforts of all
States should continue to be general and complete disarmament under effective international control, the
immediate goal is that of the elimination of the danger
of a nuclear war and the implementation of measures
to halt and reverse the arms race and clear the path
towards lasting peace. Negotiations on the entire range
of those issues should be based on the strict observance
of the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, with full recognition of the role
of the United Nations in the field of disarmament and
reflecting the vital interest of all the peoples of the
world in this sphere. The aim of the Declaration is to
review and assess the existing situation, outline the
objectives and the priority tasks and set forth fundamental principles for disarmament negotiations.
9. For disarmament-the aims and purposes of
which the Declaration proclaims-to become a reality,
it was essential to agree on a series of specific disarmament measures, selected by common accord as those
on which there is a consensus to the effect that their
subsequent realization in the short term appears to be
feasible. There is also a need to prepare through agreed
procedures a comprehensive disarmament programme.
That programme, passing through all the necessary
stages, should lead to general and complete disarmament under effective international control. Procedures
for watching over the fulfilment of the obligations thus
assumed had also to be agreed upon. That is the purpose of the Programme of Action.
I 0. Although the decisive factor for achieving real
measures of disarmament is the "political will" of
States, especially of those possessing nuclear weapons, a significant role can also be played by th~ effective functioning of an appropriate internat10nal
machinery designed to deal with the problems of disarmament in its various aspects. Consequently, it would
be necessary that the two kinds of organs required to
that end, the deliberative and the negotiating organs,
have the appropriate organization and procedures that
would be most conducive to obtaining constructive
results. The last section of the Final Document, section IV, has been prepared with that end in view.

II.

DECLARATION

11. Mankind today is confronted with an unprecedented threat of self-extinction arising from the massive and competitive accumulation of the most destructive weapons ever produced. Existing arsenals of
nuclear weapons alone are more than sufficient to
destroy all life on earth. Failure of efforts to halt and
reverse the arms race, in particular the nuclear arms
race, increases the danger of the proliferation of nu-

clear weapons. Yet the arms race continues. Military
budgets are constantly growing, with enormous consumption of human and material resources. The increase in weapons, especially nuclear weapons, far
from helping to strengthen international security, on
the contrary weakens it. The vast stockpiles and tremendous build-up of arms and armed forces and the
competition for qualitative refinement of weapons of
all kinds, to which scientific resources and technological
advances are diverted, pose incalculable threats to
peace. This situation both reflects and aggravates international tensions, sharpens conflicts in various regions
of the world, hinders the process of detente, exacerbates the differences between opposing military alliances, jeopardizes the security of all States, heightens
the sense of insecurity among all States, including the
non-nuclear-weapon States, and increases the threat of
nuclear war.
12. The arms race, particularly in its nuclear aspect, runs counter to efforts to achieve further relaxation of international tension, to establish international
relations based on peaceful coexistence and trust between all States, and to develop broad international
co-operation and understanding. The arms race impedes the realization of the purposes, and is incompatible with the principles, of the Charter of the United
Nations, especially respect for sovereignty, refraining
from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, the peaceful settlement of disputes and non-intervention and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States. It also
adversely affects the right of peoples freely to determine
their systems of social and economic development, and
hinders the struggle for self-determination and the
elimination of colonial rule, racial or foreign domination or occupation. Indeed, the massive accumulation
of armaments and the acquisition of armaments technology by racist regimes, as well as their possible
acquisition of nuclear weapons, present a challenging
and increasingly dangerous obstacle to a world community faced with the urgent need to disarm. It is,
therefore, essential for purposes of disarmament to
prevent any further acquisition of arms or arms technology by such regimes, especially through strict adherence by all States to relevant decisions of the Security Council.
13. Enduring international peace and security cannot be built on the accumulation of weaponry by military alliances nor be sustained by a precarious balance
of deterrence or doctrines of strategic superiority. Genuine and lasting peace can only be created through the
effective implementation of the security system provided for in the Charter of the United Nations and the
speedy and substantial reduction of arms and armed
forces, by international agreement and mutual example,
leading ultimately to general and complete disarmament under effective international control. At the same
time, the causes of the arms race and threats to peace
must be reduced and to this end effective action should
be taken to eliminate tensions and settle disputes by
peaceful means.
14. Since the process of disarmament affects the
vital security interests of all States, they must all be
actively concerned with and contribute to the measures
of disarmament and arms limitation, which have an
essential part to play in maintaining and strengthening
international security. Therefore the role and responsibility of the United Nations in the sphere of dis-

III.

Resolution adopted on the report of the Ad Hoe Committee

armament, in accordance with its Charter, must be
strengthened.
15. It is essential that not only Governments but
also the peoples of the world recognize and understand
the dangers in the present situation. In order that an
international conscience may develop and that world
public opinion may exercise a positive influence, the
United Nations should increase the dissemination of
information on the armaments race and disarmament
with the full co-operation of Member States.
16. In a world of finite resources there is a close
relationship between expenditure on armaments and
economic and social development. Military expenditures are reaching ever higher levels, the highest percentage of which can be attributed to the nuclearweapon States and most of their allies, with prospects
of further expansion and the danger of further increases
in the expenditures of other countries. The hundreds
of billions of dollars spent annually on the manufacture
or improvement of weapons are in sombre and dramatic
contrast to the want and poverty in which two thirds
of the world's population live. This colossal waste of
resources is even more serious in that it diverts to military purposes not only material but also technical and
human resources which are urgently needed for development in all countries, particularly in the developing
countries. Thus, the economic and social consequences
of the arms race are so detrimental that its continuation
is obviously incompatible with the implementation of
the new international economic order based on justice,
equity and co-operation. Consequently, resources released as a result of the implementation of disarmament
measures should be used in a manner which will help
to promote the well-being of all peoples and to improve the economic conditions of the developing countries.
17. Disarmament has thus become an imperative
and most urgent task facing the international community. No real progress has been made so far in the
crucial field of reduction of armaments. However, certain positive changes in international relations in some
areas of the world provide some encouragement.
Agreements have been reached that have been important in limiting certain weapons or eliminating them
altogether, as in the case of the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction4 and excluding particular
areas from the arms race. The fact remains that these
agreements relate only to measures of limited restraint
while the arms race continues. These partial measures
have done little to bring the world closer to the goal
of general and complete disarmament. For more than
a decade there have been no negotiations leading to
a treaty on general and complete disarmament. The
pressing need now is to translate into practical terms
the provisions of this Final Document and to proceed
along the road of binding and effective international
agreements in the field of disarmament.
18. Removing the threat of a world war-a nuclear
war-is the most acute and urgent task of the present
day. Mankind is confronted with a choice: we must
halt the arms race and proceed to disarmament or face
annihilation.
19. The ultimate objective of the efforts of States
in the disarmament process is general and complete
4 Resolution

2826 (XXVI), annex.

5

disarmament under effective international control. The
principal goals of disarmament are to ensure the survival of mankind and to eliminate the danger of war,
in particular nuclear war, to ensure that war is no
longer an instrument for settling international disputes
and that the use and the threat of force are eliminated
from international life, as provided for in the Charter
of the United Nations. Progress towards this objective
requires the conclusion and implementation of agreements on the cessation of the arms race and on genuine
measures of disarmament, taking into account the need
of States to protect their security.
20. Among such measures, effective measures of
nuclear disarmament and the prevention of nuclear war
have the highest priority. To this end, it is imperative
to remove the threat of nuclear weapons, to halt and
reverse the nuclear arms race until the total elimination
of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems has been
achieved, and to prevent the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. At the same time, other measures designed
to prevent the outbreak of nuclear war and to lessen
the danger of the threat or use of nuclear weapons
should be taken.
21. Along with these measures, agreements or
other effective measures should be adopted to prohibit
or prevent the development, production or use of other
weapons of mass destruction. In this context, an agreement on elimination of all chemical weapons should be
concluded as a matter of high priority.
22. Together with negotiations on nuclear disarmament measures, negotiations should be carried out
on the balanced reduction of armed forces and of
conventional armaments, based on the principle of
undiminished security of the parties with a view to
promoting or enhancing stability at a lower military
level, taking into account the need of all States to protect their security. These negotiations should be conducted with particular emphasis on armed forces and
conventional weapons of nuclear-weapon States and
other militarily significant countries. There should also
be negotiations on the limitation of international transfer of conventional weapons, based in particular on
the same principle, and taking into account the inalienable right to self-determination and independence
of peoples under colonial or foreign domination and
the obligations of States to respect that right, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States, 5 as well as the need of recipient States to protect
their security.
23. Further international action should be taken to
prohibit or restrict for humanitarian reasons the use
of specific conventional weapons, including those which
may be excessively injurious, cause unnecessary suffering or have indiscriminate effects.
24. Collateral measures in both the nuclear and
conventional fields, together with other measures specifically designed to build confidence, should be undertaken in order to contribute to the creation of favourable conditions for the adoption of additional
disarmament measures and to further the relaxation
of international tension.
25. Negotiations and measures in the field of disarmament shall be guided by the fundamental principles set forth below.
5 Resolution

2625 (XXV), annex.

6

General Assembly-Tenth Special Session

26. All States Members of the United Nations
reaffirm their full commitment to the purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations and their obligation
strictly to observe its principles as well as other relevant and generally accepted principles of international
law relating to the maintenance of international peace
and security. They stress the special importance of refraining from the threat or use of force against the
sovereignty, territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or against peoples under colonial
or foreign domination seeking to exercise their right
to self-determination and to achieve independence;
non-intervention and non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States; the inviolability of international
frontiers; and the peaceful settlement of disputes, having regard to the inherent right of States to individual
and collective self-defence in accordance with the
Charter.
27. In accordance with the Charter, the United
Nations has a central role and primary responsibility
in the sphere of disarmament. In order effectively to
discharge this role and facilitate and encourage all
measures in this field, the United Nations should be
kept appropriately informed of all steps in this field,
whether unilateral, bilateral, regional or multilateral,
without prejudice to the progress of negotiations.
28. All the peoples of the world have a vital interest in the success of disarmament negotiations. Consequently, all States have the duty to contribute to
efforts in the field of disarmament. All States have the
right to participate in disarmament negotiations. They
have the right to participate on an equal footing in
those multilateral disarmament negotiations which have
a direct bearing on their national security. While disarmament is the responsibility of all States, the nuclearweapon States have the primary responsibility for
nuclear disarmament and, together with other militarily
significant States, for halting and reversing the arms
race. It is therefore important to secure their active
participation.
29. The adoption of disarmament measures should
take place in such an equitable and balanced manner
as to ensure the right of each State to security and to
ensure that no individual State or group of States may
obtain advantages over others at any stage. At each
stage the objective should be undiminished security at
the lowest possible level of armaments and military
forces.
30. An acceptable balance of mutual responsibilities and obligations for nuclear and non-nuclearweapon States should be strictly observed.
31. Disarmament and arms limitation agreements
should provide for adequate measures of verification
satisfactory to all parties concerned in order to create
the necessary confidence and ensure that they are being
observed by all parties. The form and modalities of
the verification to be provided for in any specific agreement depend upon and should be determined by the
purposes, scope and nature of the agreement. Agreements should provide for the participation of parties
directly or through the United Nations system in the
verification process. Where appropriate, a combination
of several methods of verification as well as other compliance procedures should be employed.
32. All States, in particular nuclear-weapon States,
should consider various proposals designed to secure
the avoidance of the use of nuclear weapons, and the

prevention of nuclear war. In this context, while noting
the declarations made by nuclear-weapon States, effective arrangements, as appropriate, to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or the threat of
use of nuclear weapons could strengthen the security
of those States and international peace and security.
33. The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free
zones on the basis of agreements or arrangements
freely arrived at among the States of the zone concerned and the full compliance with those agreements
or arrangements, thus ensuring that the zones are genuinely free from nuclear weapons, and respect for
such zones by nuclear-weapon States constitute an important disarmament measure.
34. Disarmament, relaxation of international tension, respect for the right to self-determination and
national independence, the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the strengthening of international peace
and security are directly related to each other. Progress in any of these spheres has a beneficial effect on
all of them; in turn, failure in one sphere has negative
effects on others.
35. There is also a close relationship between disarmament and development. Progress in the former
would help greatly in the realization of the latter.
Therefore resources released as a result of the implementation of disarmament measures should be devoted to the economic and social development of all
nations and contribute to the bridging of the economic
gap between developed and developing countries.
36. Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons is a matter of universal concern. Measures of disarmament
must be consistent with the inalienable right of all
States, without discrimination, to develop, acquire and
use nuclear technology, equipment and materials for
the peaceful use of nuclear energy and to determine
their peaceful nuclear programmes in accordance with
their national priorities, needs and interests, bearing
in mind the need to prevent the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. International co-operation in the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy should be conducted under
agreed and appropriate international safeguards applied on a non-discriminatory basis.
37. Significant progress in disarmament, including nuclear disarmament, would be facilitated by parallel measures to strengthen the security of States and
to improve the international situation in general.
38. Negotiations on partial measures of disarmament should be conducted concurrently with negotiations on more comprehensive measures and should be
followed by negotiations leading to a treaty on general
and complete disarmament under effective international
control.
39. Qualitative and quantitative disarmament measures are both important for halting the arms race. Efforts to that end must include negotiations on the
limitation and cessation of the qualitative improvement
of armaments, especially weapons of mass destruction
and the development of new means of warfare so that
ultimately scientific and technological achievements
may be used solely for peaceful purposes.
40. Universality of disarmament agreements helps
create confidence among States. When multilateral
agreements in the field of disarmament are negotiated,
every effort should be made to ensure that they are

III.

Resolution adopted on the report of the Ad Hoe Committee

universally acceptable. The full compliance of all parties with the provisions contained in such agreements
would also contribute to the attainment of that goal.
41. In order to create favourable conditions for
success in the disarmament process, all States should
strictly abide by the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, refrain from actions which might adversely affect efforts in the field of disarmament, and
display a constructive approach to negotiations and the
political will to reach agreements. There are certain
negotiations on disarmament under way at different
levels, the early and successful completion of which
could contribute to limiting the arms race. Unilateral
measures of arms limitation or reduction could also
contribute to the attainment of that goal.
42. Since prompt measures should be taken in
order to halt and reverse the arms race, Member States
hereby declare that they will respect the objectives and
principles stated above and make every effort faithfully to carry out the Programme of Action set forth
in section III below.
III.

PROGRAMME OF ACTION

43. Progress towards the goal of general and
complete disarmament can be achieved through the
implementation of a programme of action on disarmament, in accordance with the goals and principles established in the Declaration on disarmament. The
present Programme of Action contains priorities and
measures in the field of disarmament that States should
undertake as a matter of urgency with a view to halting and reversing the arms race and to giving the necessary impetus to efforts designed to achieve genuine
disarmament leading to general and complete disarmament under effective international control.
44. The present Programme of Action enumerates
the specific measures of disarmament which should be
implemented over the next few years, as well as other
measures and studies to prepare the way for future
negotiations and for progress towards general and complete disarmament.
45. Priorities in disarmament negotiations shall be:
nuclear weapons; other weapons of mass destruction,
including chemical weapons; conventional weapons,
including any which may be deemed to be excessively
injurious or to have indiscriminate effects; and reduction of armed forces.
46. Nothing should preclude States from conducting negotiations on all priority items concurrently.
47. Nuclear weapons pose the greatest danger to
mankind and to the survival of civilization. It is essential to halt and reverse the nuclear arms race in
all its aspects in order to avert the danger of war involving nuclear weapons. The ultimate goal in this
context is the complete elimination of nuclear weapons.
48. In the task of achieving the goals of nuclear
disarmament, all the nuclear-weapon States, in particular those among them which possess the most important nuclear arsenals, bear a special responsibility.
49. The process of nuclear disarmament should be
carried out in such a way, and requires measures to
ensure, that the security of all States is guaranteed at
progressively lower levels of nuclear armaments, taking
into account the relative qualitative and quantitative
importance of the existing arsenals of the nuclearweapon States and other States concerned.

7

50. The achievement of nuclear disarmament will
require urgent negotiation of agreements at appropriate
stages and with adequate measures of verification satisfactory to the States concerned for:
(a) Cessation of the qualitative improvement and
development of nuclear-weapon systems;
( b) Cessation of the production of all types of
nuclear weapons and their means of delivery, and of
the production of fissionable material for weapons
purposes;
( c) A comprehensive, phased programme with
agreed time-frames, whenever feasible, for progressive
and balanced reduction of stockpiles of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery, leading to their ult~mate and complete elimination at the earliest possible
time.
C?o~sideration can be given in the course of the negot~at10ns. to mutua! a:1d agreed limitation or prohibition, without prejudice to the security of any State,
of any types of nuclear armaments.
51. ~h~ cessation of nuclear-weapon testing by all
States w1thm the framework of an effective nuclear
disarmament process would be in the interest of mankind. It would make a significant contribution to the
above aim of ending the qualitative improvement of
nuclear weapons and the development of new types
of such weapons and of preventing the proliferation
of nu~lear weapons. In this context the negotiations
now m progress on "a treaty prohibiting nuclearweapon tests, and a protocol covering nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, which would be an
integral part of the treaty," should be concluded urgently and the result submitted for full consideration
by the multilateral negotiating body with a view to the
submission of a draft treaty to the General Assembly
at the earliest possible date. All efforts should be made
by the negotiating parties to achieve an agreement
which, following endorsement by the General Assembly, could attract the widest possible adherence. In this
context, various views were expressed by non-nuclearweapon States that, pending the conclusion of this
treaty, the world community would be encouraged if
all the nuclear-weapon States refrained from testing
nuclear weapons. In this connexion, some nuclearweapon States expressed different views.
52. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
the United States of America should conclude at the
earliest possible date the agreement they have been
pursuing for several years in the second series of
the strategic arms limitation talks. They are invited
to transmit in good time the text of the agreement
to the General Assembly. It should be followed
~romptly by further strategic arms limitation negotiat10ns betwee~ the two parties, leading to agreed significant _reductions of, and qualitative limitations on,
~trategi~ ar1:1s. It should c<;mstitute an important step
m the direction of nuclear disarmament and ultimately
of establishment of a world free of such ~eapons. '
53. The process of nuclear disarmament described
in the paragraph on this subject should be expedited
by the urgent and vigorous pursuit to a successful conclusion of ongoing negotiations and the urgent initiation of further negotiations among the nuclear-weapon
States.
54. Significant progress in nuclear disarmament
would be facilitated both by parallel political or inter-

8

General Assembly-Tenth Special Session

national legal measures to strengthen the security of
States and by progress in the limitation and reduction
of armed forces and conventional armaments of the
nuclear-weapon States and other States in the regions
concerned.
55. Real progress in the field of nuclear disarmament could create an atmosphere conducive to progress in conventional disarmament on a world-wide
basis.
56. The most effective guarantee against the danger of nuclear war and the use of nuclear weapons is
nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of
nuclear weapons.
57. Pending the achievement of this goal, for which
negotiations should be vigorously pursued, and bearing in mind the devastating results which nuclear war
would have on belligerents and non-belligerents alike,
the nuclear-weapon States have special responsibilities
to undertake measures aimed at preventing the outbreak of nuclear war, and of the use of force in international relations, subject to the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, including the use of
nuclear weapons.
58. In this context all States, in particular nuclearweapon States, should consider as soon as possible
various proposals designed to secure the avoidance of
the use of nuclear weapons, the prevention of nuclear
war and related objectives, where possible through international agreement, and thereby ensure that the survival of mankind is not endangered. All States should
actively participate in efforts to bring about conditions
in international relations among States in which a code
of peaceful conduct of nations in international affairs
could be agreed and which would preclude the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons.
59. In the same context, the nuclear-weapon States
are called upon to take steps to assure the non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons. The General Assembly notes the declarations made by the nuclear-weapon States and urges
them to pursue efforts to conclude, as appropriate,
effective arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon
States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons.
60. The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free
zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at
among the States of the region concerned constitutes
an important disarmament measure.
61. The process of establishing such zones in different parts of the world should be encouraged with
the ultimate objective of achieving a world entirely
free of nuclear weapons. In the process of establishing
such zones, the characteristics of each region should
be taken into account. The States participating in such
zones should undertake to comply fully with all the
objectives, purposes and principles of the agreements
or arrangements establishing the zones, thus ensuring
that they are genuinely free from nuclear weapons.
62. With respect to such zones, the nuclear-weapon
States in turn are called upon to give undertakings, the
modalities of which are to be negotiated with the competent authority of each zone, in particular:
(a) To respect strictly the status of the nuclearweapon-free zone;
( b) To refrain from the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons against the States of the zone.

63. In the light of existing conditions, and without
prejudice to other measures which may be considered
in other regions, the following measures are especially
desirable:
(a) Adoption by the States concerned of all relevant measures to ensure the full application of the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) ,6 taking into
account the views expressed at the tenth special session
on the adherence to it;
( b) Signature and ratification of the Additional
Protocols of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) by
the States entitled to become parties to those instruments which have not yet done so;
( c) In Africa, where the Organization of African
Unity has affirmed a decision for the denuclearization
of the region, the Security Council of the United Nations shall take appropriate effective steps whenever
necessary to prevent the frustration of this objective;
( d) The serious consideration of the practical and
urgent steps, as described in the paragraphs above,
required for the implementation of the proposal to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East,
in accordance with the relevant General Assembly
resolutions, where all parties directly concerned have
expressed their support for the concept and where the
danger of nuclear-weapon proliferation exists. The establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East would greatly enhance international peace
and security. Pending the establishment of such a zone
in the region, States of the region should solemnly
declare that they will refrain on a reciprocal basis from
producing, acquiring or in any other way possessing
nuclear weapons and nuclear explosive devices and
from permitting the stationing of nuclear weapons on
their territory by any third party, and agree to place
all their nuclear activities under International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards. Consideration should be
given to a Security Council role in advancing the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East;
( e) All States in the region of South Asia have
expressed their determination to keep their countries
free of nuclear weapons. No action should be taken by
them which might deviate from that objective. In this
context, the question of establishing a nuclear-wcaponfree zone in South Asia has been dealt with in several
resolutions of the General Assembly, which is keeping
the subject under consideration.

64. The establishment of zones of peace in various
regions of the world under appropriate conditions, to
be clearly defined and determined freely by the States
concerned in the zone, taking into account the characteristics of the zone and the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, and in conformity with international law, can contribute to strengthening the security of States within such zones and to international
peace and security as a whole. In this regard, the General Assembly notes the proposals for the establishment of zones of peace, inter alia, in:
(a) South-East Asia where States in the region
have expressed interest in the establishment of such a
zone, in conformity with their views;
6 United

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.

III.

Resolution adopted on the report of the Ad Hoe Committee

(b) The Indian Ocean, taking into account the
deliberations of the General Assembly and its relevant
resolutions and the need to ensure the maintenance of
peace and security in the region.
65. It is imperative, as an integral part of the effort to halt and reverse the arms race, to prevent the
proliferation of nuclear weapons. The goal of nuclear
non-proliferation is on the one hand to prevent the
emergence of any additional nuclear-weapon States
besides the existing five nuclear-weapon States, and
on the other progressively to reduce and eventually
eliminate nuclear weapons altogether. This involves
obligations and responsibilities on the part of both nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States,
the former undertaking to stop the nuclear arms race
and to achieve nuclear disarmament by urgent application of the measures outlined in the relevant paragraphs
of this Final Document, and all States undertaking to
prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.
66. Effective measures can and should be taken
at the national level and through international agreements to minimize the danger of the proliferation of
nuclear weapons without jeopardizing energy supplies
or the development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Therefore, the nuclear-weapon States and the
non-nuclear-weapon States should jointly take further
steps to develop an international consensus of ways and
means, on a universal and non-discriminatory basis,
to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
67. Full implementation of all the provisions of
existing instruments on non-proliferation, such as the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 7
and/ or the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) by States
parties to those instruments will be an important contribution to this end. Adherence to such instruments
has increased in recent years and the hope has been
expressed by the parties that this trend might continue.
68. Non-proliferation measures should not jeopardize the full exercise of the inalienable rights of all
States to apply and develop their programmes for the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy for economic and social development in conformity with their priorities,
interests and needs. All States should also have access
to and be free to acquire technology, equipment and
materials for peaceful uses of nuclear energy, taking
into account the particular needs of the developing
countries. International co-operation in this field
should be under agreed and appropriate international
safeguards applied through the International Atomic
Energy Agency on a non-discriminatory basis in order
to prevent effectively the proliferation of nuclear
weapons.
69. Each country's choices and decisions in the
field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be
respected without jeopardizing their respective fuel
cycle policies or international co-operation, agreements
and contracts for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
provided that the agreed safeguard measures mentioned above are applied.
70. In accordance with the principles and provisions of General Assembly resolution 32/50 of
8 December 1977, international co-operation for the
promotion of the transfer and utilization of nuclear
technology for economic and social development,
7 Resolution

2373 (XXII), annex.

9

especially in the developing countries, should be
strengthened.
71. Efforts should be made to conclude the work
of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation
strictly in accordance with the objectives set out in the
final communique of its Organizing Conference. 8
72. All States should adhere to the Protocol for
the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June
1925.n
73. All States which have not yet done so should
consider adhering to the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction.
74. States should also consider the possibility of
adhering to multilateral agreements concluded so far
in the disarmament field which are mentioned below
in this section.
75. The complete and effective prohibition of the
development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and their destruction represent one of
the most urgent measures of disarmament. Consequently, the conclusion of a convention to this end, on
which negotiations have been going on for several
years, is one of the most urgent tasks of multilateral
negotiations. After its conclusion, all States should
contribute to ensuring the broadest possible application of the convention through its early signature and
ratification.
76. A convention should be concluded prohibiting
the development, production, stockpiling and use of
radiological weapons.
77. In order to help prevent a qualitative arms
race and so that scientific and technological achievements may ultimately be used solely for peaceful purposes, effective measures should be taken to avoid the
danger and prevent the emergence of new types of
weapons of mass destruction based on new scientific
principles and achievements. Efforts should be appropriately pursued aiming at the prohibition of such
new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction. Specific agreements could be concluded on
particular types of new weapons of mass destruction
which may be identified. This question should be kept
under continuing review.
78. The Committee on Disarmament should keep
under review the need for a further prohibition of
military or any other hostile use of environmental
modification techniques in order to eliminate the dangers to mankind from such use.
79. In order to promote the peaceful use of and
to avoid an arms race on the sea-bed and the ocean
floor and the subsoil thereof, the Committee on Disarmament is requested-in consultation with the States
parties to the Treaty on the Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons
of Mass Destruction on the Sea-Bed and the Ocean
Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof, 10 and taking into
account the proposals made during the 1977 Review
8 See

A/C.1/32/7.
of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929),
No. 2138.
10 Resolution 2660 (XXV), annex.
9 League

lO

General Assembly-Tenth Special Session

Conference of the parties to that Treaty and any relevant technological developments-to proceed promptly
with the consideration of further measures in the field
of disarmament for the prevention of an arms race
in that environment.
80. In order to prevent an arms race in outer
space, further measures should be taken and appropriate international negotiations held in accordance
with the spirit of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of
Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies.11
81. Together with negotiations on nuclear disarmament measures, the limitation and gradual reduction
of armed forces and conventional weapons should he
resolutely pursued within the framework of progress
towards general and complete disarmament. States with
the largest military arsenals have a special responsibility in pursuing the process of conventional armaments reductions.
82. In particular the achievement of a more stable
situation in Europe at a lower level of military potential on the basis of approximate equality and parity,
as well as on the basis of undiminished security of all
States with full respect for security interests and independence of States outside military alliances, by agreement on appropriate mutual reductions and limitations
would contribute to the strengthening of security in
Europe and constitute a significant step towards enhancing international peace and security. Current efforts to this end should be continued most energetically.
83. Agreements or other measures should be resolutely pursued on a bilateral, regional and multilateral basis with the aim of strengthening peace and
security at a lower level of forces, by the limitation
and reduction of armed forces and of conventional
weapons, taking into account the need of States to
protect their security, bearing in mind the inherent
right of self-defence embodied in the Charter of the
United Nations and without prejudice to the principle
of equal rights and self-determination of peoples in
accordance with the Charter, and the need to ensure
balance at each stage and undiminished security of all
States. Such measures might include those in the following two paragraphs.
84. Bilateral, regional and multilateral consultations and conferences should be held where appropriate conditions exist with the participation of an the
countries concerned for the consideration of different
aspects of conventional disarmament, such as the
initiative envisaged in the Declaration of Ayacucho
subscribed to by eight Latin American countries on
9 December 1974. 12
85. Consultations should be carried out among
major arms supplier and recipient countries on the
limitation of all types of international transfer of conventional weapons, based in particular on the principle of undiminished security of the parties with a
view to promoting or enhancing stability at a lower
military level, taking into account the need of all States
to protect their security as well as the inalienable right
to self-determination and independence of peoples under colonial or foreign domination and the obligations
11 Resolution

2222 (XXI), annex.
annex.

12 See A/ 10044,

of States to respect that right, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States.
86. The United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively
Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, to be held
in 1979, should seek agreement, in the light of humanitarian and military considerations, on the prohibition
or restriction of use of certain conventional weapons
including those which may cause unnecessary suffering
or have indiscriminate effects. The Conference should
consider specific categories of such weapons, including
those which were the subject-matter of previously conducted discussions.
87. All States are called upon to contribute towards carrying out this task.
88. The result of the Conference should be considered by all States, especially producer States, in
regard to the question of the transfer of such weapons to other States.
89. Gradual reduction of military budgets on a
mutually agreed basis, for example, in absolute figures
or in terms of percentage points, particularly by nuclear-weapon States and other militarily significant
States, would be a measure that would contribute to
the curbing of the arms race and would increase the
possibilities of reallocation of resources now being used
for military purposes to economic and social development, particularly for the benefit of the developing
countries. The basis for implementing this measure
will have to be agreed by all participating States and
will require ways and means of its implementation acceptable to all of them, taking account of the problems
involved in assessing the relative significance of reductions as among different States and with due regard
to the proposals of States on all the aspects of reduction of military budgets.
90. The General Assembly should continue to consider what concrete steps should be taken to facilitate
the reduction of military budgets, bearing in mind the
relevant proposals and documents of the United Nations on this question.
91. In order to facilitate the conclusion and effective implementation of disarmament agreements and
to create confidence, States should accept appropriate
provisions for verification in such agreements.
92. In the context of international disarmament
negotiations, the problem of verification should be
further examined and adequate methods and procedures in this field be considered. Every effort should
be made to develop appropriate methods and procedures which are non-discriminatory and which do
not unduly interfere with the internal affairs of other
States or jeopardize their economic and social development.
93. In order to facilitate the process of disarmament, it is necessary to take measures and pursue policies to strengthen international peace and security
and to build confidence among States. Commitment
to confidence-building measures could significantly contribute to preparing for further progress in disarmament. For this purpose, measures such as the following,
and other measures yet to be agreed upon, should be
undertaken:

III.

Resolution adopted on the report of the Ad Hoe Committee

(a) The prevention of attacks which take place
by accident, miscalculation or communications failure
by taking steps to improve communications between
Governments, particularly in areas of tension, by the
establishment of "hot lines" and other methods of reducing the risk of conflict;
( b) States should assess the possible implications
of their military research and development for existing
agreements as well as for further efforts in the field
of disarmament;
(c) The Secretary-General shall periodically submit reports to the General Assembly on the economic
and social consequences of the armaments race and
its extremely harmful effects on world peace and security.
94. In view of the relationship between expenditure on armaments and economic and social development and the necessity to release real resources now
being used for military purposes to economic and social development in the world, particularly for the
benefit of the developing countries, the SecretaryGeneral should, with the assistance of a group of
qualified governmental experts appointed by him, initiate an expert study on the relationship between disarmament and development. The Secretary-General
should submit an interim report on the subject to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session and submit the final results to the Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session for subsequent action.
95. The expert study should have the terms of reference contained in the report of the Ad Hoe Group
on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development13 appointed by the Secretary-General in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/88 A
of 12 December 1977. It should investigate the three
main areas listed in the report, bearing in mind the
United Nations studies previously carried out. The
study should be made in the context of how disarmament can contribute to the establishment of the new
international economic order. The study should be
forward-looking and policy-oriented and place special
emphasis on both the desirability of a reallocation, following disarmament measures, of resources now being
used for military purposes to economic and social development, particularly for the benefit of the developing countries, and the substantive feasibility of such
a reallocation. A principal aim should be to produce
results that could effectively guide the formulation of
practical measures to reallocate those resources at the
local, national, regional and international levels.
96. Taking further steps in the field of disarmament and other measures aimed at promoting international peace and security would be facilitated by carrying out studies by the Secretary-General in this field
with appropriate assistance from governmental or consultant experts.
97. The Secretary-General shall, with the assistance of consultant experts appointed by him, continue
the study of the interrelationship between disarmament
and international security requested in Assembly resolution 32/87 C of 12 December 1977 and submit it to
the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly.
98. At its thirty-third and subsequent sessions the
General Assembly should determine the specific guidelines for carrying out studies, taking into account the
13 A/S-10/9,

annex.

11

proposals already submitted including those made by
individual countries at the special session, as well as
other proposals which can be introduced later in this
field. In doing so, the Assembly would take into consideration a report on these matters prepared by the
Secrcta ry-G eneral.
99. In order to mobilize world public opinion on
behalf of disarmament, the specific measures set forth
below, designed to increase the dissemination of information about the armaments race and the efforts to
halt and reverse it, should be adopted.
I 00. Governmental and non-governmental information organs and those of the United Nations and
its specialized agencies should give priority to the
preparation and distribution of printed and audio-visual
material relating to the danger represented by the armaments race as well as to the disarmament efforts and
negotiations on specific disarmament measures.
101. In particular, publicity should be given to the
Final Document of the tenth special session.
102. The General Assembly proclaims the week
starting 24 October, the day of the foundation of the
United Nations, as a week devoted to fostering the
objectives of disarmament.
103. To encourage study and research on disarmament, the United Nations Centre for Disarmament
should intensify its activities in the presentation of
information concerning the armaments race and disarmament. Also, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization is urged to intensify
its activities aimed at facilitating research and publications on disarmament, related to its fields of competence, especially in developing countries, and should
disseminate the results of such research.
I 04. Throughout this process of disseminating information about developments in the disarmament field
of all countries, there should be increased participation
by non-governmental organizations concerned with the
matter, through closer liaison between them and the
United Nations.
105. Member States should be encouraged to ensure a better flow of information with regard to the
various aspects of disarmament to avoid dissemination
of false and tendentious information concerning armaments, and to concentrate on the danger of escalation
of the armaments race and on the need for general
and complete disarmament under effective international
control.
106. With a view to contributing to a greater understanding and awareness of the problems created by
the armaments race and of the need for disarmament,
Governments and governmental and non-governmental
international organizations are urged to take steps to
develop programmes of education for disarmament and
peace studies at all levels.
107. The General Assembly welcomes the initiative of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization in planning to hold a world
congress on disarmament education and, in this connexion, urges that organization to step up its programme aimed at the development of disarmament
education as a distinct field of study through the preparation, inter alia, of teachers' guides, textbooks, readers
and audio-visual materials. Member States should take
all possible measures to encourage the incorporation

12

General Assembly-Tenth Special Session

of such materials in the curricula of their educational
institutes.
108. In order to promote expertise in disarmament
in more Member States, particularly in the developing
countries, the General Assemblv decides to establish a
programme of fellowships on disarmament. The Secretary-General, taking into account the proposal submitted to the special session, should prepare guidelines
for the programme. He should also submit the financial
requirements of twenty fellowships to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session for inclusion in the
regular budget of the United Nations, bearing in mind
the savings that can be made within the existing budgetary appropriations.
109. Implementation of these priorities should lead
to general and complete disarmament under effective
international control, which remains the ultimate goal
of all efforts exerted in the field of disarmament. Negotiations on general and complete disarmament shall be
conducted concurrently with negotiations on partial
measures of disarmament. With this purpose in mind,
the Committee on Disarmament will undertake the
elaboration of a comprehensive programme of disarmament encompassing all measures thought to be advisable in order to ensure that the goal of general and
complete disarmament under effective international
control becomes a reality in a world in which international peace and security prevail and in which the new
international economic order is strengthened and consolidated. The comprehensive programme should contain appropriate procedures for ensuring that the General Assembly is kept fully informed of the progress
of the negotiations including an appraisal of the situation when appropriate and, in particular, a continuing
review of the implementation of the programme.
110. Progress in disarmament should be accompanied by measures to strengthen institutions for maintaining peace and the settlement of international
disputes by peaceful means. During and after the
implementation of the programme of general and complete disarmament, there should be taken, in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, the necessary measures to maintain international peace and security, including the obligation of
States to place at the disposal of the United Nations
agreed manpower necessary for an international peace
force to be equipped with agreed types of armaments.
Arrangements for the use of this force should ensure
that the United Nations can effectively deter or supress
any threat or use of arms in violation of the purposes
and principles of the United Nations.
111. General and complete disarmament under
strict and effective international control shall permit
States to have at their disposal only those non-nuclear
forces, armaments, facilities and establishments as are
agreed to be necessary to maintain internal order and
protect the personal security of citizens and in order
that States shall support and provide agreed manpower
for a United Nations peace force.
112. In addition to the several questions dealt
with in this Programme of Action, there are a few
others of fundamental importance, on which, because
of the complexity of the issues involved and the short
time at the disposal of the special session, it has proved
impossible to reach satisfactory agreed conclusions. For
those reasons they are treated only in very general
terms and, in a few instances, not even treated at all

in the Programme. It should be stressed, however,
that a number of concrete approaches to deal with
such questions emerged from the exchange of views
carried out in the General Assembly which will undoubtedly facilitate the continuation of the study and
negotiation of the problems involved in the competent
disarmament organs.
IV.

MACHINERY

113. While disarmament, particularly in the nuclear field, has become a necessity for the survival of
mankind and for the elimination of the danger of
nuclear war, little progress has been made since the
end of the Second World War. In addition to the need
to exercise political will, the international machinery
should be utilized more effectively and also improved
to enable implementation of the Programme of Action
and help the United Nations to fulfil its role in the
field of disarmament. In spite of the best efforts of
the international community, adequate results have not
been produced with the existing machinery. There is,
therefore, an urgent need that existing disarmament
machinery be revitalized and forums appropriately
constituted for disarmament deliberations and negotiations with a better representative character. For maximum effectiveness, two kinds of bodies are required
in the field of disarmament-deliberative and negotiating. All Member States should be represented on the
former, whereas the latter, for the sake of convenience,
should have a relatively small membership.
114. The United Nations, in accordance with the
Charter, has a central role and primary responsibility
in the sphere of disarmament. Accordingly, it should
play a more active role in this field and, in order to
discharge its functions effectively, the United Nations
should facilitate and encourage all disarmament measures-unilateral, bilateral, regional or multilateraland be kept duly informed through the General Assembly, or any other appropriate United Nations
channel reaching all Members of the Organization, of
all disarmament efforts outside its aegis without prejudice to the progress of negotiations.
115. The General Assembly has been and should
remain the main deliberative organ of the United Nations in the field of disarmament and should make
every effort to facilitate the implementation of disarmament measures. An item entitled "Review of the
implementation of the recommendations and decisions
adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special
session" shall be included in the provisional agenda
of the thirty-third and subsequent sessions of the General Assembly.
116. Draft multilateral disarmament conventions
should be subjected to the normal procedures applicable in the law of treaties. Those submitted to the
General Assembly for its commendation should be
subject to full review by the Assembly.
117. The First Committee of the General Assembly should deal in the future only with questions of
disarmament and related international security questions.
118. The General Assembly establishes, as success?r to the Commission originally established by resolut10n 502 (VI) of 11 January 1952 a Disarmament
Commission, composed of all States' Members of the
United Nations, and decides that:

III.

Resolution adopted on the report of the Ad Hoe Committee

13

(a) The Disarmament Commission shall be a deliberative body, a subsidiary organ of the General
Assembly, the function of which shall be to consider
and make recommendations on various problems in
the field of disarmament and to follow up the relevant
decisions and recommendations of the special session
devoted to disarmament. The Disarmament Commission should, inter alia, consider the elements of a
comprehensive programme for disarmament to be submitted as recommendations to the General Assembly
and, through it, to the negotiating body, the Committee on Disarmament;
( b) The Disarmament Commission shall function
under the rules of procedure relating to the committees
of the General Assembly with such modifications as the
Commission may deem necessary and shall make every
effort to ensure that, in so far as possible, decisions on
substantive issues be adopted by consensus;
( c) The Disarmament Commission shall report
annually to the General Assembly and will submit for
consideration by the Assembly at its thirty-third session
a report on organizational matters; in 1979, the Disarmament Commission will meet for a period not exceeding four weeks, the dates to be decided at the
thirty-third session of the Assembly;
(d)
The Secretary-General shall furnish such experts, staff and services as are necessary for the effective accomplishment of the Commission's functions.

( d) Rotate the chairmanship of the Committee
among all its members on a monthly basis;
( e) Adopt its own agenda taking into account the
recommendations made to it by the General Assembly
and the proposals presented by the members of the
Committee;
(f) Submit a report to the General Assembly annually, or more frequently as appropriate, and provide
its formal and other relevant documents to the States
Members of the United Nations on a regular basis;
(g) Make arrangements for interested States, not
members of the Committee, to submit to the Committee written proposals or working documents on
measures of disarmament that are the subject of negotiation in the Committee and to participate in the discussion of the subject-matter of such proposals or
working documents;
( h) Invite States not members of the Committee,
upon their request, to express views in the Committee
when the particular concerns of those States are under
discussion;
(i) Open its plenary meetings to the public unless
otherwise decided.

119. A second special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament should be held on a
date to be decided by the Assembly at its thirty-third
session.

122. At the earliest appropriate time, a world disarmament conference should be convened with universal participation and with adequate preparation.

120. The General Assembly is conscious of the
work that has been done by the international negotiating body that has been meeting since 14 March
1962 as well as the considerable and urgent work that
remains to be accomplished in the field of disarmament.
The Assembly is deeply aware of the continuing requirement for a single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of limited size taking decisions on the
basis of consensus. It attaches great importance to the
participation of all the nuclear-weapon States in an
appropriately constituted negotiating body, the Committee on Disarmament. The Assembly welcomes the
agreement reached following appropriate consultations
among the Member States during the special session of
the General Assembly devoted to disarmament that the
Committee on Disarmament will be open to the nuclear-weapon States, and thirty-two to thirty-five other
States to be chosen in consultation with the President of
the thirty-second session of the Assembly; that the
membership of the Committee on Disarmament will
be reviewed at regular intervals; that the Committee
on Disarmament will be convened in Geneva not later
than January 1979 by the country whose name appears
first in the alphabetical list of membership; and that
the Committee on Disarmament will:

(a)

Conduct its work by consensus;

(b)

Adopt its own rules of procedure;

(c) Request the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, following consultations with the Committee
on Disarmament, to appoint the Secretary of the Committee, who shall also act as his personal representative,
to assist the Committee and its Chairman in organizing
the business and time-tables of the Committee;

121. Bilateral and regional disarmament negotiations may also play an important role and could facilitate negotiations of multilateral agreements in the field
of disarmament.

123. In order to enable the United Nations to continue to fulfil its role in the field of disarmament and
to carry out the additional tasks assigned to it by this
special session, the United Nations Centre for Disarmament should be adequately strengthened and its
research and information functions accordingly extended. The Centre should also take account fully of
the possibilities offered by specialized agencies and
other institutions and programmes within the United
Nations system with regard to studies and information
on disarmament. The Centre should also increase contacts with non-governmental organizations and research
institutions in view of the valuable role they play in the
field of disarmament. This role could be encouraged
also in other ways that may be considered as appropriate.
124. The Secretary-General is requested to set up
an advisory board of eminent persons, selected on the
basis of their personal expertise and taking into account the principle of equitable geographical representation, to advise him on various aspects of studies to
be made under the auspices of the United Nations in
the field of disarmament and arms limitation, including
a programme of such studies.

* * *
125. The General Assembly notes with satisfaction
that the active participation of the Member States in
the consideration of the agenda items of the special
session and the proposals and suggestions submitted by
them and reflected to a considerable extent in the Final
Document have made a valuable contribution to the
work of the special session and to its positive conclusion. Since a number of those proposals and sugges-

14

General Assembly-Tenth Special Session

tions, 14 which have become an integral part of the work
of the special session of the General Assembly, deserve
to be studied further and more thoroughly, taking into
consideration the many relevant comments and observations made in both the general debate in plenary
meeting and the deliberations of the Ad Hoe Committee of the Tenth Special Session, the SecretaryGeneral is requested to transmit, together with this
Final Document, to the appropriate deliberative and
negotiating organs dealing with the questions of disarmament all the official records of the special session
devoted to disarmament, in accordance with the recommendations which the Assembly may adopt at its
thirty-third session. Some of the proposals put forth
for the consideration of the special session are listed
below:
(a) Text of the decision of the Central Committee
of the Romanian Communist Party concerning Romania's position on disarmament and, in particular, on
nuclear disarmament, adopted on 9 May 1978; 15
( b) Views of the Swiss Government on problems
to be discussed at the tenth special session of the General Assembly; 16
( c) Proposals of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics on practical measures for ending the arms
race; 17
(d)
Memorandum from France concerning the establishment of an International Satellite Monitoring
Agency; 18
( e) Memorandum from France concerning the establishment of an International Institute for Research
on Disarmament; 19
(f) Proposal by Sri Lanka for the establishment of
a World Disarmament Authority; 20
(g) Working paper submitted by the Federal Republic of Germany entitled "Contribution to the seismological verification of a comprehensive test ban"; 21
(h) Working paper submitted by the Federal Republic of Germany entitled "Invitation to attend an
international chemical-weapon verification workshop in
the Federal Republic of Germany"; 22
(i) Working paper submitted by China on disarmament;23
(j) Working paper submitted by the Federal Republic of Germany concerning zones of confidence14 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Tenth
Special Session, Plenary Meetings, Ist to 25th meetings; ibid.,
Tenth Special Session, Supplement No. I (AIS-10/ I), Supplement No. 2 (A/S-10/2 and Corr.I), Supplement No. 2A
(A/S-10/2/Add.1/Rev.1) and Supplement No. 3 (A/S-10/3
and Corr. I); ibid., Tenth Special Session, Annexes, agenda
item 7, document A/S-10/10; and ibid., Tenth Special Session,
Ad Hoe Committee of the Tenth Special Session, 1st to 16th
meetings, and ibid., Ad Hoe Committee of the Tenth Special
Session, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum; A/S-10/5, A/S-10/6
and Corr.I and Add.I, A/S-10/7 and Corr.I, A/S-10/8 and
Add.I and 2, A/S-10/9.A/S-10/11-14andA/S-10/17;A/S-10/
AC.1/1-8, A/S-10/AC.l/9 and Add.I, A/S-10/AC.l/10
and 11, A/S-10/AC.1/12 and Corr.I, A/S-10/AC.l/13-25,
A/S-10/AC.1/26 and Corr.I and 2, A/S-10/AC.1/27-36,
A/S-10/AC.l/37 and Rev.I and Corr.I and Rev.I/Add.I,
and A/S-I0/AC.1/38-40; A/S-10/AC.l/L.1 and Rev.I and
A/S-10/ AC.1/L.2-17.
1 5 A/S-I 0/ 14.
16 A/S-10/ AC.1 /2.
11 A/S-10/ AC.1/4.
1s A/S-10/ AC.1/7.
10 A/S-10/AC.l/8.
20 A/S-10/ AC.1/9 and Add.I.
21 A/S-10/ AC. l/ 12 and Corr. l.
22 A/S-10/ AC.1/13.
23 A/S-10/ AC. l/ 17.

building measures as a first step towards the preparation of a world-wide convention on confidence-building
measures; 24
(k)
Proposal by Ireland for a study of the possibility of establishing a system of incentives to promote
arms control and disarmament; 211
([) Working paper submitted by Romania concerning a synthesis of the proposals in the field of disarmament ;26
(m) Proposal by the United States of America on
the establishment of a United Nations Peace-keeping
Reserve and on confidence-building measures and stabilizing measures in various regions, including notification of manceuvres, invitation of observers to manreuvres, and United Nations machinery to study and
promote such measures; 27
( n) Proposal by Uruguay on the possibility of establishing a polemological agency; 28
( o) Proposal by Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Federal Republic of, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America on
the strengthening of the security role of the United
Nations in the peaceful settlement of disputes and
peace-keeping ;20
(p) Memorandum from France concerning the establishment of an International Disarmament Fund for
Development ;30
(q) Proposal by Norway entitled "Evaluation of
the impact of new weapons on arms control and disarmament efforts" ;31
(r) Note verbale transmitting the text, signed in
Washington on 22 June 1978 by the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia,
Ecuador, Panama, Peru and Venezuela, reaffirming the
principles of the Declaration of Ayacucho with respect
to the limitation of conventional weapons; 32
(s) Memorandum from Liberia entitled "Declaration of a new philosophy on disarmament" ;33
(t) Statements made by the representatives of
China, on 22 June 1978, on the draft Final Document
of the tenth special session; 34
(u) Proposal by the President of Cyprus for the
total demilitarization and disarmament of the Republic
of Cyprus and the implementation of the resolutions
of the United Nations; 35
( v) Proposal by Costa Rica on economic and social incentives to halt the arms race; 36
( w) Amendments submitted by China to the draft
Final Document of the tenth special session; 37
(x)
Proposals by Canada for the implementation
of a strategy of suffocation of the nuclear arms race; 38
24 A/S-10/ AC.1 /20.

20 A/S-I0/AC.1/21.
2(l A/S-10/ AC. I /23.

21 A/S-10/ AC.1/24.
2s A/S-10/ AC.1/25.
20 A/S-I0/AC.1/26 and
30 A/S-10/ AC. I /28.

Corr.I and 2.

31 A/S-10/ AC.1 /31.

32 A/S-10/AC.l/34.

33 A/S-10/ AC. I /35.

34 A/S-10/AC.l/36.

35 A/S-10/ AC.1 /39.
36 A/S-10/AC.l/40.
37 A/S-10/AC.I/L.2-4,

38 A/S-10/ AC. I /L.6.

A/S-10/AC.1/L.7 and 8.

III.

(y)
Draft resolution submitted by Cyprus, Ethiopia and India on the urgent need for cessation of
further testing of nuclear weapons; 39
(z) Draft resolution submitted by Ethiopia and
India on the non-use of nuclear weapons and prevention of nuclear war; 40
( aa) Proposal by the non-aligned countries on the
establishment of a zone of peace in the Mediterranean;41
(bb) Proposal by the Government of Senegal for
a tax on military budgets; 42
(cc) Proposal by Austria for the transmission to
Member States of working paper A/ AC.187 / 109 and
the ascertainment of their views on the subject of verification;43
(dd) Proposal by the non-aligned countries for
the dismantling of foreign military bases in foreign
territories and withdrawal of foreign troops from foreign territories; 44
(ee) Proposal by Mexico for the opening, on a
provisional basis, of an ad hoe account in the United
Nations Development Programme to use for development the funds which may be released as a result of
disarmament measures; 45
(ff) Proposal by Italy on the role of the Security
Council in the field of disarmament in accordance
with Article 26 of the Charter of the United Nations; 46
(gg) Proposal by the Netherlands for a study on
the establishment of an international disarmament organization.47
126. In adopting this Final Document, the States
Members of the United Nations solemnly reaffirm their
determination to work for general and complete disarmament and to make further collective efforts aimed
at strengthening peace and international security; eliminating the threat of war, particularly nuclear war; implementing practical measures aimed at halting and
reversing the arms race; strengthening the procedures
for the peaceful settlement of disputes; and reducing
military expenditures and utilizing the resources thus
released in a manner which will help to promote the
well-being of all peoples and to improve the economic
conditions of the developing countries.
39 A/S-10/ AC. l/L.10.
40 A/S-10/AC.l/L.11.

41 A/S-10/ AC.1/37, para. 72.

42 /bid.,
43 J bid.,
44 Jbid.,
45 Ibid.,
46 Jbid.,

para. 101.
para. 113.
para. 126.
para. 141.
para. 179.
47 Ibid., para. 186.

15

Resolution adopted on the report of the Ad Hoe Committee

127. The General Assembly expresses its satisfaction that the proposals submitted to its special session
devoted to disarmament and the deliberations thereon
have made it possible to reaffirm and define in this
Final Document fundamental principles, goals, priorities and procedures for the implementation of the above
purposes, either in the Declaration or the Programme
of Action or in both. The Assembly also welcomes the
important decisions agreed upon regarding the deliberative and negotiating machinery and is confident that
these organs will discharge their functions in an effective manner.
128. Finally, it should be borne in mind that the
number of States that participated in the general debate, as well as the high level of representation and
the depth and scope of that debate, are unprecedented
in the history of disarmament efforts. Several Heads of
State or Government addressed the General Assembly.
In addition, other Heads of State or Government sent
messages and expressed their good wishes for the success of the special session of the Assembly. Several
high officials of specialized agencies and other institutions and programmes within the United Nations system and spokesmen of twenty-five non-governmental
organizations and six research institutes also made
valuable contributions to the proceedings of the session.
It must be emphasized, moreover, that the special
session marks not the end but rather the beginning of
a new phase of the efforts of the United Nations in the
field of disarmament.
129. The General Assembly is convinced that the
discussions of the disarmament problems at the special
session and its Final Document will attract the attention of all peoples, further mobilize world public
opinion and provide a powerful impetus for the cause
of disarmament.
27th plenary meeting
30 June 1978

*
* *
The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-General 4 8 that the Committee 011 Disarmament, referred to in paragraph 120 of the above resolution,
would be open to the nuc/ear-weapo11 States and to the followinJ; thirty-five States: ALGERIA, ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA, BELGIUM, BRAZIL, BULGARIA, BURMA, CANADA, CUBA, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, EGYPT, ETHIOPIA, GERI\IAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC,
GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF, HUNGARY, INDIA, JNDONESIA,
lRAK, ITALY, JAPAN, KENYA, MEXICO, MONGOLIA, MOROCCO,
NETHERLANDS, NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, PERU, POi.AND, ROMANIA,
SRI LA1'KA, SWEDEN, VENEZUELA, YUGOSLAVIA and ZAIRE.

"A 1 S-10/24.
