Resolutiona adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2327 (:XX:Il). Consideration of principles of
international law concerning friendly relations and co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1815 (XVII) of 18 December 1962, 1966 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963,
2103 (XX) of 20 December 1965 and 2181 (XXI)
of 12 December 1966, which affirm the importance of
the progressive development and codification of the principles of international law concerning friendly relations and co-operation among States,
Recalling further that among the fundamental purposes of the United Nations are the maintenance of international peace and security and the development of
friendly relations and co-operation among States,
Considering that the faithful observance of the principles of international law concerning friendly relations
and co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations is of paramount importa!1ce for the maintenance of international peace and
securtty and the improvement of the international
situation,
Considering further that the progressive development
and codification of those principles, so as to secure
their more effective application, would promote the
realization of the purposes of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind that the Second Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries,
which met at Cairo in 1964, recommended to the General Assembly the adoption of a declaration on these
principles as an important step towards the enhancement. ?f the role of international law in present-day
conditions,
Convinced of the significance of continuing the effort
to achieve general agreement in the process of the
elaboration of the seven principles of international law
set fo~th in General Assembly resolution 1815 (XVII),
but without prejudice to the applicability of the rules
o_f procedure of th~ Asse~bly, with a view to the adoption of a declaration which would constitute a landmark in the progressive development and codification
of those principles,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on Principles of International Law concernin2
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States "A
which met at Geneva from 17 July to 19 August 1967,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States ;
2. Expresses its appreciation to that Committee for
the valuable work it has performed;
3.. Decides to ask the Special Committee, as reconstituted by,the General Assembly in resolution 2103
(XX), t? meet in 1968 in New York, Geneva ·or any
other smtable place for which the Secretary-General
receives an invitation, in order to continue its work;
4. Requests the Special Committee, in the light of the
debate which took place in the Sixth Committee during
the seventeenth, eighteenth, twentieth, twenty-first and
twenty-second session of the General Assembly and in
the 1964, 1966 and 1967 sessions of the Special Committee, to complete the formulation of :
8 /bid., agenda item 87, document A/6799.

(a) The principle that States shall refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity and political independ~nce of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent
with the purposes of the United Nations;
( b) The principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples;
5. Requests_ the Special Committee to consider proposals compatible with General Assembly resolution
2131 (?CX) of 21 December 1965 on the principle
concernmg the duty not to intervene in matters within
th_e domestic jurisdiciton of any State, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations with the aim
of widening the area of agreement alr;ady expressed
in that resolution ;
6. Calls upon the members of the Special Committee
to devote th~ir utmost efforts to ensuring the success
of the ~pec1~l Commit_tee's session, in particular by
undertakmg, m the penod preceding the session such
consultations and other preparatory measures a~ they
may deem necessary ;
7. Requests the Special Committee to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-third session a comprehensive report on the principles entrusted to it;
_8. Requests the Secretary-General to co-operate
with the Special Committee in its task and to provide
all the services, documentation and other facilities
necessary for its work;
. 9. Decide~ to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-th1rd session an item entitled "Consideration
of P:inciples of international law concerning friendly
re!ahons and co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations".
1637th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.

2328 (XXII). Question of diplomatic privilegee
and immunities
The General Assembly,
H (11Jing considered the item entitled :
"Question of diplomatic privileges and immunities:
"(a) Measures tending to implement the privileges
and immunities of representatives of Member
States to the principal and subsidiary organs
of the United Nations and to conferences convene~ by th_e_ United Nations and the privileges
and 1mmumhes of the staff and of the Organization i!self, as well as the obligations of States
concerning the protection of diplomatic personnel and property ;
"(b) R ea ffi rmatl?n
.
of an important immunity of
r~presentahves of Member States to the principal and subsidiary organs of the United
Nations and to conferences convened by the
United Nations",
Recognizing the importance of the work of the organs
?f the United Nations. an~ of conferences convened by
1t an~ also ~f the contribu_tion of the Organization itself
and its officials to the mamtenance of peaceful relations
and co-operation among States,
. Consc~s that the unimpeded functioning of the
d1plomat1c channels for communication and consultation
between Governments is vital to avoid dangerous misunderstanding and friction,
~ecogniz_ing t~at! for th~ independent exercise of
their functions, 1t 1s essential that representatives of
