11.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

25

---------------------------------------------

flict, of which it is the core, and to endanger international peace and security,
Reafjirming that a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East cannot be established without the achievement, inter alia, of a just solution of the problem of
Palestine on the basis of the attainment of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the right
of return and the right to national independence and
sovereignty in Palestine, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations,
Taking note of the resolution on the question of
Palestine adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its twenty-ninth ordinary session, held at Libreville from 23 June to
3 July 1977, 47
Taking note of the Declaration on the situation in
the Middle East and the question of Palestine adopted
by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of non-aligned
countries at their extraordinary meeting in New York
on 30 September 1977, 48
Taking note also of the final communiqué of the
extraordinary meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the States members of the Islamic Conference,
held in New York on 3 October 1977, 49
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned
to it by the General Assembly;
2. Takes note of the report of the Committee and
endorses the recommendations contained in paragraphs 43 and 44 of that report;
3. Notes with satisfaction that, during the consideration of the report of the Committee by the Security
Council at its 2041st meeting, on 27 October 1977,
all members of the Council who participated in the
discussion reaffirmed that a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East could not be established without the
achievement, in particular, of a just solution of the
problem of Palestine on the basis of the attainment of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people;
4. Urges the Security Council to take as soon as
possible a decision on the recommendations endorsed
by the General Assembly in its resolution 31/20 as a
basis for the solution of the problem of Palestine;
5. Decides to circulate the report to all the competent bodies of the United Nations and urges them to
take necessary action, as appropriate, in accordance
with the Committee's programme of implementation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
reports of the Committee to all conferences on the
Middle East held under the auspices of the United
Nations, including the Geneva Peace Conference on
the Middle East;
7. Authorizes the Committee to continue to exert
all efforts to promote the implementation of its recommendations, to send delegations or representatives
to international conferences wherc such representation
would be considered by it to be appropriatc, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtythird session;
47 A/32/310, annex I,
48 A/32/255-S/12410,

resolution CM/Res.580 (XXIX).
annex. For the printed text, see
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second Y ear,
Supplement for October, November and December 1977.
49 A/32/261, annex.

8. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Committee with all the necessary
facilities for the performance of its tasks, including
summary records of its meetings;
9. Decides to include the itcm cntitled "Question of
Palestine" in the provisional agenda of its thirty-third
sess1on.
91 st plenary meeting
2 Deccmber 1977

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, 50
Noting, in particular, the observations contained in
paragraphs 38 to 42 of that report,
Recognizing the need for the greatest possible dissemination of information on the inalienable rights of
thc Palestinian people and on the efforts of the United
Nations to promote the attainment of those rights,
J. Requests the Secretary-General to establish
within the Secretariat of the United Nations a Special
Unit on Palestinian Rights which would:
(a) Prepare, under the guidance of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, studies and publications relating to:
(i) The inalienable rights of the Palestinian people;
(ii) Relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and other organs of the United Nations;
(iii) The activities of the Committee and other
United Nations organs, in order to promote
the attainment of those rights;
( b) Promote maximum publicity for such studies
and publications through all appropriate means;
(e) Organize in consultation with the Committee
commencing in 1978, the annual observance of 29 No~
vember as the lnternational Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure
the ful! co-operation of the Office of Public Information
an~ other units_ ~f the ~ecretariat in enabling the Special
Umt on Palestmian R1ghts to perform its tasks;
3. Invites ali Governments and organizations to
lend their co-operation to the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and the. Special Unit on Palestinian Rights in the
1mplementat1on of the present resolution.
91 st plenary meeting
2 December 1977
32/ 41.

lnternational Conference in Support of
the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the lnternational Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia was
held at _Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977, in accordance w1th General Assembly resolution 31/145 of
17 December 1976,
50 _Of]icial Records of the General A.ssembly, Thirty-second
Sesswn, Supp/ement No. 35 (A/32/35).

26

General Assembly-Thirty-seconrl Sesshm

Having examined the report of the Conference" 1
submitted by the presiding offi.cers of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to thc Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Indcpendence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Unitcd
Nations Council far Namibia in pursuance of paragraph 5 of resolution 31 / 145,
Having also examined thc relevant parts of the rcports of the Special Committcc"~ ancl thc United Nations Council for Namibia," 3
Reiterating thc special responsibi!ity of the Unitcd
Nations to support thc struggle of thc pcoples of Z:imbabwe and Namibia to excrcise their inalienable nght
to self-determination and indepcndence in accordancc
with the Declaration on the Granting of Jndependencc
to Colonial Countries and Peoplcs, containcd in Genern.l
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Decembcr 1960,
Bearing in mind the continuing nccd to intensify thc
widespread dissemination of information on the struggle
for liberation being waged by the pcoplcs of Zimbabwe
and Namibia,
l. Approves the report of the lnternational Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe ami
Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977;
2. Invites ali States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations systcm
and non-governmental organizations having a special
interest in the field of decolonization to accord priority
to the full implementation of the relevant provisions of
the Maputo Declaration in Support of the Peoples of
Zimbabwe and Namibia and the Programme of Action
for the Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia; 54
3. Expresses its profound gratitude to the Government and the people of Mozambique for the contribution they have made to the success of the Conference
and, in particular, for providing the necessary facilities
for its meetings, as well as for the kind hospitality and
cordial reception accorded to it throughout its duration;
4. Expresses its particular gratitude to the Organization of African Unity for its assistance and co-operation in ensuring the effective organization and successful
conclusion of the Conference;
5. Expresses its deep appreciation to those Governments which made generous contributions to the funding
of the Conference;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to effect the
widest possible dissemination of the accomplishments
of the Conference through ali the media at his disposal;
7. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples and the United Nations Council for Namibia to follow closely the implementation of the Maputo Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the Programme of Action for
the Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia, in the dis51 A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.1. For the printed text, see
O/ficial Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second Y ear,
Supplement for Ju/y, August and September 1977.
52 O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/23/Rev.1 ), vol. I, chaps. I
and IV-VI, and vol. II, chaps. VII and VIII.
53 /bid., Supplement No. 24 (A/32/24).
64 A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.l, annex V. Por the printed
text, see O/ficial Records of the Securíty Council, Thírty-second
Year, Supplement for Ju/y, August and September 1977.

charge of the mandates entrusted to thcm by thc General Assembly.
96th plenary meeting
7 December 1977

:~2/ 42.

Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoplcs

The General Assembly,
Having examined thc report of the Special Committee
on thc Situation with regard to the Implementation of
thc Dcclaration on the Granting of Indcpendencc to
Colonial Countries and Peoples," 5
Taking inlo account the Maputo Declaration in Support of the Pcoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and thc
Programme of Action for the Libcration of Zimbabwe
anlNamibia.''º adoptcd by the International Confercnce
in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia,
held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977, and ths Lagos
Dcclaration for Action against Apartheid," 7 adopted
by thc World Conference for Action against Apartheid,
hcld at Lagos from 22 to 26 August 1977.
Recalling its n:solutions 1514 (XV) of 14 Dcccmbcr 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of lndepcndcnce to Colonial Countries and Peoplcs,
and 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the
programme of :1ction for the full implementation of the
Declaration,
Recalling al! its previous resolutions concerning the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Indepcndence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, in
particular resolution 31/143 of 17 December 1976,
as well as the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Condemning the continued colonialist and racist rcpression of millions of Africans, in Namibia by thc
Government of South Africa through its persisten!,
ille¡:,:al occupation of the international Territory, and
in Zimbabwe by the illegal racist minority régime,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need to take all thc
necessary measures to bring about the speedy and complete elimination of the last vestiges of colonialism,
particularly with respect to Namibia and Zimbabwe
where efforts to perpetuate illegal racist minority rule
have brought untold suffering and bloodshed to the
peoples of those Territories,
Strongly deprecating the policies of those States
which, in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, continue to collaborate with the Government of South Africa and with the illegal racist
minority régime in Southern Rhodesia, thus perpetuating their domination of the peoples in the Territories
con cerned,
A ware that the success of the national liberation
struggle and the resultant international situation have
provided the international community with a unique
opportunity to make a decisive contribution towards
5 5 O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thírty-second
Session, Supp/ement No. 23 (A/32/23/Rev.1).
5 " A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.1, annex V. For the printed
text, see O/ficial Records of the Securíty Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supp/ement for Ju/y, August and September 1977.
5 7 A/CONF.91/9 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.
