A /70/PV.58

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

58

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 19 November 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that at its 2nd
plenary meeting on 18 September 2015, the General
Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (a) of agenda
item 20 to the Second Committee.
To enable the General Assembly to take action
expeditiously on the item, may I take it that the
Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (a) of agenda
item 20 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 20
Sustainable development
(a) Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme
for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and
the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development
Draft decision (A/70/L.15)
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft decision A/70/L.15. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft decision A/70/L.15?

15-37711 (E)

Draft decision A/70/L.15 was adopted (decision
70/410).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 20.
Agenda item 129
Investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld
and of the members of the party accompanying him
Letter dated 2 July 2015 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the General Assembly (A/70/132)
Draft resolution (A/70/L.9)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden to introduce draft resolution
A/70/L.9.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I am very pleased to be able
to introduce, on behalf of all of its 74 sponsors, the draft
resolution contained in document A/70/L.9 concerning
the investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and
the colleagues who accompanied him. We are very
grateful to all the delegations that have joined us in this
endeavour and I would like to thank all the sponsors for
their support.
The influence of Dag Hammarskjöld, the second
Secretary-General, on the role and function of the
Organization has been profound, and remains so to

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1537711*

A/70/PV.58

this day. His dedication to the office he held, his moral
leadership in a world of turmoil and cold war and his
courageous stand in both words and deeds continue
to stand out as exceptional. They still resonate in the
Assembly. He promoted the integrity of the United
Nations; he was meticulously loyal to the ideals of the
Charter of the United Nations; he fought hard for the
independence and integrity of his office; and he showed
creativity and innovation by conceiving the concepts
of preventive diplomacy and setting up the first United
Nations peacekeeping operation, in 1956.
The contrast between what we know about
Hammarskjöld’s life and legacy, and even his inner
thoughts, on the one hand, and what we still do not
know about the circumstances surrounding his death,
on the other, remains troubling. Last year, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 69/246, requesting the
Secretary-General to appoint an independent panel
of experts to examine new information and assess
its probative value, and encouraging Member States
to release any relevant records in their possession
and provide the Secretary-General with relevant
information related to the deaths of Dag Hammarskjöld
and the members of the party accompanying him. We
would like to thank the Independent Panel of Experts
for their important work. The pursuit of bringing clarity
to the circumstances of the incident is particularly
important to the families of all 16 victims, some of
whom are present today. But it should also be important
to the United Nations as an organization and to all of
us, as we try to come together to continue the work left
unfinished by Dag Hammarskjöld’s premature death.
It is clear from eyewitness accounts, observations
and additional information contained in the report
regarding the possible cause of the crash that there is
a need for a follow-up. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral that this may be the last chance to find out the
truth, and that it is our shared responsibility to pursue
the full truth concerning the fateful plane crash in
Ndola 54 years ago. We therefore join the SecretaryGeneral in his call on Member States to disclose all
information that may be relevant to the case.
In the light of that, and in firm support of the
Secretary-General’s recommendation on the way
forward, Sweden, together with partners, is introducing
the draft resolution before the Assembly today. The
draft resolution has four operational elements.

2/3

19/11/2015

First, it requests the Secretary-General to pursue
the pending request for information made by the
Independent Panel of Experts to Member States, as well
as to explore the feasibility of the establishment of a
central archival holding or other holistic arrangement,
in line with the recommendations of the Panel.
Secondly, it urges all Member States, particularly
those addressed in the report of the Panel of Experts,
to release any records in their possession relevant to the
deaths of Dag Hammarskjöld and the members of the
party accompanying him. Thirdly, it requests that the
Secretary-General inform the General Assembly before
the end of the seventieth session on any further progress
made. And fourthly, it decides to include the item on
the provisional agenda of the Assembly at its seventyfirst session, hopefully by then with much more clarity
as to the circumstances. Sweden is grateful for the
support already received for this initiative, particularly
the valuable partnership with Zambia.
It is my Government’s sincere hope that the
momentum from this year’s efforts can be utilized
and the unresolved questions answered out of respect
for the memory of Dag Hammarskjöld and those who
perished with him. I am confident that we will have the
Assembly’s full support for the draft resolution and its
full cooperation in its implementation.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.9, entitled
“Investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and
of the members of the party accompanying him”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since draft resolution A/70/L.9
was submitted, the following countries have become
sponsors: Algeria, Andorra, Armenia, Bulgaria,
Canada, Eritrea, France, Georgia, Guatemala,
Hungary, Lesotho, Liberia, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, New Zealand, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, the Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, the Russian
Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/70/L.9?

15-37711

19/11/2015

Draft resolution A/70/L.9 was adopted (resolution
70/11).

A/70/PV.58

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
129.
The meeting rose at 10.20 a.m.

15-377113/3
