S/PV.8983

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8983rd meeting

Monday, 28 February 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Kelly
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-27101 (E)
*2227101*

Ukraine

S/PV.8983

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and
Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: Mr. President, I am speaking to you
from Geneva. Wherever we are in the world, we have all
been watching the military offensive in Ukraine with a
sense of disbelief and horror. As we all feared, civilians
are already paying the price. The scale of civilian
casualties and damage to civilian infrastructure — even
in these very early days — is alarming. Humanitarian
needs are growing at an alarming pace in the hardesthit areas. Civilian children, women and men have been
injured and killed. Homes have been damaged and
sometimes destroyed.
As of yesterday, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights had reported at
least 406 civilian casualties, including at least 102 dead
in these few days. The real figure could be considerably
higher, since many reported casualties have yet to be
confirmed. We know — and of course we will hear
much more from Mr. Grandi — that at least 160,000
people have been internally displaced across Ukraine,
fleeing for safety, and we know that figure is likely to be
much higher, potentially a significant proportion of the
entire population. As Mr. Grandi will tell the Council,
we believe that more than half a million refugees have
been forced to choose to flee their country in search of
2/17

28/02/2022

safety. Families have been separated. The elderly and
people with disabilities find themselves trapped and
unable to flee, unable to get even that small comfort.
The picture is grim and could get worse still. Aerial
attacks and fighting in urban areas are damaging critical
civilian facilities and disrupting essential services such
as health, electricity, water and sanitation, in effect
leaving civilians without the basics for day-to-day life.
Bridges and roads have been destroyed, cutting off
people’s access to critical supplies and services. The
use of explosive weapons in urban areas carries a high
risk of indiscriminate impact, which is of particular
concern in places such as Kyiv and Kharkiv, since
civilians will undeservedly suffer the most from such
attacks on densely populated urban centres.
All parties must respect international humanitarian
law, take constant care to spare all civilians and civilian
objects from harm throughout their military operations
and avoid the use of wide-area explosive weapons in
populated areas. The longer this goes on, the greater
the cost will be for civilians. Children will miss school
and face a greater risk of physical harm, displacement
and unimaginably severe emotional distress. Women,
so often disproportionately affected by conflict, as we
have so often discussed in this Chamber, will be at
even greater risk of gender-based violence. Women and
children may be exposed to other forms of exploitation.
The economy of Ukraine could implode, which will
further exacerbate humanitarian needs and create a
ripple effect far beyond Ukraine’s borders. Already the
upheavals in recent days are deepening a pre-existing
humanitarian crisis. Eight gruelling years of conflict
in eastern Ukraine had already left 3 million people
in need of humanitarian assistance on both sides of
the contact line in the Donbas region. And it goes
without saying that humanitarian needs are now much
greater, including those resulting from the large-scale
displacement to which I have already referred,
across and beyond the entire country and not in one
region alone.
Humanitarian workers are doing their best
to respond. The United Nations has expanded its
humanitarian presence in Ukraine, and we will continue
to do so. We are working to ensure that we can scale up
our operations as quickly as possible, and we have been
preparing for this for some time. However, I must say
that for the past three days our movements — that is, the
movements of our dear colleagues in Ukraine — have
been seriously constrained as a result of the ongoing
22-27101

28/02/2022

S/PV. 8983

Ukraine

fighting and our inability to receive assurances from
parties to the conflict that humanitarian movement
will be protected. I was fortunate enough to receive
the beginning of some assurances to that effect only
this evening. We must hope that becomes a reality.
In the meantime, as usual, local organizations and
institutions are doing the truly remarkable job that
they do in all such situations — responding to needs.
Local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and the
Ukrainian Red Cross are working tirelessly to support
civilians and evacuation operations. Health workers
are working day and night to care for the injured. Aid
organizations are providing psychosocial support to
traumatized children and delivering first-aid kits. And
we are all here this afternoon to support their efforts.
Today our most pressing humanitarian needs are
for emergency medical services, including sexual and
reproductive health services, critical medicines, health
supplies and equipment, safe water for drinking and
hygiene and shelter and protection for the displaced.
In all, 119 humanitarian organizations are operating
in Ukraine and have been able to provide some form
of humanitarian assistance, but over the past few days
their efforts have clearly been hampered. Right now, we
urgently need progress on two fronts if we are to reach
more people with the aid that they need and deserve.
First, we need assurances from the parties to
the conflict that humanitarian workers and their
movement will be protected, even when the conflict
is at its most severe. We cannot wait for the conflict
to subside. Even now, even today, even yesterday, we
should be providing that protection to those workers so
that they can do the job that they want to do. Under
international humanitarian law, all parties must allow
and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of
impartial humanitarian relief for civilians in need and
must ensure freedom of movement for humanitarian
actors, a point we have been making in many different
ways for the past four days.
Secondly, of course, we desperately need more
resources. Tomorrow, the Secretary-General will
launch a humanitarian appeal for this crisis with two
components — a three-month flash appeal for the
situation inside the country and a regional response plan
for the situation outside under the leadership of Filippo
Grandi and his Office. The Secretary-General, together
with Mr. Grandi, our NGO colleagues and me, will
all call on Member States to show support with quick,
generous and flexible funding. Cash will be a major

source for the delivery of humanitarian assistance given
the particular circumstances that obtain in Ukraine.
However, that is certainly not enough. Simply
put, the lives of millions of civilians are at stake. We
know from other recent conflicts how brutal, deadly
and protracted urban warfare can be. We know
how countries’ economies can be devastated and
infrastructure investment and development gains set
back an entire generation, and we know enough to
know that we do not yet know what the consequences
of the events that we are observing today will be. These
things should never happen, in any country, anywhere.
Every effort must be made to de-escalate the conflict
for the hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians who have
taken the decision to leave their homes to seek safety
elsewhere in their country or beyond, and for the even
greater number who remain in peril due to the loss of
basic services, pensions, support and the services that
their children need, and of the safety of a day that may
or may not come.
Finally, I reiterate the Secretary-General’s calls for
the only thing that we must all pray for, which is an
immediate cessation of hostilities.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Grandi.
Mr. Grandi: Today and in recent days, the Council
has heard that the United Nations humanitarian
organizations, together with their non-governmental
organization (NGO) partners, have remained in
Ukraine. Let me start by saying how proud I am that we
decided to do so, just as we did in Afghanistan a few
months ago.
But naturally, as we just heard, our colleagues on
the ground, like the rest of the civilian population,
are now caught up in this deadly conflict. Many of
them have been relocated and military attacks may
force them to move again. Yet they are still striving to
deliver help to people in need whenever a small window
of relative security allows humanitarian aid to be
distributed — working with partners, including national
NGOs, often in extremely dangerous circumstances.
But we know that we are not even scratching the
surface in meeting the needs of Ukrainians, including
an unknown but surely very substantial number who
have been forced to flee their homes in the past few
days. The situation is moving so quickly, and the

22-271013/17

S/PV.8983

Ukraine

risks are so high at this point, that it is impossible for
humanitarian actors to distribute systematically the
help that Ukrainians desperately need. I therefore echo
the Secretary-General’s urgent call, and those of the
Emergency Relief Coordinator just a few minutes ago,
as well as others. Civilians and civilian infrastructure
must be protected and spared, and humanitarian access
must be granted to those delivering aid to the people
affected by war. A failure to do so will compound the
already extraordinary levels of human suffering.
In addition to the grave situation inside Ukraine,
as Mr. Griffiths just told us, hundreds of thousands
are seeking refuge in neighbouring countries. They
need safety and protection, first and foremost, but also
shelter, food, hygiene and other support, and they need it
urgently. As we speak, there are 520,000 refugees from
Ukraine in neighbouring countries. That figure has
been rising exponentially, literally hour by hour, since
Thursday. I have worked in refugee crises for almost
40 years, and I have rarely seen such an incredibly fast
and rising exodus of people — surely the largest within
Europe since the Balkan wars. More than 280,000 have
fled to Poland and another 94,000 to Hungary. Nearly
40,000 are currently in Moldova, 34,000 in Romania,
30,000 in Slovakia, and tens of thousands in other
European countries. We are also aware that a sizeable
number have gone to the Russian Federation.
I want to commend the Governments of receiving
countries for allowing refugees access to their territory.
The challenge to admit and register, to meet the needs
and ensure the protection of those fleeing is daunting.
So far, that challenge has been met, although I am
seriously concerned about the likelihood of further
escalation in the number of arrivals. We may have
seen just the beginning. My message today is therefore
one of gratitude to the Governments of Ukraine’s
neighbours, and through them, the expression of my
heartfelt thanks to the citizens of those countries.
Ordinary Poles, Hungarians, Moldovans, Romanians,
Slovaks and citizens of other European countries
have undertaken extraordinary acts of humanity and
kindness. That is the humanitarian instinct that is so
needed in times of crisis. I encourage Governments
to continue to maintain access to their territories for
all who are fleeing — Ukrainians, of course, but also
third-country nationals living in Ukraine, people who
are there to work and study, and in some cases people
who are in Ukraine as refugees, all of whom are now
similarly forced to escape the violence. At this critical
4/17

28/02/2022

juncture there can be no discrimination against any
person or any group.
I am aware that the European Union and its member
States and other Governments have already provided
bilateral support to countries receiving refugees from
Ukraine, which I hope will continue. The Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), with its United Nations partner agencies
and national and international NGOs, is present in all
these countries, and we are scaling up. We encourage
host countries to avail themselves of our support and
expert advice as they address the situation and uphold
their international obligations. We are helping, and can
do more in areas such as protection and registration,
the organization of reception capacity and the provision
of emergency relief and cash assistance, as well as
in identifying and responding to the needs of the
most vulnerable, many of them women and children,
including a growing number of unaccompanied and
separated children.
I regret to say that unless there is an immediate halt
to the conflict, as Mr. Griffiths said, Ukrainians will
simply continue to flee. We are currently planning — I
repeat, planning — for up to 4 million refugees in the
coming days and weeks. Such a rapid increase would be
a huge burden for receiving States and would no doubt
stress reception systems and related resources. Like any
country hosting refugees around the world, they cannot
be left alone to shoulder that responsibility. I therefore
welcome the support expressed by many European
States at yesterday’s European Union Justice and Home
Affairs Council meeting to activate the Temporary
Protection Directive for people fleeing Ukraine. If
activated, it would enable the provision of immediate
temporary refuge in the European Union and would also
facilitate the sharing of responsibility among European
member States for people fleeing Ukraine.
As Mr. Griffiths mentioned, we will launch the
United Nations Humanitarian Appeal for Ukraine
tomorrow, for activities both inside and outside the
country. Private citizens and companies from around
the world have already offered extraordinary financial
support through thousands of donations, including
more than $40 million to UNHCR alone in a couple of
days. I am counting on Governments to do the same,
and quickly. Ukrainians, and the countries hosting
refugees from Ukraine, cannot wait.
22-27101

28/02/2022

Ukraine

Finally, let us remember that Ukrainian refugees,
like all others — and please let us not forget the
continuing plight of Afghans, Syrians, Ethiopians,
the Rohingya people from Myanmar and many
others — never wanted to be refugees. They never
wanted to be forced to flee their homes, and they all
hope to return to their country as quickly as possible.
It is not very often that I get to brief the Security
Council. I therefore want to take this opportunity to
echo what I said the last time the Council invited me, a
few months ago (see S/PV.8919). Humanitarian workers
are courageous, resourceful and experienced, but they
cannot keep pace with the constantly growing numbers
of conflicts around the world or their increasing gravity.
Today I am speaking to the Council as a sixth night of
anguish falls over Europe, struck once again by war,
and as millions of innocent Ukrainian civilians huddle
in bunkers, scramble to board crowded trains and think
with trepidation about the future of their children. As
an old humanitarian worker myself, I want to say that
the responsibility that the Council has — to ensure that
peace and security for all ultimately prevail over power
struggles and narrow national interests — has never
been as urgent or as indispensable a task as it is tonight.
If the Council fails — if we fail — it may be too late
for us all.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Grandi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Grandi for their briefings.
The humanitarian consequences of the Russian
offensive in Ukraine are dire. The number of civilian
casualties, including children, continues to rise. Cities
are being bombed. Civilian infrastructure has been
destroyed. About 500,000 people have been forced to
flee and take refuge in Poland, Hungary, Romania,
Slovakia and Moldova. That number is increasing
every hour. France salutes the solidarity shown by
Ukraine’s neighbours.
Russia, a permanent member of the Council,
is violating the most fundamental principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. It is riding roughshod
over international humanitarian law. It is violating
human rights and trampling on the Geneva Conventions.
France reiterates its call for an immediate cessation

S/PV. 8983

of hostilities, which must come before any peace
talks. The protection of civilians, including children
and humanitarian personnel, as well as civilian
infrastructure, is a top priority, and France will not
compromise on that. France reiterates its call for safe
and unimpeded humanitarian access to all people in
need. We have a collective responsibility and a moral
duty to help the Ukrainian people.
France and its European Union partners stand
firmly alongside Ukraine and its population. The
European Union has already announced €90 million
in humanitarian aid, in which France is playing its
part. France has just sent 33 tons of humanitarian
aid to Poland to help Ukrainians and is preparing to
send more than 30 tons to Moldova. France welcomes
the launch tomorrow by the United Nations of an
emergency response plan for Ukraine and of a plan
to help Ukrainian refugees in the region, and we call
on all Member States to contribute financially. France
also welcomes the Secretary-General’s appointment of
Mr. Amin Awad as United Nations Crisis Coordinator
for Ukraine. The sanctions adopted by the European
Union against Russia and Belarus will be implemented
with full regard for international humanitarian law,
and we will ensure that they have no impact on the
humanitarian response.
Together with Mexico, France is preparing a draft
resolution for the Council, calling for full respect
for international humanitarian law, the protection of
civilians and unhindered humanitarian access in order
to meet the urgent needs of the Ukrainian population,
to be put to a vote as soon as possible. France salutes
the courage shown by the people of Ukraine. Within the
United Nations and in all forums France will continue
to work with its partners to mobilize support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine and the
Ukrainian people.
Mr. De La Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, and Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for
their briefings.
The numbers that have just been shared with us and
the scene described reflect a humanitarian situation
that is worsening with each passing hour. That is why,
among other actions, Mexico and France will present a
draft resolution aimed at achieving a general cessation

22-271015/17

S/PV.8983

Ukraine

28/02/2022

of hostilities, the protection of civilians and guaranteed
access to humanitarian aid. We deplore the continuing
clashes in such densely populated cities as Kharkiv,
Odessa, Kyiv and others. The use of explosive weapons
in populated areas is unacceptable. It is also very
worrying that large sectors of the population no longer
have electricity, water or access to basic infrastructure.
Communities are becoming isolated and facing
shortages of food and medicine. Health services should
be preserved at all costs. We call for ensuring that all
humanitarian workers are enabled access so that they
can provide services without any restrictions.

ones to the conflict in the last few days. We regret
the mounting casualties, the hundreds of thousands
internally displaced and those who are leaving Ukraine
as refugees, as well as the growing damage to civilian
objects and infrastructure. We commend the United
Nations for swiftly stepping in to provide humanitarian
assistance. We also commend Ukraine’s neighbours
for opening their borders to refugees. We give special
thanks to Hungary, Poland, Romania and Slovakia for
working with our Ministry of Foreign Affairs to ensure
that Kenyan citizens in Ukraine are granted visafree entry.

As we have heard, hundreds of thousands of people
are now displaced in Ukraine, in addition to those who
are seeking refuge in neighbouring countries. The
numbers, although still very preliminary, are already
alarming and are growing rapidly. We will have more
clarity on this escalation in the coming days, weeks,
months and perhaps even in the coming years. We
call for borders to be kept open, as has so far been
accomplished with great solidarity so that all those
seeking protection have been able to find it. We also
call for respect for the principle of non-refoulement.
Nonetheless, although we recognize the right of States
to legitimate self-defence, the substantial increase in
the flow of weapons and the impact that it will have on
the civilian population is no less worrying.

In the unfolding emergency there have been
disturbing reports about racist treatment of Africans,
and people of African descent, seeking to flee Ukraine
to safety. The media is covering those appalling
incidents, and several States have confirmed that their
citizens have suffered such treatment. We strongly
condemn that racism and believe it is damaging to the
spirit of solidarity that is so urgently needed today.
The mistreatment of African peoples on Europe’s
borders needs to cease immediately, whether it is
directed at Africans fleeing Ukraine or crossing the
Mediterranean. And we also need to understand that
there are actors who want to magnify this story for
cynical reasons that have nothing to do with the wellbeing and safety of Africans.

We acknowledge the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, including the establishment of the Central
Emergency Response Fund, and we appreciate the
financial commitments that several States have already
announced. We now need international economic
solidarity if Ukraine is to meet its growing needs for
humanitarian support.

We are here to discuss the humanitarian situation
in Ukraine. But if we are truly to hold to humanitarian
principles, we must broaden our view. The extensive
unilateral economic sanctions that have been announced
against the Russian Federation are almost certain to
have serious humanitarian consequences. In total, their
effects may even amount to a form of blockade. It is our
contention that the peaceful means for settling conflicts
advocated by the Charter of the United Nations do not
include acts that may constitute collective punishment.
We must also add caution that such considerable
sanctions, rather than opening the path to peace, may
lead to an escalation and broadening of the conflict.
The only way out of this increasingly dangerous crisis
is to prioritize diplomacy in order to limit all military
manoeuvres and open a path to negotiations. It is still
not too late to turn to the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral, regional organizations and bilateral efforts to
de-escalate this dangerous crisis. Whether the conflict
ends now or later, with even more disastrous results,
it will still require an appetite for negotiating a stable
security order. At this moment, statesmanship is

Finally, Mexico calls unequivocally on all parties
to respect international humanitarian law, in particular
the four 1949 Geneva Conventions and its first
additional protocol of 1977, as well as international
human rights law.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Mr. Filippo Grandi,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for
their briefings. I also welcome the participation today
of the representative of Ukraine.
The humanitarian suffering in Ukraine is
unnecessary and uncalled-for. Kenya offers its
condolences to the families who have lost loved
6/17

22-27101

28/02/2022

Ukraine

required, and we urge all leaders of the States involved
to embrace their responsibility.
In conclusion, I reiterate Kenya’s recognition of
the inviolable rights of Ukraine to its sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, and Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, for their truly
sobering briefings. I think they underscore what the
Secretary-General has said, which is that this is a
moment of great peril and great tragedy. I thank their
agencies and their teams for answering the call to help
Ukrainians in need during this dire hour.
In a matter of days, Russia’s unprovoked and
premeditated invasion has unleashed vast human
suffering across Ukraine. We need to address the
displacement and refugee crisis that we have just heard
described. We need to address the food-security crisis.
And we need to document and address all violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law. The Council just heard the latest displacement
numbers, which have been rising by the hour in the last
four days. First it was 50,000 fled. Then it was 150,000
fled. Now it is half a million people who have fled.
That does not even include the hundreds of thousands
displaced internally within Ukraine. Behind each of
those numbers are real people caught in a humanitarian
nightmare unfolding before our eyes. The truth is, no
one knows where it will end, how many people will
flee their homes, how many will need humanitarian
assistance or how many will die. That is because we
do not know when President Putin will end his war of
choice against Ukraine.
I want to thank the many countries and the people
in the region who have opened their borders and homes
to fleeing Ukrainians. The safety they are providing
underscores our common humanity during an otherwise
dark moment of war. I want to echo the calls of the
United Nations Refugee Agency. We should help and
welcome all those fleeing conflict, without regard to
race or nationality. Refugees are refugees, regardless
of race or creed. Of course, not everyone can or will
choose to flee, and those who remain in Ukraine must
be assured unobstructed protection and assistance.
Four days into the invasion, our humanitarian partners
have already identified cash, fuel constraints, volatile

S/PV. 8983

security conditions and logistical challenges as key
operational constraints affecting all aid delivery in
the country.
We also need to be very concerned about the
hunger that Russia’s invasion will cause. The World
Food Programme is warning us that the food-security
impact of Russia’s invasion will be felt far beyond
Ukraine’s borders. The Black Sea basin is one of the
world’s most important areas for grain and agricultural
exports. Vulnerable people from Asia to Africa and the
Middle East will face greater levels of food insecurity
as supplies are disrupted, as we are already seeing. An
estimated 283 million people in more than 80 countries
are acutely food insecure or at high risk, and the conflict
in Ukraine will only exacerbate situations already on
the brink of starvation. That is yet another reason why
hostilities must end now.
Finally, we are gravely concerned about the
reports of damage to apartment buildings and schools,
as well as significant infrastructure damage that has
left hospitals and hundreds of thousands of people
without electricity or water, while bridges and roads
are damaged by shelling. It will be critical to ensure
adherence to international humanitarian law, including
obligations related to the protection of civilians and
civilian infrastructure. Humanitarian agencies must
be granted secure and full access to people in need of
aid. Tomorrow, as we have heard, the United Nations
will be launching a funding appeal, an appeal for this
humanitarian crisis. For its part, the United States is
already providing nearly $54 million in additional
humanitarian assistance to Ukraine. The United
States Agency for International Development has been
airlifting and positioning relief supplies, which are
especially needed to help older people, people with
disabilities and those displaced from their homes face
the winter weather. That is just the beginning, and
much more is coming. We welcome the commitments
and leadership of other nations aimed at ensuring that
life-saving assistance reaches those most in need.
No matter what happens next, we must do absolutely
everything that we can to help the people of Ukraine.
Mr. Kelly (Ireland): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and High Commissioner
Grandi for their sobering briefings and urgent calls to
action today.
The Russian Federation’s unprovoked and
unjustified further invasion of Ukraine continues

22-271017/17

S/PV.8983

Ukraine

to visit death and destruction on the country and its
people, inflicting enormous hardship and suffering.
Ireland stands in unwavering solidarity with the
Government and people of Ukraine. They have shown
extraordinary courage and resilience. This fresh
onslaught comes on the heels of eight years of conflict
in eastern Ukraine, where 1.4 million people were
already displaced and relying on assistance to meet
their daily needs. The Russian Federation’s invasion
has created a humanitarian catastrophe, compounding
the suffering of millions with a rapidly rising toll of
internally displaced persons and refugees in need of
humanitarian assistance. Millions of people in Ukraine
are grappling with the humanitarian consequences
of a war not of their making. Innocent civilians,
including children, are paying the terrible price of
conflict. In Kharkiv, Kherson and elsewhere, we have
seen significant damage to essential infrastructure
that has left hundreds of thousands of people without
electricity and water. It has deprived them of vital
medical facilities, transportation services and means of
communication. That is unacceptable.
The parties to the conflict must comply with
international humanitarian law, including the obligation
to attack only military objectives, the prohibitions on
indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks and the
obligation to take all feasible precautions in attacks.
Ireland is gravely concerned about the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas, which carries a particular
risk of harming civilians and is in violation of those
fundamental legal obligations. We are particularly
concerned about the reports of the indiscriminate
Russian attacks and shelling in Kharkiv, which are
causing death and destruction among the civilian
population. There have been reports that Russian forces
have used banned cluster munitions. If confirmed, that
will be a further damning indictment of Russia’s military
aggression. Cluster munitions are indiscriminate by
their very nature, and we condemn any use of them in
any circumstances.
Ireland urges against attacks on infrastructure
and installations, including nuclear power plants. Such
attacks could have profound effects on the health of
millions and render the surrounding environments
uninhabitable for generations to come. Any armed attack
or threat against nuclear facilities devoted to peaceful
purposes constitutes a violation of international law,
including the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, the first Additional Protocol to the Geneva
8/17

28/02/2022

Conventions and the Statute of the International Atomic
Energy Agency. We are also deeply concerned about
the deployment of weapons and armaments and the
conduct of missile strikes directly from the Chernobyl
exclusion zone.
The Russian Federation must protect all civilians in
Ukraine. We recall its obligations to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights law. The safety of
all humanitarian and medical workers must be assured.
Humanitarian actors must not be prevented from
ensuring the delivery of principled assistance where and
when it is most needed. Ireland and its European Union
(EU) partners are providing significant humanitarian
support and we stand ready to do more. We commend
our EU partners and Moldova for their generosity and
solidarity in providing shelter to hundreds of thousands
of people fleeing the war. They are deserving of our
support in providing timely humanitarian assistance,
especially to the most vulnerable — the elderly, the
young and the sick. We appeal to all countries in the
region to keep their borders open to all who are seeking
safety and protection. Ireland is already providing
humanitarian support, including core funding to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. We also recently announced a €10 million
humanitarian package.
When conflicts rage, outcomes that are
unpredictable and even barely conceivable can become
all too real. Threats to unleash forces that cannot be
controlled, including threats of nuclear weapons, are
utterly unacceptable. Ireland has long argued that
nuclear weapons offer no security. Their use would
cause devastation in the region and beyond, bringing
a new blight on humankind for generations to come.
That is not a prospect that any of us should be willing
to contemplate. We urge the Russian Federation to
immediately cease hostilities, withdraw unconditionally
from the entire territory of Ukraine and refrain from
further threats or the use of force of any kind against
Ukraine or any other Member State. In sum, we urge
Russia to turn away from war and choose the path of
dialogue and diplomacy. That is the right path, and the
time to take it is now, before any more lives are ruined
or lost.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me first thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths, the Emergency Relief Coordinator, and
Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, for their frank accounts of the Russian
invasion’s consequences for civilians in Ukraine. We
22-27101

28/02/2022

Ukraine

need their strong leadership in the response to the
unfolding humanitarian crisis. Norway is stepping up
its support to the civilian population in Ukraine. Our
Government has announced that it will provide up to
$226 million to the humanitarian response.
Let me start by underlining that Russia, and Russia
alone, bears sole responsibility for this humanitarian
crisis. Through its unprovoked, unjustified and
irresponsible military aggression, it has blatantly
violated Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The parties to the conflict in Ukraine must comply with
their obligations under international law, including
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. They must ensure the protection of
the civilian population throughout Ukraine. We demand
that all the parties ensure that everything and everyone
engaged exclusively in medical duties — medical
personnel, hospitals and other medical facilities, along
with their means of transport and equipment — are
respected and protected. We call on the parties to the
conflict to protect all humanitarian personnel and
ensure and facilitate safe, rapid and unimpeded access
to humanitarian aid for those in need. The space for
neutral, impartial and independent humanitarian action
must be restored and protected.
There is ongoing fighting in and around urban
areas, including the use of heavy explosive weapons.
We are deeply concerned about the long-term harm
that it will cause to civilians, including children, and
civilian infrastructure. Homes, schools, hospitals,
waterworks and other civilian infrastructure are being
damaged and destroyed. We are also very concerned
about the reported use of cluster munitions. Explosive
remnants of war will continue to kill and injure even
after a conflict ends and prevent people from returning
home, going to school, returning to work and rebuilding
their communities.
Hundreds of thousands of civilians are fleeing the
conflict. We commend the neighbouring countries for
keeping their borders open and for the great generosity
and solidarity that they have shown to the people fleeing
the conflict. The door to safety and protection must
remain open to all in need, without discrimination. We
will do our part, including by providing support.
Two media workers were shot and injured this
weekend. Journalists and media workers are civilians
under international humanitarian law. The world relies
on independent and truthful reporting of the events that

S/PV. 8983

are unfolding. The heroic efforts by the Ukrainian and
international press are incredibly important. We urge
all parties to respect and protect the press, both on the
ground and online.
We demand the unconditional withdrawal of
Russia’s troops from the territory of Ukraine in order
to restore respect for the Charter of the United Nations
and international law and prevent further civilian
suffering. Russia started the war in Ukraine, and it can
choose to stop it now.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and High Commissioner
Grandi for their startling updates on the catastrophic
situation unfolding in Ukraine.
Russia’s unprovoked aggression is causing an
unprecedented humanitarian situation in Ukraine on
a scale that Europe has not seen in decades. We all
know the toll of war. In every conflict, it is the civilian
populations that bear the worst of the consequences and
pay the highest price. Conflicts mean innocent victims,
destruction, displacement, refugees and severe human
suffering, and those who initiate conflicts know that.
As we have heard, the situation is alarming.
Mr. Grandi mentioned the staggering numbers of
hundreds of thousands of people on the move in and out
of Ukraine, and all of it happening in just a few days.
Women, children, the elderly and people with disabilities
are currently the most in need. As the aggression goes
on, civilians everywhere in Ukraine are terrified of
what awaits them, wondering when rockets will fall
on their roofs and in what other ways this absurd war
will affect them. International law is clear about the
fact that targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure
constitutes a serious crime and its perpetrators must be
held accountable. There is no justification for this war,
just as there is no justification for the destruction of
bridges, the deliberate targeting of infrastructure and
the launching of missiles in residential areas.
We are happy to hear that despite the hostilities, the
United Nations operation in Ukraine has expanded. We
support a strong and reinforced presence of the United
Nations and humanitarian partners on the ground. We
support ensuring safe, protected, unimpeded access
for humanitarian workers and their deliveries to areas
affected by conflict. Our message is clear. Civilians and
civilian infrastructure must be protected; security and
access for humanitarian efforts must be guaranteed;
safe and unhindered access for humanitarian assistance

22-271019/17

S/PV.8983

Ukraine

to Ukraine and its people should remain a priority;
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, in particular, the four Geneva Conventions
and their first Additional Protocol, must be upheld;
and human rights violations and other crimes must be
documented for the purposes of accountability.
We commend all the countries that are hosting
refugees. As Prime Minister Rama announced last
week, we are happy to shelter Ukrainians who have
been forced to flee because of the war. Albania is
participating in the wide array of sanctions recently
adopted by the European Union and will close its
airspace to all Russian operators except for flights
conducted for emergency and humanitarian needs.
We are working to provide assistance in the form of
military and hospital supplies to Ukraine.
The decisions and actions made in the coming days
will directly affect the lives of millions of people. What
is happening in Ukraine should not happen anywhere.
We need peace, not war. We need friendship, not
aggression. We will continue to stand with Ukraine.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and High
Commissioner Filippo Grandi for their briefings.
India remains deeply concerned about the
developments in Ukraine, where the situation
continues to deteriorate. Our well-considered calls
for an immediate cessation of violence and an end
to all hostilities are an urgent imperative. India’s
Prime Minister advocated that strongly in his recent
conversations with the leaders of the Russian Federation
and Ukraine, whose commencement of direct talks we
welcome. We reiterate our belief that differences can be
bridged only through sustained dialogue and diplomacy.
We also underline that all Member States have agreed
on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States.
There is an urgent and pressing humanitarian
situation developing in Ukraine. In such times of
conflict, India considers that the safety and well-being
of civilians, especially women, children and the elderly,
are the top priority. We believe that the core principles
of humanitarian assistance should be fully honoured.
Taking into account the humanitarian requirements in
Ukraine, my Government has also decided to provide
urgent relief supplies, including medicines, that will be
dispatched tomorrow.
10/17

28/02/2022

We remain deeply concerned about the safety
and security of the thousands of Indian citizens,
including students, who are stranded in Ukraine. Our
evacuation efforts have been adversely affected by
the developments on the ground at Ukraine’s border
crossings. Given that the safety of Indian nationals is
of paramount importance to my Government, senior
ministers from the Government of India are being
deployed to Ukraine’s neighbours as special envoys,
and we thank those countries for their cooperation
at this difficult time. We stand ready to help people
from India’s own neighbours and from developing
countries who are also stranded in Ukraine and may be
seeking assistance. We also support all United Nations
humanitarian efforts. As we reiterated yesterday, there
is no option but to return to the path of diplomacy and
dialogue. That is the only way ahead.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to begin by thanking today’s briefers,
Mr. Filippo Grandi and Mr. Martin Griffiths.
As a result of President Putin’s decision to launch a
full-scale invasion of Ukraine, a country of 44 million
people is now on the brink of humanitarian catastrophe.
Whatever my Russian colleague claims, the world can
see Russia’s indiscriminate attacks on men, women
and children across Ukraine and its disregard for
international humanitarian law. Missiles have rained
down on Kharkiv, with cluster munitions hitting
residential areas and injuring residents. Disruptions
to supply chains have caused food shortages in
Kramatorsk. The reckless bombing of an oil depot
in Vasylkiv has unleashed toxic fumes in nearby
communities. The violence in Kyiv has forced people
to seek refuge underground, with many thousands,
including the elderly and disabled, unable to evacuate.
And as we have heard from the United Nations, as of
today, hundreds of civilians have been killed as a result
of the Russian invasion.
My Russian colleagues may try to paint the United
Nations reporting as hysteria, just as they said it was
Western hysteria to warn of their impending invasion.
But let us look at the facts. Half a million people
have already fled to Poland, Hungary, Romania,
Moldova, Slovakia and other countries. Seven
million people have been displaced, and that figure,
as the High Commissioner for Refugees told us, is
rising exponentially. United Nations agencies and
humanitarian partners have been forced to suspend
operations. As the High Commissioner stated, in this
22-27101

28/02/2022

Ukraine

moment of urgent need the situation the agencies are
facing is impossible.
The United Kingdom stands with the Ukrainian
people during their time of need. Yesterday, Prime
Minister Boris Johnson announced $54 million
in aid to help our Ukrainian friends. That latest
assistance package brings the total amount of United
Kingdom Government aid pledged to Ukraine this
year to $190 million. Last week, Mr. Johnson also
announced that the United Kingdom would guarantee
up to $500 million in loans to Ukraine through the
multilateral development banks. The United Kingdom
will also participate in tomorrow’s United Nations
appeal. United Kingdom Government experts have
deployed to the region to provide humanitarian support
to those fleeing violence in Ukraine. But we know
that a humanitarian response is not enough to save
the Ukrainian people from the disaster that Russia is
inflicting on them. Our message today is therefore
simple. Once again, for the sake of humanity, we call
on President Putin to stop this war and withdraw his
forces from Ukraine.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): At the outset, let me
thank Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and
High Commissioner Filippo Grandi for their very
sobering briefings, which unfortunately confirm the
images we are seeing in the media.
Ghana is seriously concerned about the
humanitarian situation unfolding in Ukraine. Today’s
briefings highlighted indiscriminate attacks in civilianpopulated areas that have spread fear and panic among
populations and forced people to take refuge in shelters
and subways. Children and newborn babies have not
been spared in this regrettable situation. Thousands of
people have also been internally displaced, including
Ghanaians and other nationals, with more than half a
million people forced to flee to neighbouring countries
as refugees.
Ghana calls for an immediate and unconditional
cessation of the hostilities that have caused the current
humanitarian crisis and urges the parties to refrain from
further attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure,
in accordance with international humanitarian law.
We strongly call on the parties to grant unfettered
access to humanitarian agencies and guarantee their
protection and safety. We also call for the safe passage
of all civilians caught up in the war who desire to leave
Ukraine. In that regard, Ghana encourages the countries

S/PV. 8983

neighbouring Ukraine to facilitate the free passage of
persons fleeing the war, without discrimination, and to
provide them with humanitarian assistance, including
medical care, in line with the principles of humanity,
neutrality and impartiality. We continue to urge the
parties to accept the path of peace and seek an early
resolution through dialogue and diplomacy.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
and High Commissioner Filippo Grandi for their
insightful briefings. I also welcome the participation
of the Permanent Representative of Ukraine in
these discussions.
Our view of the situation in Ukraine is clear. We
do not want a war against a Member State of the United
Nations, and we equally deplore the humanitarian
consequences of war. My country is deeply concerned
about the attacks on civilians and civilian public goods.
We urge the parties to the conflict to refrain from any
use of weapons that may have indiscriminate effects.
We stand in solidarity with the people who are victims
of a war not of their choosing and one that they did
not provoke. For that reason, we call for the unhindered
delivery of humanitarian aid to those who need it,
without discrimination. We commend in that regard
the outpouring of generosity that Ukraine’s neighbours
have shown in welcoming those fleeing the war.
I want to echo the cries for help from the African
nationals and students, including students from my
country, who are facing discrimination as they flee
the war in Ukraine and seek shelter. There have been
many accounts of people experiencing racism, which is
unacceptable. We urge respect for people’s dignity and
call for all persons in distress to be treated equitably.
Gabon would like to take this opportunity to emphasize
the African Union’s call under these circumstances for
respect for international law and for the equal treatment
of all persons crossing international borders during
the conflict.
The only way to end humanitarian suffering and
the people’s distress is by ending the hostilities. We
therefore reiterate our call for an immediate ceasefire
and de-escalation.
The scale of the needs in Ukraine and its
neighbouring countries requires a commensurate
humanitarian response. The funding appeal for
humanitarian assistance to be launched tomorrow

22-2710111/17

S/PV.8983

Ukraine

28/02/2022

by the Secretary-General will give us an excellent
opportunity to achieve that.

States, regardless of their resources, capabilities or
physical size.

In conclusion, my country urges the international
community to demonstrate empathy and to provide
support to all the victims of the war, without
discrimination based on nationality or race.

In conclusion, my country emphasizes once again
the importance of working to reach an immediate
ceasefire and seeking peaceful solutions that serve
regional and international security and stability.

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and
Mr. Filippo Grandi for their briefings.

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank the briefers for their informative presentations.
I also want to take this opportunity to express our
solidarity with all the families who have lost someone
in this war; with all the people left without a home,
water or electricity; with those who are fleeing in fear,
in some cases with nowhere to go; and with everyone
who is now trapped in a conflict zone, desperately
attempting to find refuge. I want to commend all the
personnel who are now in Ukraine trying to alleviate
the people’s suffering. We know that they are doing their
best in very challenging circumstances, and we know
that more can be done to assist them in their efforts.

The humanitarian situation in Ukraine has
deteriorated significantly in recent days, with
the continued fighting resulting in damage to the
country’s infrastructure as well as civilian casualties
and deaths. According to United Nations reports,
hundreds of thousands of people are suffering owing
the lack of essential services. Many homes have been
damaged or destroyed and hundreds of thousands of
people have been displaced or are seeking refuge in
neighbouring countries. All civilians seeking refuge
should be able to do so unimpeded and without being
discriminated against. In the light of the crisis in
Ukraine, we stress the importance of focusing on the
deteriorating humanitarian situation for civilians,
including by working to ensure their protection and
prevent the disastrous humanitarian situation from
escalating beyond our ability to address or contain it.
For its part, the United Arab Emirates is addressing the
humanitarian needs resulting from the crisis in Ukraine
with continuing efforts to alleviate the suffering of
civilians affected by the conflict.
We deplore the ongoing violence in Ukraine
and reiterate the need for self-restraint, a ceasefire
and a peaceful resolution. If the hostilities continue,
more innocent people will lose their lives and the
humanitarian situation, which has been exacerbated
by extreme cold temperatures this winter, will worsen
further, at a time when civilians are fleeing the crisis
and seeking refuge and safe havens. We therefore
urge all the parties to fulfil their obligations under
international law, including by allowing humanitarian
aid to reach those in need and refraining from targeting
civilians. We also reiterate the importance of complying
with the principles of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations, especially that of respect for
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of States. Those principles, on which the
United Nations was founded, apply to all Member
12/17

As we speak, hundreds of thousands of civilians
have already fled Ukraine. Many more, perhaps
millions, will certainly follow. Most of the hostilities
are playing out in densely populated areas where there
is an increased risk of civilian casualties, including
children, particularly when explosive weapons are
used. Civilians are being called on to join the fighting,
possibly with no proper training. There is a pressing
humanitarian need for medical services, medicines,
health equipment, shelter and protection.
Brazil calls on all the parties to fully respect
international humanitarian law and uphold the
principles of distinction, proportionality, precaution,
necessity and humanity at all times. It is vital that
we ensure the protection of civilians, critical civilian
infrastructure, refugees and displaced persons, as
well as unhindered humanitarian access to all in need.
We also reiterate our appeal to Ukraine and Russia to
facilitate the evacuation of all persons who want to leave
the territory of Ukraine. Brazil expresses its gratitude
to Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, Moldova, Romania and
others that are facilitating the exit of people fleeing the
conflict, including Brazilians and Latin Americans.
In international humanitarian law, it does not
matter how a war came to be or who was responsible for
it. What matters is sparing civilians and maintaining
a minimum of humanity in an already inhumane
situation. We therefore can and must come together,
beyond any discussions in the Security Council on
22-27101

28/02/2022

Ukraine

the reasons for the war, in order to adopt measures to
minimize the humanitarian impact of the conflict. That
is the minimum that we can do.
In moving forward, it will be important to closely
monitor the situation on the ground, the number
of civilian casualties and the immediate needs of
the population. At the same time, there is no doubt
that the best way to protect civilians and prevent a
humanitarian crisis is to prevent conflict and cease it
as soon as it erupts. Any war will generate devastation,
death, chaos and fear. The greater the escalation, the
higher the risks of human suffering. In the past few
days, permanent members of the Council, who bear the
greatest responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, have been openly referring to
severe unilateral sanctions, military action and nuclear
forces. That must stop. The world needs that escalation
to stop and dialogue to resume. The severe economic
sanctions being imposed may have ripple effects on
the world’s economy with consequences felt far beyond
Russia. Populations in developing countries may be the
ones who suffer the most. Supplying arms to the region
and promoting its militarization will hardly promote
dialogue and will probably provoke more tensions.
Since we have seen reports of nuclear forces being
put on high alert, I would like to remind the Council that
the International Court of Justice has stated that nuclear
weapons have the potential to destroy all civilization
and the entire ecosystem of the planet, and that their
use or threat of use would generally be contrary to the
rules of international law applicable in armed conflict.
Any use of nuclear weapons would have unacceptable
humanitarian consequences for current and future
generations in the territory of Ukraine and beyond. So
far we have received reports of approximately 200 to
300 civilian casualties in Ukraine, which is already
devastating. How many deaths would there be if a party
were to resort to the use of a weapon of mass destruction?
What would be the extent of that destruction? We have
seen it before, and we hope — we plead with everyone
involved — that we will not see it again.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and
High Commissioner Grandi for their briefings.
What is now unfolding in Ukraine is indeed heartwrenching. We call on all the parties to exercise restraint,
de-escalate the situation and prevent civilian casualties.
The safety and security of the lives and property of

S/PV. 8983

all civilians, including foreign nationals, and their
humanitarian needs, should be effectively guaranteed.
Preventing a large-scale humanitarian crisis is of
the utmost importance. We welcome the remarks by the
Secretary-General indicating that the United Nations
will play an active role in coordinating the humanitarian
assistance. In our view, the United Nations and the
international community should provide humanitarian
assistance in accordance with the principles of
humanity, neutrality and impartiality, as set forth in
General Assembly resolution 46/182, in order to prevent
the politicization of humanitarian action.
The most important thing for the time being is to
return to the track of diplomatic negotiations and a
political settlement as soon as possible, and to promote
a de-escalation of the situation. China supports holding
direct dialogue between Russia and Ukraine, which is
the way to ultimately resolve the crisis. The international
community should foster favourable external conditions
for dialogue and a political settlement, and refrain from
exacerbating the situation. Any action by the Council
should help play a constructive role, rather than leading
to further escalation
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We listened very carefully to the briefings by
Martin Griffiths and Filippo Grandi.
Without a doubt, all of us are very concerned about
the situation in Ukraine. We can see the suffering of
ordinary people, who have basically become hostages
of Ukrainian radicals and nationalists who desperately
are clinging to power. I say that because the people
in the areas under the control of the Russian armed
forces are not encountering acute humanitarian issues.
Once the radicals have left, the local authorities are
working normally and providing all the necessary
services to the people. Life-sustaining infrastructure
is functioning. The acute issues are only in towns
where the Ukrainian authorities issued a criminal and
irresponsible order to distribute arms to anyone who
wants them, including criminals who had been released
from prisons for that purpose. That has resulted in mass
incidents of robberies, killings and looting. There is
plenty of information about that on social media. There
are also appeals on social media by heads of some local
administrations calling on Ukrainian authorities to
stop the madness. There have also been many cases in

22-2710113/17

S/PV.8983

Ukraine

which victims of looters and bandits are shamelessly
said to have died at the hands of so-called Russian
subversive groups.
I address the people of Kyiv, who are held in the city
by the radicals as human shields. The Russian Ministry
of Defence confirms that all the peaceful citizens of
Kyiv can leave the capital of Ukraine without hindrance
via the Kyiv-Vasylkiv road. That road is open and safe.
We repeat again that the goal of Russia’s special
military operation is not to occupy Ukraine or to harm
the local population. The demilitarization of Ukraine,
which is packed with NATO weapons, is aimed at
protecting the long-suffering people of Donbas and
Ukraine.
Russia’s special operation does not impact critical
civilian infrastructure. Over the five days of the
operation, there have been no recorded cases of targeted
destruction. Similarly, there is no evidence of the
Russian military causing the death of civilians. Yet we
are constantly being told the opposite, with a reference
to some kind of credible reports. The widespread fake
information is used to blame us for what Ukraine itself
is doing. This flow of blatant lies, replicated by Western
media, unfortunately has become a dangerous sign of
our time. At this Security Council meeting, we heard
once again about the bombings of residential areas,
hospitals, schools and kindergartens. It is well known
that Ukrainian radicals are deploying assault weapons
in residential areas, which constitutes a direct violation
of international humanitarian law. We ask Martin
Griffiths and Filippo Grandi to comment on that.
Everyone is well aware that, starting in 2014,
Russia and Russia alone has provided assistance to
the civilian population of Donbas, who were faced
with constant shelling by the Ukrainian army and the
blockade imposed by Kyiv. We have already explained
our approach in several Security Council meetings, and
I will not repeat that. Let me just say that we deeply
regret the fact that, even today when we discuss the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine, not a single Western
colleague has mentioned the people of Donbas. Rather,
the West has chosen to ignore their suffering for the
past eight years.
An important support measure for the people of
Donbas was the 2019 decree by the President of Russia,
Mr. Putin, entitled “On defining for humanitarian
purposes categories of persons entitled to apply for
citizenship of the Russian Federation via a simplified
14/17

28/02/2022

procedure”. At a time when the people of south-eastern
Ukraine were pushed to the brink of survival by the
criminal authorities in Kyiv, who had organized a
socioeconomic blockade of Donbas, providing them
with Russian citizenship allowed them to receive social
benefits, pensions and salaries, as well as education and
health-care services.
Currently, in Russia there are more than 110,000
refugees from Donbas. They had to leave their homes a
week ago when Kyiv made another attempt to “solve”
the problem of Donbas by military means, in violation
of the Minsk package of measures. The blame for
that situation also belongs to our Western colleagues,
because they openly indulged Kyiv when it rejected the
Minsk package of measures and filled the country with
weapons. By our estimates, since the beginning of the
conflict in 2014, approximately 3 million Ukrainians
have moved to Russia.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that Russia did not
start the war, but rather is trying to end it. Ukraine
started the war in 2014, but the international community
has tried to ignore it all these years.
It was strange to hear the representative of France
say that the European sanctions against Russia do
not violate international humanitarian law or the
interests of ordinary people in Russia. We have heard
such duplicitous claims before in the context of other
country situations.
With regard to the draft resolution on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine proposed by France
and Mexico, we need to study the text closely before
we can make any assessments. In any case, Council
members should know that the Russian military will
provide any necessary humanitarian assistance to the
people of Ukraine in the territories that have been freed
from the radicals.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): First of all, I would like
to thank the Security Council for addressing this urgent
issue. With every new day, the unprovoked Russian war
against Ukraine increases the human suffering across
the entire country.
22-27101

28/02/2022

Ukraine

I would also like to express my sincere gratitude to
the Secretary-General for his powerful statement and
relentless engagement with the situation in my country.
The Ukrainian Government welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Amin Awad as Assistant SecretaryGeneral to serve as United Nations Crisis Coordinator
for Ukraine, and I know he has arrived in Geneva and
assumed his duties. His mission will be extremely
difficult against the backdrop of the ongoing Russian
military activities, which are often equal to war crimes.
At the same time, millions of Ukrainians will require
his attention, in particular our children, women, older
persons and other vulnerable citizens. I wish him and
his team strength and mercy in their work.
Let us be clear: this is not only a security crisis.
This is a humanitarian crisis. This war of choice is not
only a violation of international law, but it violates the
conscience of the world. Security assistance is needed,
but it alone is not enough. We call on international
organizations to provide us with humanitarian
assistance. We call on the international community
to register all cases in which international law and
international humanitarian law are violated.
Almost all speakers and briefers today were
unanimous in their assessments: the situation in
Ukraine could deteriorate sharply. Let me provide the
Security Council with the latest available information
from the Government of Ukraine.
Today is the fifth day of a full-scale, unprovoked
and unjustified war launched by Russia against
Ukraine — launched by Russia against the very heart
of Europe, launched by Russia against the idea and
the ideals of democracy. It is the most horrible and
large-scale invasion since the Second World War.
This morning (see A/ES-11/PV.1), I told the General
Assembly about the shelling of the residential city of
Kharkiv by Russian Grad rockets, which killed and
wounded dozens of innocent civilians. The residents
of Kyiv — home to 3 million innocent people — and
its suburbs are sitting in Russian crosshairs right now.
According to Ukrainian Health Minister Viktor Lyashko,
as of today more than 352 people, including 16 children,
have been killed, and approximately 2,040 people,
including 45 children, have been wounded.
Russia continues attacking kindergartens and
orphanages. Russia is attacking hospitals. Russia is
attacking mobile medical aid brigades with shellfire

S/PV. 8983

and sabotage groups. Russia fired on ambulance crews
near Zaporizhia and Kyiv. Let me say that again so
that everyone can see those images in their minds:
Russia is attacking hospitals, mobile aid brigades and
ambulances. This is not the action of a State with a
legitimate security concern; this is the action of a State
determined to kill civilians. There is no debate. These
are war crimes. These attacks violate the Rome Statute,
and they are far from over.
It is why I say that this is a humanitarian crisis.
As we sit here, Russian missiles are aimed at
destroying critical infrastructure, which could lead to
a serious environmental disaster and even radioactive
contamination. International humanitarian law is
crystal clear: none of those facilities are legitimate
military targets. The civilian population of Ukraine is
the first to suffer from such attacks, and, if we do not
act today, it will be far from the last.
We welcomed the statement issued today by the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Mr. Karim Khan, on the situation In Ukraine and his
decision to proceed with opening an investigation. In
his statement, the ICC Prosecutor said:
“I have reviewed the Office’s conclusions
arising from the preliminary examination of the
situation in Ukraine and have confirmed that there
is a reasonable basis to proceed with opening an
investigation. In particular, I am satisfied that
there is a reasonable basis to believe that both
alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity
have been committed in Ukraine in relation to the
events already assessed during the preliminary
examination by the Office. Given the expansion of
the conflict in recent days, it is my intention that
this investigation will also encompass any new
alleged crimes falling within the jurisdiction of
my Office that are committed by any party to the
conflict on any part of the territory of Ukraine;
“I will also be asking for the support of all
States parties, and the international community as
a whole, as my Office sets about its investigations.
I will be calling for additional budgetary support,
for voluntary contributions to support all our
situations and for the loan of gratis personnel.
The importance and urgency of our mission is too
serious to be held hostage to lack of means.”
I would say to my colleagues from around the world
that this affects them too. Russian military aggression

22-2710115/17

S/PV.8983

Ukraine

affects not only Ukrainians, but also threatens
thousands of foreigners who remain in Ukraine. The
Ukrainian Government is doing its best to facilitate
their passage at the State border, even as the border has
become overwhelmed with the massive influx of people
fleeing Russia’s armed aggression.
Temporary volunteer assistance points have been
set up at the border to provide foreign students with food
and other humanitarian needs. Please do not be misled
by Russian disinformation: there is no discrimination
based on race or nationality, and, if there are cases, they
should be investigated.
Journalists working in the free press are also under
fire during live reports from the scenes of action and
hotspots. A journalist and a photographer working for
the Danish newspaper Ekstra Bladet were injured when
their car was targeted in the district of Okhtyrka of the
Sumy region.
Ukrainian children are crossing the EU-Ukraine
border without their parents and without power of
attorney from their parents. In that regard, we request
decision-makers in the EU countries to provide
clarifications and instructions to EU institutions in
order to secure the free movement of, and assistance to,
such underage persons and their guardians.
According to the Ministry of Education of
Ukraine, more than 350,000 school children have
no access to education. Schools are closed, owing to
severe insecurity in several areas across the country.
The number of refugees is being assessed. It could be
hundreds of thousands of people who have been forced
to flee across international borders into neighbouring
European countries, mostly Poland, Slovakia and
Romania. It can take several days of waiting to cross
the border, and we are grateful that more checkpoints
on the border with Poland have been opened, including
two additional pedestrian crossings for all who want to
get from Ukraine to the neighbouring safe country.
Key local authorities have set up a coordinating
humanitarian headquarters to provide food and basic
necessities to those in need. An electronic platform
will be launched tomorrow. On the platform, businesses
will be able to provide information about available
resources, and Kyiv residents will be able to make their
needs known. All of the information will systematize
the quick and effective communication and distribution
of essential goods.
16/17

28/02/2022

Olga Stefanishyna, the Vice-Prime Minister of
Ukraine, who has been appointed as the Government
coordinator for humanitarian assistance, is working 24/7.
There are many urgent things to do, such as agreeing on
humanitarian corridors to evacuate civilians from the
most endangered territories. However, I need to warn
the Council not to be misled by Russian assurances
of security. Russian words often, if not always, do
not match their deeds. For instance, just recently, we
heard Russian politicians and diplomats, even here in
this Chamber, say that there would be no invasion of,
or attacks against, Ukraine. Therefore, those corridors
can be easy targets for the Russian army.
The Vice-Prime Minister is working to help people
at the border crossing-points in the western regions of
Ukraine who have been waiting to cross for at least one
to two days, provide assistance to internally displaced
persons in those areas, including housing, schools and
jobs, and to provide humanitarian aid to civilians who
have remained in their homes and are now cut off from
markets, including in the occupied territories.
This is not only a security crisis. This is a
humanitarian crisis, as I said earlier. The Russian war
against Ukraine has brought the entire region to the
brink of a humanitarian catastrophe. Let me therefore
repeat our call to international organizations to
provide every possible form of humanitarian assistance
and record all cases in which international law and
international humanitarian law are violated. Council
members have all heard the lies from the Russian side,
the lies in Moscow, the lies in the General Assembly
and the lies in the Security Council.
Do not listen to Russian lies. Listen to Ukraine’s
cries. Listen to the cries of men, women and children
who have lived in peace, who deserve to remain in peace
and who support — and will forever support — Council
members’ own nations’ efforts for peace, across Europe
and around the world. Russia has tried, and failed, to
defend its lies. But the people of Ukraine, with the help
of the world, will never fail to defend our land.
Do not listen to Russia’s lies. Listen
Ukrainian cries. We need the Council’s help.

to

The Russian Ambassador laments the fact that a
dozen Russian spies will no longer be able to enjoy all
the benefits of American life while conducting activities
that are incompatible with their status, which is used
as a cover. The Russian Ambassador should instead
work hard to report to his superiors on his cronies — a
22-27101

28/02/2022

S/PV. 8983

Ukraine

bunch of cronies — in line with his narrative here at the
United Nations.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Mr. Grandi.

I would like to conclude by saying that I look
forward to midnight, although midnight is the most
dangerous time right now, as that is when the majority
of attacks take place. However, I look forward to
midnight when this abomination of an occupation of the
seat of the President of the Council will come to an end.

Mr. Grandi: I fully support the remarks just made
by the Under-Secretary-General.

The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now give
the floor to Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Grandi to respond to the
question I posed in my capacity as the representative of
the Russian Federation — about the placement of heavy
weaponry in residential areas in Ukrainian towns and
how that is in line with international humanitarian law?
I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: Let me respond to that if I may,
or, indeed, try to respond to it. I can say that we
have no confirmation of reports of radicals placing
such weaponry in residential areas. The fact is that
accountability at this stage for breaches of international
humanitarian law, which we must see in time, is
naturally, at this level of the conflict, level of violence
and level of uncertainty, very difficult to establish. We
are truly in the fog of war. It is a fog that obscures the
future of so many of the people in Ukraine.
I made several points in my briefing about our
fears surrounding the impact on civilian objects and
civilian infrastructure as a result of urban warfare. I
mentioned, for example, our reminder that large-scale
urban warfare also requires that we avoid wide-area
explosive weapons. We are extremely concerned about
what we now see on the streets of some of the key
large, modern cities of Ukraine — the way in which
people are voting with their feet, the way in which basic
services are being interrupted and the way in which
civilian infrastructure is being damaged. In time, I
am quite sure that we will discover who did what and
who breached which requirements of international
humanitarian law.

The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of the Russian Federation before I
adjourn the meeting.
I would like to say that I was surprised at the
comments by the briefers. Some reports, footage and
messages about the developments in Ukraine are
taken for granted, while others, although obvious and
undoubtedly true, are deemed to be unconfirmed and
unverified. We will share some videos with members.
We expect the United Nations leadership to comment
on how such acts by Ukrainian radicals should
be perceived.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
As this is the last scheduled meeting of the
Council for the month of February, on behalf of the
Russian Federation, I would like to express our sincere
appreciation to the members of the Council and to the
Secretariat for all their support. It has been a very
busy month, but we managed to reach consensus on
several important issues within our purview, although,
as members know, not on all of them. I would like to
again thank all the representatives of the Secretariat,
including conference services, interpreters and
translators, verbatim reporters and security staff.
Our presidency is coming to an end. I know I speak
on behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation of the
United Arab Emirates good luck in the month of March.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

22-2710117/17
