A/63/49 (Vol. III)

Resolutions
and
Decisions
adopted by the General Assembly
during its sixty-third session

Volume III
25 December 2008 – 14 September 2009

General Assembly
Official Records ! Sixty-third Session
Supplement No. 49 (A/63/49)

United Nations ! New York, 2009

NOTE
The resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly are identified as follows:
Regular sessions
Until the thirtieth regular session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed by a roman numeral in parentheses indicating the
session (for example: resolution 3363 (XXX)). When several resolutions were adopted
under the same number, each of them was identified by a capital letter placed between the
two numerals (for example: resolution 3367 A (XXX), resolutions 3411 A and B (XXX),
resolutions 3419 A to D (XXX)). The decisions were not numbered.
Since the thirty-first session, as part of the new system adopted for symbols of General
Assembly documents, resolutions and decisions have been identified by an arabic numeral,
indicating the session, followed by an oblique stroke and another arabic numeral (for
example: resolution 31/1, decision 31/301). When several resolutions or decisions were
adopted under the same number, each of them has been identified by a capital letter placed
after the two numerals (for example: resolution 31/16 A, resolutions 31/6 A and B, decisions
31/406 A to E).
Special sessions
Until the seventh special session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letter “S” and a roman
numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution 3362 (S-VII)). The decisions were
not numbered.
Since the eighth special session, resolutions and decisions have been identified by the
letter “S” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by an oblique stroke and
another arabic numeral (for example: resolution S-8/1, decision S-8/11).
Emergency special sessions
Until the fifth emergency special session, the resolutions of the General Assembly
were identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letters “ES” and a
roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution 2252 (ES-V)). The decisions
were not numbered.
Since the sixth emergency special session, resolutions and decisions have been
identified by the letters “ES” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by an
oblique stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution ES-6/1, decision
ES-6/11).
In each of the series described above, the numbering follows the order of adoption.
*
*

*

The present volume contains the resolutions and decisions adopted by the General Assembly
from 25 December 2008 to 14 September 2009. Resolutions adopted by the Assembly from
16 September to 24 December 2008 appear in volume I. Volume II contains the decisions adopted
by the Assembly during that period.

ISSN 0252-7014

Contents
Section

Page

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee................................................................... 1
II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee)............................................................................................................................... 45
III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee .................................................................... 47
IV. Decisions............................................................................................................................................. 133
A. Elections and appointments.......................................................................................................... 135
B. Other decisions............................................................................................................................. 143
1.

Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee................................................... 143

2.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee...................................................... 148
Annexes

I. Allocation of agenda items .................................................................................................................. 153
II. Checklist of resolutions and decisions.................................................................................................. 155

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Contents
Resolution
No.

Title

Page

63/267.

New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support............................... 2

63/277.

Organization of a United Nations conference at the highest level on the world financial and economic crisis and
its impact on development................................................................................................................................... 2

63/278.

International Mother Earth Day............................................................................................................................ 4

63/279.

International cooperation and coordination for the human and ecological rehabilitation and economic
development of the Semipalatinsk region of Kazakhstan......................................................................................... 5

63/281.

Climate change and its possible security implications ............................................................................................. 8

63/282.

The Peacebuilding Fund ..................................................................................................................................... 9

63/301.

Situation in Honduras: democracy breakdown ..................................................................................................... 10

63/302.

2010 high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly .................................................................................... 11

63/303.

Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development.................. 11

63/304.

Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.................................................. 23

63/305.

Establishment of an ad hoc open-ended working group of the General Assembly to follow up on the issues
contained in the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on
Development................................................................................................................................................... 27

63/306.

Multilingualism ............................................................................................................................................... 28

63/307.

Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia............................................................................................................................................... 32

63/308.

The responsibility to protect .............................................................................................................................. 33

63/309.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly ............................................................................................. 34

63/310.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union ............................................................................ 35

63/311.

System-wide coherence .................................................................................................................................... 41

1

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 63/267
Adopted at the 78th plenary meeting, on 31 March 2009, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/63/L.60/Rev.1 and Add.1, sponsored by: Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Sudan, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

63/267. New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and
international support
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/2 of 16 September 2002 on the United Nations Declaration on the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development,
Recalling also its resolution 57/7 of 4 November 2002 on the final review and appraisal of
the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s and support for the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development and resolutions 58/233 of 23 December 2003, 59/254
of 23 December 2004, 60/222 of 23 December 2005, 61/229 of 22 December 2006 and 62/179 of
19 December 2007 entitled “New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support”,
Recalling further the 2005 World Summit Outcome,1 including the recognition of the need
to address the special needs of Africa, and recalling its resolution 60/265 of 30 June 2006,
Recalling the political declaration on Africa’s development needs, adopted at the high-level
meeting on Africa’s development needs on 22 September 2008,2
1.

Takes note of the sixth consolidated report of the Secretary-General;3

2. Reaffirms its commitment to the full implementation of the political declaration on
Africa’s development needs,2 as reaffirmed also in the Doha Declaration on Financing for
Development, adopted as the outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on
Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, held in
Doha from 29 November to 2 December 2008;4
3. Reaffirms its full support for the implementation of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development;5
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the
implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session on the
basis of inputs from Governments, organizations of the United Nations system and other
stakeholders in the New Partnership.
RESOLUTION 63/277
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 7 April 2009, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/63/L.66, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

_______________
1

See resolution 60/1.
See resolution 63/1.
3
A/63/206.
4
Resolution 63/239, annex.
5
A/57/304, annex.
2

2

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

63/277. Organization of a United Nations conference at the highest level on the world
financial and economic crisis and its impact on development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for
Development6 and the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of
the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the
Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus,7 as well as its resolution 63/239 of 24 December
2008, in which it endorsed the Doha Declaration which states that the United Nations will hold a
conference at the highest level on the world financial and economic crisis and its impact on
development, to be organized by the President of the General Assembly with the modalities to be
defined by March 2009 at the latest,
Conscious of the importance of examining and overcoming the deepening world financial
and economic crisis and its impact on development, concerned about the present and future
impacts of the crisis on, inter alia, employment, trade, investment and development, including the
achievement of the internationally agreed development goals and the Millennium Development
Goals, convinced of the urgency of undertaking coordinated and collaborative actions and
appropriate measures to mitigate the impact of the crisis on development, emphasizing the
importance of the role of the United Nations and its Member States in the ongoing international
discussions on reforming and strengthening the international financial and economic system and
architecture, and stressing the contributions of the United Nations development system in the
response to the crisis,
1. Decides that the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its
Impact on Development:
(a)

Will be convened at United Nations Headquarters from 1 to 3 June 2009;

(b)

Will be held at the highest level;

(c)

Will be presided over by the President of the General Assembly;

(d)

Will consist of:

(i)

A short opening session;

(ii) Plenary meetings;
(iii) Four interactive round tables, which will address the main issues before the
Conference as outlined above;
(e)

Will result in a concise outcome to be agreed by Member States;

(f) Will also result in summaries of the round-table discussions, to be included in the final
report of the Conference;
2. Invites the Holy See, in its capacity as observer State, and Palestine, in its capacity as
observer, to participate in the Conference;
3. Invites the United Nations funds and programmes, and the specialized agencies of the
United Nations system, including the International Labour Organization and the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade
Organization, the regional development banks, the regional commissions of the United Nations,
non-governmental organizations and civil society and business sector entities to participate in the
Conference and in the preparatory process of the Conference in accordance with the rules of
_______________
6

Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
7
Resolution 63/239, annex.

3

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

procedure of the General Assembly and, in addition, where appropriate, the rules of procedure
adopted for the Monterrey Conference8 and for the Doha Conference,9 with the practical
arrangements and modalities for participation in the Conference, including the accreditation
procedures for non-governmental organizations and civil society and business sector entities, to be
dealt with in the note referred to in paragraph 4 below;
4. Requests the Secretariat, in close collaboration with the Office of the President of the
General Assembly, to provide no later than 20 April 2009 a note on the organization of work of the
Conference;
5. Welcomes the special high-level meeting in 2009 of the Economic and Social Council
with the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade Organization and the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, which will include a session devoted to a comprehensive
discussion of the global financial and economic crisis and its impact on development, and invites
the President of the Council to provide a summary of the discussion as an input to the preparatory
process for the draft outcome document of the Conference;
6. Notes with appreciation the initiative of the President of the General Assembly in
organizing the interactive, thematic dialogue on the world financial and economic crisis and its
impact on development, held from 25 to 27 March 2009, as a contribution to the preparatory
process;
7. Welcomes the initiative of the regional commissions, with the support of regional
financial institutions, including regional development banks, and other relevant entities, to hold
regional consultations, and invites them to provide inputs as early as possible to the preparatory
process for the Conference;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report, based upon the analytical work of
United Nations programmes, departments and organizations, on the origins and causes of the
present crisis, the mechanisms of its transmission to the developing countries, the potential impact
of the crisis on development, the response of the United Nations to the crisis through its
development activities and national and international policy responses to date;
9. Requests the President of the General Assembly, through an open, transparent and
inclusive process led by the Member States, to present in a timely manner a draft text based upon
all preparatory inputs to serve as the basis for an outcome document, to be agreed by the Member
States;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all appropriate assistance to the preparatory
process and the Conference.
RESOLUTION 63/278
Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 22 April 2009, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/63/L.69 and Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Finland, Germany, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Maldives, Mongolia,
Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Saint Lucia, Serbia,
Seychelles, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Turkey, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen

_______________
8
9

A/CONF.198/2.
A/CONF.212/2.

4

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

63/278. International Mother Earth Day
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming Agenda 21,10 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”),11
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,12
Recalling also its resolution 60/192 of 22 December 2005 proclaiming 2008 the
International Year of Planet Earth,
Acknowledging that the Earth and its ecosystems are our home, and convinced that in order
to achieve a just balance among the economic, social, and environmental needs of present and
future generations, it is necessary to promote harmony with nature and the Earth,
Recognizing that Mother Earth is a common expression for the planet earth in a number of
countries and regions, which reflects the interdependence that exists among human beings, other
living species and the planet we all inhabit,
Noting that Earth Day is observed each year in many countries,
1.

Decides to designate 22 April as International Mother Earth Day;

2. Invites all Member States, the organizations of the United Nations system,
international, regional and subregional organizations, civil society, non-governmental
organizations and relevant stakeholders to observe and raise awareness of International Mother
Earth Day, as appropriate;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all
Member States and organizations of the United Nations system.
RESOLUTION 63/279
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 24 April 2009, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/63/L.67 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sudan, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United States of America, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Zambia

_______________
10

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992,
vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum),
resolution 1, annex II.
11
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
12
See resolution 60/1.

5

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

63/279. International cooperation and coordination for the human and ecological
rehabilitation and economic development of the Semipalatinsk region of
Kazakhstan
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 52/169 M of 16 December 1997, 53/1 H of 16 November 1998,
55/44 of 27 November 2000, 57/101 of 25 November 2002 and 60/216 of 22 December 2005,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,13 and the information contained therein
on measures taken to address health, environmental, economic and humanitarian development
problems and satisfy the needs of the Semipalatinsk region,
Recognizing that the Semipalatinsk nuclear testing ground, inherited by Kazakhstan and
closed in 1991, remains a matter of serious concern for the people and Government of Kazakhstan
with regard to the long-term nature of its consequences for the lives and health of the people,
especially children and other vulnerable groups, as well as for the environment of the region,
Taking into consideration the results of the international conference on the problems of the
Semipalatinsk region, held in Tokyo in 1999, which have promoted the effectiveness of the
assistance provided to the population of the region,
Recognizing the important role of national development policies and strategies in the
rehabilitation of the Semipalatinsk region, and taking note with satisfaction of the successful
implementation of the Kazakhstan national programme entitled “Complex solution of the former
Semipalatinsk nuclear test site problems for 2005–2007” and the elaboration of the new cycle of
the programme for 2009–2011,
Recognizing also the challenges Kazakhstan faces in the rehabilitation of the Semipalatinsk
region, in particular in the context of the efforts by the Government of Kazakhstan to ensure the
effective and timely achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals, in particular with regard to health care and environmental
sustainability,
Recognizing further that the Government of Kazakhstan may call upon the United Nations
Resident Coordinator in Kazakhstan to render assistance conducting consultations for establishing
a multi-stakeholders’ mechanism, with the participation of various government bodies, local
governments, civil society, the donor community and international organizations, to improve
governance and enable the more efficient use of resources allocated for the rehabilitation of the
Semipalatinsk region, in particular regarding the areas of radiation safety, socio-economic
development, health and environmental protection, and for the provision of information on risks to
the population,
Expressing profound concern regarding the negative effects of nuclear testing on the
sustainability of the ecosystem in the region and about the accumulation of radioactive substances
in the soil, which result in wide-ranging and complex consequences that create humanitarian,
environmental, social, economic and health problems,
Taking note of the need for the utilization of modern technologies in minimizing and
mitigating radiological, health, socio-economic, psychological and environmental challenges in
the Semipalatinsk region,
Taking into account the fact that a number of international programmes in the Semipalatinsk
region have been completed since the closure of the nuclear testing ground, but serious social,
economic and ecological problems continue to exist,

_______________
13

6

A/63/659.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Expressing deep concern that the current efforts are not sufficient to alleviate the
consequences of nuclear testing, and regarding the fact that only five of the thirty-eight projects
identified by the international conference held in Tokyo in 1999 were implemented,
Emphasizing the importance of support by donor States and international development
organizations for the efforts by Kazakhstan to improve the social, economic and environmental
situation in the Semipalatinsk region, and in this regard stressing the need for the international
community to continue to pay due attention to the rehabilitation of the Semipalatinsk region,
Emphasizing also the importance of the new development-oriented approach in tackling
problems in the Semipalatinsk region in the medium and long term,
Stressing the importance of the commemoration, in 2011, of the twentieth anniversary of the
closure of the Semipalatinsk nuclear test site,
Expressing appreciation to donor countries, especially Japan, United Nations agencies, in
particular the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the
United Nations Population Fund, the International Atomic Energy Agency and the World Bank,
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Global Environment Facility
for their contribution to the rehabilitation of the Semipalatinsk region,
1. Welcomes and recognizes the important role of the Government of Kazakhstan in
providing domestic resources to help to meet the needs of the Semipalatinsk region, including for
the implementation of the Kazakhstan national multi-year programme entitled “Complex solution
of the former Semipalatinsk nuclear test site problems for 2005–2007”;
2. Calls upon the international community, including all Member States, in particular
donor States, and United Nations institutions to continue to support Kazakhstan in addressing the
challenges of the rehabilitation of the Semipalatinsk region and its population, taking additional
actions, including by facilitating the implementation of the Kazakhstan national programme on
addressing the problems of the former Semipalatinsk nuclear testing ground in a comprehensive
manner, and stresses the importance of regional cooperation in this regard;
3. Urges the international community to provide assistance to Kazakhstan in the
formulation and implementation of special programmes and projects for the treatment and care of
the affected population as well as in efforts to ensure economic growth and sustainable
development in the Semipalatinsk region;
4. Calls upon Member States, relevant multilateral financial organizations and other
entities of the international community, including academia and non-governmental organizations,
to share their knowledge and experience in order to contribute to the human and ecological
rehabilitation and economic development of the Semipalatinsk region;
5. Welcomes initiatives commemorating the closure of the former Semipalatinsk test site
and the twentieth anniversary of the international anti-nuclear movement “Nevada-Semei”, and
the international conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency on the remediation of
land contaminated by radioactive material residues, to be held in 2009 in Kazakhstan, and invites
the international community to participate in these events;
6. Invites Member States to observe, in 2011, the twentieth anniversary of the closure of
the Semipalatinsk nuclear test site by conducting events and functions to provide to the
international community information on the deteriorating consequences of nuclear testing on
human health and the environment;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in implementing relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and to encourage the donor community and international and
regional organizations to fulfil their commitments declared at the Tokyo international conference;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to pursue a consultative process, with the
participation of interested States and relevant United Nations agencies, on modalities for

7

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

mobilizing and coordinating the necessary support to seek appropriate solutions to the problems
and needs of the Semipalatinsk region, including those prioritized in his report ;13
9. Calls upon the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to enhance world public
awareness of the problems and needs of the Semipalatinsk region;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth
session, under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, on progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 63/281
Adopted at the 85th plenary meeting, on 3 June 2009, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/63/L.8/Rev.1 and Add.1 sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Comoros, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino , Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu

63/281. Climate change and its possible security implications
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 63/32 of 26 November 2008 and other resolutions relating to the
protection of the global climate for present and future generations of mankind,
Recalling also Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations, which established the purposes
of the United Nations,
Recognizing the respective responsibilities of the principal organs of the United Nations,
including the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security
conferred upon the Security Council and the responsibility for sustainable development issues,
including climate change, conferred upon the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council,
Noting the open debate in the Security Council on “Energy, security and climate” held on
17 April 2007,14
Reaffirming that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change15 is the key
instrument for addressing climate change,
Recalling the provisions of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
including the acknowledgement that the global nature of climate change calls for the widest
possible cooperation by all countries and their participation in an effective and appropriate
_______________
14

Including the letter dated 5 April 2007 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2007/186), the letter
dated 12 April 2007 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2007/203) and the
letter dated 16 April 2007 from the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations, on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2007/211). See S/PV.5663.
15
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.

8

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

international response, in accordance with their common but differentiated responsibilities and
respective capabilities and their social and economic conditions,
Reaffirming the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States,16 the Mauritius Declaration17 and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States,18
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,19
Deeply concerned that the adverse impacts of climate change, including sea-level rise, could
have possible security implications,
1. Invites the relevant organs of the United Nations, as appropriate and within their
respective mandates, to intensify their efforts in considering and addressing climate change,
including its possible security implications;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report to the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session on the possible security implications of climate change, based
on the views of the Member States and relevant regional and international organizations.
RESOLUTION 63/282
Adopted at the 90th plenary meeting, on 17 June 2009, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/63/L.72 and Add.1 sponsored by: Australia, Belgium, Benin, Brazil, Canada, Czech Republic, Egypt,
Finland, France, Germany, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

63/282. The Peacebuilding Fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 60/180 and Security Council resolution 1645 (2005) of 20 December
2005, as well as its resolution 60/287 of 8 September 2006,
1. Takes note of the arrangements for the revision of the terms of reference for the
Peacebuilding Fund as contained in the report of the Secretary-General20 and the revised terms of
reference for the Fund contained in the annex thereto;
2. Notes that the broad objectives of the revision of the terms of reference for the
Peacebuilding Fund are to enhance the capacity of the Fund to serve as a flexible, responsive and
focused resource for peacebuilding support and to enhance and maximize the synergy between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Fund;
3. Affirms the respective roles of the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission
and the independent Advisory Group to provide policy guidance on the use of the Fund to
maximize its impact and improve its functioning;

_______________
16

Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown,
Barbados, 25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution
1, annex II.
17
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
18
Ibid., annex II.
19
See resolution 60/1.
20
A/63/818.

9

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4. Welcomes the contributions and financial pledges made to the Fund, and emphasizes
the necessity of sustained contributions in order to enhance the capacity of the Fund to provide the
predictable and catalytic resources needed to launch post-conflict peacebuilding activities;
5.

Urges all Member States to consider making voluntary contributions to the Fund;

6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit an annual report to the General Assembly on
the operation and activities of the Fund;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to include in his annual report on the operation
and activities of the Fund to be submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session the
findings and recommendations from the next comprehensive independent evaluation;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Report of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Fund”.
RESOLUTION 63/301
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/63/L.74 and Add.1, as orally amended, sponsored by: Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Barbados,
Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Guyana, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and Tobago, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)

63/301. Situation in Honduras: democracy breakdown
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned by the coup d’état that took place in the Republic of Honduras on 28 June
2009,
Deeply concerned also by the acts of violence against diplomatic personnel and accredited
officials in the Republic of Honduras in violation of the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations,21
Recalling the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, international law
and conventions on international peace and security,
Gravely concerned by the breakdown in the constitutional and democratic order that has led
to the endangerment of security, democracy and the rule of law, which has jeopardized the security
of Honduran and foreign citizens,
1. Condemns the coup d’état in the Republic of Honduras that has interrupted the
democratic and constitutional order and the legitimate exercise of power in Honduras, and resulted
in the removal of the democratically elected President of that country, Mr. José Manuel Zelaya
Rosales;
2. Demands the immediate and unconditional restoration of the legitimate and
Constitutional Government of the President of the Republic of Honduras, Mr. José Manuel Zelaya
Rosales, and of the legally constituted authority in Honduras, in order for him to fulfil the mandate
for which he was democratically elected by the Honduran people;
3. Decides to call firmly and unequivocally upon all States to recognize no Government
other than that of the Constitutional President, Mr. José Manuel Zelaya Rosales;

_______________
21

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 500, No. 7310.

10

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4. Expresses its firm support for the regional efforts being undertaken pursuant to
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations to resolve the political crisis in Honduras;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly in a timely manner of
the evolving situation in the country.
RESOLUTION 63/302
Adopted at the 95th plenary meeting, on 9 July 2009, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/63/L.76, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

63/302. 2010 high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 55/2 of 8 September 2000, by which it adopted the United Nations
Millennium Declaration, and resolution 60/1 of 16 September 2005, by which it adopted the 2005
World Summit Outcome,
1. Decides to convene in 2010, at the commencement of the sixty-fifth session of the
General Assembly, a high-level plenary meeting of the Assembly, on dates to be decided, with the
participation of Heads of State and Government, and encourages all Member States to be
represented at that level;
2. Also decides to hold consultations on the scope, modalities, format and organization of
the high-level plenary meeting of the Assembly with a view to concluding consultations before the
end of 2009 and, in this regard, requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the Assembly
at the beginning of its sixty-fourth session.
RESOLUTION 63/303
Adopted at the 95th plenary meeting, on 9 July 2009, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/63/L.75, as orally revised, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

63/303. Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its
Impact on Development
The General Assembly,
Noting the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on
Development, held in New York from 24 to 30 June 2009, and the adoption by the Conference of
the outcome document,
Decides to endorse the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic
Crisis and Its Impact on Development, annexed to the present resolution.
Annex
Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on
Development
We, Heads of State and Government and High Representatives, met in New York from 24 to
30 June 2009 for the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on
Development.
1. The world is confronted with the worst financial and economic crisis since the Great
Depression. The evolving crisis, which began within the world’s major financial centres, has
spread throughout the global economy, causing severe social, political and economic impacts. We
are deeply concerned about its adverse impact on development. This crisis is negatively affecting
all countries, particularly developing countries, and threatening the livelihoods, well-being and
11

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

development opportunities of millions of people. The crisis has not only highlighted long-standing
systemic fragilities and imbalances, but has also led to an intensification of efforts to reform and
strengthen the international financial system and architecture. Our challenge is to ensure that
actions and responses to the crisis are commensurate with its scale, depth and urgency, adequately
financed, promptly implemented and appropriately coordinated internationally.
2. We reaffirm the purposes of the United Nations, as set forth in its Charter, including “to
achieve international cooperation in solving international problems of an economic, social,
cultural, or humanitarian character” and “to be a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in
the attainment of these common ends”. The principles of the Charter are particularly relevant in
addressing the current challenges. The United Nations, on the basis of its universal membership
and legitimacy, is well positioned to participate in various reform processes aimed at improving
and strengthening the effective functioning of the international financial system and architecture.
This United Nations Conference is part of our collective effort towards recovery. It builds on and
contributes to what already is being undertaken by diverse actors and in various forums, and is
intended to support, inform and provide political impetus to future actions. This Conference also
highlights the importance of the role of the United Nations in international economic issues.
3. Developing countries, which did not cause the global economic and financial crisis, are
nonetheless severely affected by it. The economic and social progress achieved during recent
years, in particular on internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals, is now being threatened in developing countries, particularly least developed
countries. This progress, partially underpinned by a period of high economic growth in many
countries, needs to be secured and enhanced in the face of threats posed by the crisis. Our
endeavours must be guided by the need to address the human costs of the crisis: an increase in the
already unacceptable number of poor and vulnerable, particularly women and children, who suffer
and die of hunger, malnutrition and preventable or curable disease; a rise in unemployment; the
reduction in access to education and health services; and the current inadequacy of social
protection in many countries. Women also face greater income insecurity and increased burdens of
family care. These particular human costs have serious development consequences on the human
security of those affected. An equitable global recovery requires the full participation of all
countries in shaping appropriate responses to the crisis.
4. Although the financial and economic crisis has affected all countries, it is important to take
into account the varying impacts and challenges of the crisis on the different categories of
developing countries. The crisis is further endangering the achievement of their national
development objectives, as well as the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals. We are particularly concerned about the impact on countries in
special situations, including least developed countries, small island developing States and
landlocked developing countries, and on African countries and countries emerging from conflict.
We are equally concerned about the specific development challenges of middle-income countries
and low-income countries with vulnerable and poor populations. For all these countries, the crisis
presents unique challenges to their efforts to achieve their national development goals. Our
collective responses to this crisis must be made with sensitivity to the specific needs of these
different categories of developing countries, which include trade and market access, access to
adequate financing and concessionary financing, capacity-building, strengthened support for
sustainable development, financial and technical assistance, debt sustainability, trade facilitation
measures, infrastructure development, peace and security, the Millennium Development Goals,
and our previous international development commitments.
5. Peace, stability and prosperity are indivisible. In today’s globalized economy, all nations are
far more closely tied together than ever before. The global reach of the crisis calls for prompt,
decisive and coordinated action to address its causes, mitigate its impact and strengthen or
establish the necessary mechanisms to help prevent similar crises in the future.
6. This Conference represents a milestone in an ongoing and concerted engagement by all
States Members of the United Nations to address the crisis and its impact on development. Today,
we have set forth our global consensus on the responses to this crisis, prioritized required actions
12

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and defined a clear role for the United Nations. We are doing so in the interest of all nations in
order to achieve a more inclusive, equitable, balanced, development-oriented and sustainable
economic development to help overcome poverty and inequality.
Present state of the world economy
7. This crisis is connected to multiple, interrelated global crises and challenges, such as
increased food insecurity, volatile energy and commodity prices and climate change, as well as the
lack of results so far in the multilateral trade negotiations and a loss of confidence in the
international economic system. The global economic downturn is deeper than many early
estimates, and the recovery is predicted to be gradual and varied. While some countries still
experience positive, though much slower growth, the latest estimate of the United Nations
indicates that world gross product will fall by 2.6 per cent in 2009, the first such decline since the
Second World War. The crisis threatens to have calamitous human and development
consequences. Millions of people all over the world are losing their jobs, their income, their
savings and their homes. The World Bank estimates that more than 50 million people have already
been driven into extreme poverty, particularly women and children. The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations projects that the crisis will contribute to the number of hungry
and undernourished people worldwide rising to a historic high of over one billion.
Impacts of the crisis
8. The crisis has produced or exacerbated serious, wide-ranging yet differentiated impacts
across the globe. Since the crisis began, many States have reported negative impacts, which vary
by country, region, level of development and severity, including the following:
•

Rapid increases in unemployment, poverty and hunger

•

Deceleration of growth, economic contraction

•

Negative effects on trade balances and balance of payments

•

Dwindling levels of foreign direct investment

•

Large and volatile movements in exchange rates

•

Growing budget deficits, falling tax revenues and reduction of fiscal space

•

Contraction of world trade

•

Increased volatility and falling prices for primary commodities

•

Declining remittances to developing countries

•

Sharply reduced revenues from tourism

•

Massive reversal of private capital inflows

•

Reduced access to credit and trade financing

•

Reduced public confidence in financial institutions

•

Reduced ability to maintain social safety nets and provide other social services, such
as health and education

•

Increased infant and maternal mortality

•

Collapse of housing markets.

Causes of the crisis
9. The drivers of the financial and economic crisis are complex and multifaceted. We recognize
that many of the main causes of the crisis are linked to systemic fragilities and imbalances that
contributed to the inadequate functioning of the global economy. Major underlying factors in the
13

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

current situation included inconsistent and insufficiently coordinated macroeconomic policies and
inadequate structural reforms, which led to unsustainable global macroeconomic outcomes. These
factors were made acute by major failures in financial regulation, supervision and monitoring of
the financial sector, and inadequate surveillance and early warning. These regulatory failures,
compounded by over-reliance on market self-regulation, overall lack of transparency, financial
integrity and irresponsible behaviour, have led to excessive risk-taking, unsustainably high asset
prices, irresponsible leveraging and high levels of consumption fuelled by easy credit and inflated
asset prices. Financial regulators, policymakers and institutions failed to appreciate the full
measure of risks in the financial system or address the extent of the growing economic
vulnerabilities and their cross-border linkages. Insufficient emphasis on equitable human
development has contributed to significant inequalities among countries and peoples. Other
weaknesses of a systemic nature also contributed to the unfolding crisis, which has demonstrated
the need for more effective government involvement to ensure an appropriate balance between the
market and public interest.
Response to the crisis
10. We are all in this crisis together. While each country has primary responsibility for its own
economic and social development, we will continue to work in solidarity on a vigorous,
coordinated and comprehensive global response to the crisis in accordance with our respective
abilities and responsibilities. Developed countries and emerging markets have taken the lead in
restoring global growth. An immediate priority has been to stabilize the financial markets and
restore confidence in them and counter falling demand and the recession. Major actions have
already been taken to maintain macroeconomic stability and strengthen the international financial
system. At the same time, strong and urgent actions are needed to counter the impact of the crisis
on the most vulnerable populations and help to restore strong growth and recover lost ground in
their progress towards our internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals. Therefore, an adequate share of any additional resources – both short-term
liquidity and long-term development financing – will need to be made available to developing
countries, especially the least developed countries. Although this crisis continues to have a
significant impact on the peoples of the world, we believe that it represents an important
opportunity for meaningful change. Going forward, our response must focus on creating jobs,
increasing prosperity, strengthening access to health and education, correcting imbalances,
designing and implementing environmentally and socially sustainable development paths and
having a strong gender perspective. It must also strengthen the foundation for a fair, inclusive and
sustainable globalization supported by renewed multilateralism. We are confident that we will
emerge from this crisis stronger and more vigorous and more united.
The need for prompt and decisive action
11. We commit to working in solidarity on a coordinated and comprehensive global response to
the crisis and to undertaking actions aimed at, inter alia:

14

•

Restoring confidence and economic growth, and creating full and productive
employment and decent work for all

•

Safeguarding economic, development and social gains

•

Providing adequate support for developing countries to address the human and social
impacts of the crisis, in order to safeguard and build upon hard-won economic and
development gains to date, including the progress being achieved towards the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals

•

Ensuring long-term debt sustainability of developing countries

•

Seeking to provide sufficient development resources to developing countries without
unwarranted conditionalities

•

Rebuilding trust in the financial sector and restoring lending

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

•

Promoting and revitalizing open trade and investment and rejecting protectionism

•

Fostering an inclusive, green and sustainable recovery, and providing continued
support for sustainable development efforts by developing countries

•

Strengthening the role of the United Nations development system in responding to the
economic crisis and its impact on development

•

Reforming and strengthening the international financial and economic system and
architecture, as appropriate, to adapt to current challenges

•

Fostering good governance at all levels, including in the international financial
institutions and financial markets

•

Addressing the human and social impacts of the crisis.

Lines of action
Make the stimulus work for all
12. In attempting to combat the immediate impacts of the crisis, there have already been a
number of responses at the national, regional and international levels. While acknowledging those
efforts, we encourage greater cooperation and coordination among countries’ fiscal and economic
actions. Support for development is an essential and integral part of the solution to the global
crisis, inter alia, through actions aimed at enhancing sustained economic growth, poverty
eradication and sustainable development. We encourage countries, while implementing national
stimulus measures, to avoid protectionism in any form and possible adverse impacts on third
countries, particularly developing countries.
13. We encourage countries in a position to do so to utilize the room for fiscal stimulus that they
possess, while also ensuring long-term fiscal sustainability. We also encourage individual
countries to tailor their responses to their specific circumstances and use the available scope for
domestic resource mobilization.
14. While a number of developed and emerging market economies have implemented stimulus
packages, the majority of the world’s developing countries lack fiscal space to implement
countercyclical measures to combat the effects of the crisis and spur recovery. Many also face
foreign-exchange shortages. In order to adequately respond to the crisis, developing countries will
need a larger share of any additional resources – both short-term liquidity and long-term
development financing. We call for an examination of mechanisms to ensure that adequate
resources are provided to developing countries, especially the least developed countries. We
underscore that developing countries should not be unduly financially burdened by the crisis and
its impacts.
15. Developing countries facing an acute and severe shortage of foreign reserves because of the
fallout of the crisis, which is negatively affecting their balance-of-payment situation, should not be
denied the right to use legitimate trade defence measures in accordance with relevant provisions of
the World Trade Organization (WTO), and, as a last resort, impose temporary capital restrictions
and seek to negotiate agreements on temporary debt standstills between debtors and creditors, in
order to help mitigate the adverse impacts of the crisis and stabilize macroeconomic
developments.
16. We acknowledge the G20 summit held in London on 2 April 2009, and recognize its
commitment to make available an additional $1.1 trillion programme aimed at revitalizing the
world economy. A major part of these funds will be available for use by emerging markets and
developing countries. A limited share ($50 billion) of these resources was targeted specifically to
low-income countries. We call upon the G20 to further consider addressing the financial needs of
developing countries, especially low-income countries. We also call upon all G20 countries to
follow through with their commitments and to monitor the implementation of them. While

15

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

recognizing the decisions taken by the G20, we are resolved to strengthen the role of the United
Nations and its Member States in economic and financial affairs, including its coordinating role.
17. Countries must have the necessary flexibility to implement countercyclical measures and to
pursue tailored and targeted responses to the crisis. We call for a streamlining of conditionalities to
ensure that they are timely, tailored and targeted and support developing countries in the face of
financial, economic and development challenges. In this context we note the recent improvement
of the lending framework of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), through inter alia,
modernizing conditionality, and the creation of more flexible instruments, such as a flexible credit
line, as a welcome step. New and ongoing programmes should not contain unwarranted
procyclical conditionalities. We call upon the multilateral development banks to move forward on
flexible, concessional, fast-disbursing and front-loaded assistance designed to substantially and
quickly assist developing countries facing financing gaps. While doing so, multilateral
development banks need to assure the application of agreed safeguards to ensure their financial
stability.
18. The increasing interdependence of national economies in a globalizing world and the
emergence of rules-based regimes for international economic relations have meant that the space
for national economic policy, that is, the scope for domestic policies, especially in the areas of
trade, investment and international development, is now often framed by international disciplines
and commitments and global market considerations. We recognize that these regimes, disciplines,
commitments and considerations have presented challenges to many developing countries seeking
to fashion a national response to the financial and economic crisis. We also recognize that many
developing countries have called for opportunities to exercise greater policy flexibility within the
scope of these constraints as a necessary component of recovery from the crisis and to address
specific national concerns, which include, inter alia, the human and social impacts of the crisis,
safeguarding progress achieved towards implementation of the Millennium Development Goals,
effective use of credit and liquidity facilities, regulation of local financial markets, institutions,
instruments and capital flows, and limited trade defence measures. It is for each Government to
evaluate the trade-off between the benefits of accepting international rules and commitments and
the constraints posed by the loss of policy space.
19. We recognize the continued importance of good governance along with national ownership
of policies and strategies. We commit ourselves to the promotion of effective and efficient
economic and financial institutions at all levels – key determinants of long-term economic growth
and development. We also commit ourselves to accelerating our collective recovery from the crisis
through improved transparency, eradication of corruption and strengthened governance. In this
regard, we urge all States that have not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the United
Nations Convention against Corruption22 and call upon all States parties to vigorously implement
the Convention.
20. The crisis has disparate impacts across regions, subregions and countries. These
heterogeneous impacts have added complexity to our common goal of eradicating poverty,
reducing inequality and promoting human development. Given the sensitivity of regional and
subregional institutions to the specific needs of their constituencies, we note the value of regional
and subregional cooperation efforts in meeting the challenges of the global economic crisis and
we encourage enhanced regional and subregional cooperation, for example, through regional and
subregional development banks, commercial and reserve currency arrangements, and other
regional initiatives, as contributions to the multilateral response to the current crisis and to
improved resilience to potential future crises.

_______________
22

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.

16

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Contain the effects of the crisis and improve future global resilience
21. This crisis does not affect only the economic and financial sectors. We recognize the human
and social impacts of the crisis and the inherent challenges involved in addressing them. Shortterm mitigation measures should take into account long-term goals, especially those related to
poverty eradication; sustainable development, including environmental protection and clean and
renewable energy; food security; gender equality; health; education; and sustained economic
growth, including full and productive employment and decent work for all. Strengthening existing
social safety nets, establishing new ones where needed and protecting social expenditures are
important for the advancement of people-centred development and addressing the human and
social impacts of the crisis. We reaffirm our commitment to the timely achievement of our
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals.
22. Closer cooperation and strong partnership between the United Nations development system,
regional development banks and the World Bank and their scaled-up efforts can effectively
address the needs of those hardest hit and ensure that their plight is not ignored. We call for the
mobilization of additional resources for social protection, food security and human development
through all sources of development finance, including voluntary bilateral contributions, to
strengthen the foundation for early and sustained economic and social recovery in developing
countries, particularly least developed countries. Such additional resources should be channelled
through existing institutions such as the United Nations development system, the World Bankproposed vulnerability fund and framework and multilateral development banks, where
appropriate. These funds, including those for the United Nations development system, should be
provided on a predictable basis. Furthermore, we stress the importance of the United Nations
development system, given its broad field presence, in supporting the activities at the country level
to mitigate the impact of the crisis in developing countries.
23. We commit ourselves to strengthening the ability of the United Nations to fulfil its
development mandate. United Nations funds and programmes and United Nations agencies, in
accordance with their respective mandates, have an important role to play in advancing
development and in protecting development gains, in accordance with national strategies and
priorities, including progress towards achieving the internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals, threatened by the current economic crisis. The
United Nations should use the current economic situation as an opportunity to redouble its efforts
to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its development programmes in support of systemwide coherence. We recognize the unique role of the United Nations as an inclusive forum to
promote a better understanding of the social and economic impact of the crisis and to fashion
appropriate responses.
24. We acknowledge that the current economic crisis has the potential to increase the need for
resources for humanitarian assistance in developing countries. We stress the need to take measures
to ensure adequate resources for international cooperation in the provision of humanitarian
assistance.
25. The crisis has severely impacted on international trade in most countries, especially
developing countries. For many developing countries, these impacts include, among others, falling
exports and loss of export revenue, diminishing access to trade finance, reductions in exportoriented and infrastructure investment, lower fiscal revenues and balance-of-payment problems.
We undertake to resist all protectionist tendencies and rectify any protectionist measures already
taken. At the same time we recognize the right of countries to fully utilize their flexibilities
consistent with their WTO commitments and obligations. It is important that we contribute to the
efforts of WTO and other relevant bodies to monitor and report on protectionist measures,
including on how they affect developing countries.
26. We must also fully harness the potential of trade as an engine of sustained economic growth
and development in our efforts to overcome this crisis. In this regard, we reaffirm our commitment
to a universal, rules-based, open, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system. We
reaffirm that international trade is an engine for development and sustained economic growth. We
17

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

therefore reiterate our call for an early, ambitious, successful and balanced conclusion to the Doha
Round that increases market access, generates increased trade flows and places the needs of
developing countries at its centre. We welcome the commitment to implement duty-free and
quota-free access for least developed countries, as agreed in the WTO Hong Kong Ministerial
Declaration;23 to make operationally effective the principle of special and differential treatment for
developing countries; to the parallel elimination of all forms of export subsidies; to disciplines on
all export measures with equivalent effect; to substantial reductions in trade-distorting domestic
support, in accordance with the mandate of the Doha Round and the WTO Hong Kong Ministerial
Declaration; and to meet existing aid-for-trade pledges. We also reaffirm the need to make
progress on the implementation of the WTO work programme on small economies, mandated in
the Doha Ministerial Declaration.24
27. Migrant workers are among the most vulnerable in the context of the current crisis.
Remittances, which are significant private financial resources for households in countries of origin
of migration, have been seriously affected by rising unemployment and weak earnings growth
among migrant workers, particularly in advanced economies. We should resist unfair and
discriminatory treatment of migrant workers and the imposition of unreasonable restrictions on
labour migration in order to maximize the benefits of international migration, while complying
with the relevant national legislation and applicable international instruments. We recognize the
important contribution of migrant workers for both countries of origin and destination. We commit
ourselves to allowing labour migration to meet labour market needs.
28. An effective response to the current economic crisis requires timely implementation of
existing aid commitments. There is an urgent need for all donors to maintain and deliver on their
existing bilateral and multilateral official development assistance (ODA) commitments and targets
made, inter alia, in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,25 the Monterrey Consensus26 and
the 2005 World Summit Outcome,27 at the G8 summit in Gleneagles, in the Doha Declaration28
and at the G20 London summit. We underline that the fulfilment of all ODA commitments is
crucial, including the commitments by many developed countries to achieve the target of
0.7 per cent of gross national product (GNP) for ODA to developing countries by 2015 and to
reach the level of at least 0.5 per cent of GNP for ODA by 2010, as well as a target of 0.15 to
0.20 per cent of GNP for ODA to least developed countries. We recognize that many developed
countries have established timetables to reach the level of at least 0.5 per cent for ODA by 2010.
We encourage other donors to work on national timetables, by the end of 2010, to increase aid
levels within their respective budget allocation processes towards achieving the established ODA
targets. The full implementation of these commitments will substantially boost the resources
available to push forward the international development agenda and to assist developing countries
to mitigate and more effectively respond to the crisis in accordance with their national strategies.
Donors should review and, if appropriate, increase or redirect their assistance to developing
countries to enable them to mitigate and more effectively respond to the crisis in accordance with
their national strategies.
29. We emphasize the importance for all development actors to continue to pursue economic
and governance reforms and other steps to improve the effectiveness of aid based on the
fundamental principles of national ownership, alignment, harmonization and managing for results.

_______________
23

World Trade Organization, document WT/MIN(05)/DEC. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
A/C.2/56/7, annex.
25
See resolution 55/2.
26
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
27
See resolution 60/1.
28
See resolution 63/239, annex.
24

18

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

30. We also encourage developing countries in a position to do so to continue to make concrete
efforts to increase and make more effective their South-South cooperation initiatives, in
accordance with the principles of aid effectiveness. We reiterate our support for South-South
cooperation, as well as triangular cooperation, which provide much-needed additional resources
for the implementation of development programmes.
31. New voluntary and innovative forms of financing can contribute to addressing our global
problems. We encourage the scaling up of development finance from existing sources and the
establishment, where appropriate, of new voluntary and innovative sources of financing initiatives
to provide additional stable sources of development finance, which should supplement and not be
a substitute for traditional sources of finance and should be disbursed in accordance with the
priorities of developing countries and not unduly burden them. We reiterate our request to the
Secretary-General to produce a progress report by the sixty-fourth session of the General
Assembly, taking into account all existing initiatives.
32. The crisis must not delay the necessary global response to climate change and
environmental degradation, taking into account the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities and respective capabilities. We acknowledge that the response to the crisis presents
an opportunity to promote green economy initiatives. In this regard, we encourage the utilization
of national stimulus packages, for those countries in a position to do so, to contribute to
sustainable development, sustainable long-term growth, promotion of full and productive
employment and decent work for all and poverty eradication. It is important that global green
initiatives and proposals be inclusive and address sustainable development and environmental
challenges and opportunities, including climate change mitigation and adaptation, financing and
technology transfer to developing countries and sustainable forest management. We also
encourage private-sector participation in these initiatives at the national level in accordance with
national development strategies and priorities. We look forward to a successful outcome of the
fifteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, to be held in Copenhagen in December 2009, as part of our overall efforts for a
green recovery from the crisis.
33. The deepening crisis threatens to increase the debt and therefore threatens the debt
sustainability of developing countries. This growing pressure limits the ability of these States to
enact the appropriate fiscal measures to mitigate the impact of the crisis or engage in development
financing. We affirm that the appropriate measures must be taken to mitigate the negative effects
of the crisis on the indebtedness of developing States and to avoid a new debt crisis. In that regard,
we support making full use of the existing flexibility within the Debt Sustainability Framework.
34. We call upon States to redouble efforts to honour their commitments regarding debt relief
and stress the responsibility of all debtors and creditors on the issue of debt sustainability, and
emphasize the importance of equivalent treatment of all creditors. Donors and multilateral
financial institutions should also increasingly consider providing grants and concessional loans as
the preferred modalities of their financial support instruments to ensure debt sustainability. We will
also explore enhanced approaches to the restructuring of sovereign debt based on existing
frameworks and principles, broad creditors’ and debtors’ participation and comparable burdensharing among creditors. We will also explore the need and feasibility of a more structured
framework for international cooperation in this area.
35. We recognize that increases in global liquidity play a useful role in overcoming the financial
crisis. Therefore, we strongly support and call for early implementation of the new general special
drawing right (SDR) allocation of $250 billion. We also call for the urgent ratification of the fourth
amendment to the IMF Articles of Agreement for a special one-time allocation of SDRs, as
approved by the IMF Board of Governors in September 1997. We recognize the need for keeping
under review the allocation of SDRs for development purposes. We also recognize the potential of
expanded SDRs to help increase global liquidity in response to the urgent financial shortfalls
caused by this crisis and to help prevent future crises. This potential should be further studied.

19

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

36. The crisis has intensified calls by some States for reform of the current global reserve system
to overcome its insufficiencies. We acknowledge the calls by many States for further study of the
feasibility and advisability of a more efficient reserve system, including the possible function of
SDRs in any such system and the complementary roles that could be played by various regional
arrangements. We also acknowledge the importance of seeking consensus on the parameters of
such a study and its implementation. We recognize the existence of new and existing regional and
subregional economic and financial cooperation initiatives to address, inter alia, the liquidity
shortfalls and the short-term balance-of-payment difficulties among its members.
Improved regulation and monitoring
37. The current crisis has revealed many deficiencies in national and international financial
regulation and supervision. We recognize the critical need for expanding the scope of regulation
and supervision and making it more effective, with respect to all major financial centres,
instruments and actors, including financial institutions, credit rating agencies and hedge funds.
The need for tighter and more coordinated regulation of incentives, derivatives and the trading of
standardized contracts is also apparent. We reject the imposition of needlessly onerous regulatory
requirements, and call for effective, credible and enforceable regulations at all levels to ensure the
needed transparency and oversight of the financial system. Every relevant institution must be
subject to adequate and proportionate surveillance and regulation. We underscore that each
country should adequately regulate its financial markets, institutions and instruments consistent
with its development priorities and circumstances, as well as its international commitments and
obligations. We underscore the importance of political commitment and of capacity-building to
ensure that the measures taken are fully implemented.
38. We emphasize the need to ensure that all tax jurisdictions and financial centres comply with
standards of transparency and regulation. We reiterate the need to further promote international
cooperation in tax matters, including within the United Nations, inter alia, by promoting double
taxation agreements. Inclusive and cooperative frameworks should ensure the involvement and
equal treatment of all jurisdictions. We call for consistent and non-discriminatory implementation
of transparency requirements and international standards for exchange of information.
39. Illicit financial flows are estimated to amount to several times global ODA and have a
harmful effect on development financing. Measures to enhance regulation and supervision of and
transparency in the formal and informal financial system should include steps to curb illicit
financial flows in all countries. Improving the transparency of the global financial system also
deters illicit financial flows, including to international financial centres, and enhances the ability to
detect illicit activities.
40. The current crisis has been compounded by an initial failure to appreciate the full scope of
the risks accumulating in the financial markets and their potential to destabilize the international
financial system and the global economy. We recognize the need for even-handed and effective
IMF surveillance of major financial centres, international capital flows and financial markets. In
this context, we welcome the improvement of early warning systems by the relevant international
institutions to provide early warning of macroeconomic and financial risks and the actions needed
to address them.
41. The ongoing crisis has highlighted the extent to which our economies are integrated, the
indivisibility of our collective well-being and the unsustainability of a narrow focus on short-term
gains. We reaffirm the principles of sustainable development and underscore the need for a global
consensus on the key values and principles that will promote sustainable, fair and equitable
economic development. We believe that corporate social and environmental responsibility are
important elements of such a consensus. In this regard we recognize the importance of the
10 principles of the United Nations Global Compact.

20

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reform of the international financial and economic system and architecture
42. This crisis has added new impetus to ongoing international discussions on the reform of the
international financial system and architecture, including issues related to mandate, scope,
governance, responsiveness and development orientation as appropriate. There is consensus on the
need for continued reform and modernization of the international financial institutions to better
enable them to respond to the current financial and economic challenges and to the needs of
Member States, and to better equip them to strengthen existing monitoring, surveillance, technical
assistance and coordination roles to help prevent the occurrence of similar crises in the future, in
accordance with their respective mandates.
43. We stress the urgent need for further reform of the governance of the Bretton Woods
institutions, on the basis of a fair and equitable representation of developing countries, in order to
increase the credibility and accountability of these institutions. These reforms must reflect current
realities and should enhance the perspective and voice and participation of dynamic emerging
markets and developing countries, including the poorest.
44. We call for an expeditious completion of the reform process of the World Bank’s
governance and of an accelerated road map for further reforms on voice and participation of
developing countries, with a view to reaching agreement by April 2010, based on an approach that
reflects its development mandate and with the involvement of all shareholders in a transparent,
consultative and inclusive process. We also call for inclusive consultations on further reforms to
improve the responsiveness and adaptability of the World Bank.
45. It is imperative that the reformed World Bank emerge with the requisite technical capacities,
credit facilities and financial resources needed to assist and complement the efforts of developing
countries aimed at achieving their overall development needs.
46. We recognize the importance of strengthening regional development banks, taking into
account the interests of all their member countries. It is also important for them to provide
medium- and long-term assistance to meet the development needs of their clients. We support
measures to enhance the financial and lending capacity of regional development banks.
Furthermore, we recognize the importance of other regional, interregional and subregional
initiatives and arrangements aimed at promoting development, cooperation and solidarity among
their members.
47. We recognize that it is imperative to undertake, as a matter of priority, a comprehensive and
fast-tracked reform of IMF. We look forward to this accelerated progress in order to increase its
credibility and accountability. We acknowledge the agreement to accelerate the implementation of
the package of IMF quota and voice reforms agreed in April 2008. We strongly support
completion of the next quota review, which, based on current trends, is expected to result in an
increase in the quota shares of dynamic economies, particularly in the share of emerging market
and developing countries as a whole, to be completed no later than January 2011, thus enhancing
the legitimacy and effectiveness of the Fund.
48. We reaffirm the need to address the often expressed concern at the extent of representation
of developing countries in the major standard-setting bodies. We therefore welcome, as a step in
the right direction, the expansion of the membership in the Financial Stability Board and the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision and encourage the major standard-setting bodies to further
review their membership promptly while enhancing their effectiveness, with a view to enhancing
the representation of developing countries as appropriate.
49. We agree that the heads and senior leadership of the international financial institutions,
particularly the Bretton Woods institutions, should be appointed through open, transparent and
merit-based selection processes, with due regard to gender equality and geographical and regional
representation.
50. The United Nations and the international financial institutions have complementary
mandates that make the coordination of their actions crucial. Accordingly, we encourage
continued and increasing cooperation, coordination and coherence and exchanges between the
21

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

United Nations and the international financial institutions. In this regard, we believe that this
Conference represents an important step to ensure increased cooperation.
The way forward
51. We have come together to raise our collective understanding of the impacts of the crisis and
to contribute in the fashioning of the global response, in an inclusive manner, with actions at the
national, regional and international levels.
52. We will strive to combine our short-term responses to meet the immediate impact of the
financial and economic crisis, particularly on the most vulnerable countries, with medium- and
long-term responses that necessarily involve the pursuit of development and the review of the
global economic system. In this context, we propose the following course of action:
(a) Strengthen the capacity, effectiveness and efficiency of the United Nations; enhance
the coherence and coordination of policies and actions between the United Nations, international
financial institutions and relevant regional organizations;
(b) Further develop the United Nations development system’s comprehensive crisis
response in support of national development strategies through a coordinated approach by United
Nations funds and programmes, specialized agencies and the international financial institutions at
the country level. The response must continue to be led by programme countries and, in this
context, address vulnerabilities caused or exacerbated by the crisis and further strengthen national
ownership. It should build on steps already taken by the United Nations development system, in
particular at the country level. We urge the international community to ensure adequate support to
the United Nations development system’s crisis response;
(c) Explore ways to strengthen international cooperation in the area of international
migration and development, in order to address the challenges of the current economic and
financial crisis on migration and migrants, taking into account the related work and activities of
the United Nations funds and programmes, regional commissions and specialized agencies and of
other international organizations, such as the International Organization for Migration.
53. We request the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, as well as the
United Nations funds and programmes and specialized agencies, to take full advantage of their
advocacy role to promote the recovery and development of the developing countries, especially
the most vulnerable among them.
54. We invite the General Assembly to establish an ad hoc open-ended working group of the
General Assembly to follow up on the issues contained in the present outcome document, and to
submit a report on the progress of its work to the General Assembly before the end of the sixtyfourth session.
55. We encourage the President of the General Assembly to make the world financial and
economic crisis and its impact on development a main theme of the general debate of the sixtyfourth session of the General Assembly.
56. We request the Economic and Social Council:
(a) To consider the promotion and enhancement of a coordinated response of the United
Nations development system and specialized agencies in the follow-up to and implementation of
this outcome document, in order to advance consistency and coherence in support of consensusbuilding around policies related to the world financial and economic crisis and its impact on
development;
(b) To make recommendations to the General Assembly, in accordance with the Doha
Declaration of 2 December 2008, for a strengthened and more effective and inclusive
intergovernmental process to carry out the financing for development follow-up;

22

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(c) Examine the strengthening of institutional arrangements to promote international
cooperation in tax matters, including the United Nations Committee of Experts on International
Cooperation in Tax Matters;
(d) Review the implementation of the agreements between the United Nations and the
Bretton Woods institutions in collaboration with these institutions, focusing in particular on
enhancing collaboration and cooperation between the United Nations and the Bretton Woods
institutions, as well as on the opportunities for contributing to advancing their respective
mandates;
(e) Consider and make recommendations to the General Assembly regarding the possible
establishment of an ad hoc panel of experts on the world economic and financial crisis and its
impact on development. The panel could provide independent technical expertise and analysis,
which would contribute to informing international action and political decision-making and
fostering constructive dialogues and exchanges among policymakers, academics, institutions and
civil society.
57. We request the Secretary-General to report to the Economic and Social Council on a regular
basis on the work of the High-level Task Force on the Global Food Security Crisis.
58. We invite the International Labour Organization to present the “Global Jobs Pact”, adopted
at the ninety-eighth session of the International Labour Conference, to the substantive session of
the Economic and Social Council in July 2009, which intends to promote a job-intensive recovery
from the crisis, drawing on the decent work agenda, and to shape a pattern for sustainable growth.
59. We encourage the Inter-Parliamentary Union to continue to contribute to the development of
global responses to the crisis.
RESOLUTION 63/304
Adopted at the 97th plenary meeting, on 23 July 2009, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/63/L.61/Rev.1 and Add.1, sponsored by: Portugal, Sudan (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China), United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland

63/304. Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling the report of the Open-ended Ad Hoc Working Group on the Causes of Conflict
and the Promotion of Durable Peace and Sustainable Development in Africa,29 its resolution 53/92
of 7 December 1998 and subsequent annual resolutions, including resolutions 60/223 of
23 December 2005, 61/230 of 22 December 2006 and 62/275 of 11 September 2008, as well as its
resolutions 62/179 of 19 December 2007 on the New Partnership for Africa’s Development and
59/213 of 20 December 2004 on cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union,
Recalling also in this context Security Council resolutions 1809 (2008) of 16 April 2008 on
peace and security in Africa, 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000 and 1820 (2008) of 19 June 2008 on
women and peace and security, 1366 (2001) of 30 August 2001 on the role of the Council in the
prevention of armed conflicts, 1612 (2005) of 26 July 2005 on children and armed conflict,
1625 (2005) of 14 September 2005 on strengthening the effectiveness of the Council’s role in
conflict prevention, particularly in Africa, and 1631 (2005) of 17 October 2005 on cooperation

_______________
29

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 45 (A/56/45).

23

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security,
Recalling further the 2005 World Summit Outcome,30 through which world leaders
reaffirmed their commitment to addressing the special needs of Africa, and its resolution 60/265 of
30 June 2006,
Reaffirming the political declaration on Africa’s development needs adopted at the highlevel meeting on Africa’s development needs on 22 September 2008,31
Recognizing that development, peace, security and human rights are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing,
Stressing that the responsibility for peace and security in Africa, including the capacity to
address the root causes of conflict and to resolve conflicts in a peaceful manner, lies primarily with
African countries, while recognizing the need for support from the international community and
the United Nations, taking into account the responsibilities of the United Nations in this regard,
according to the Charter,
Recognizing, in particular, the importance of strengthening the capacity of the African Union
and subregional organizations to address the causes of conflict in Africa,
Noting that despite the positive trends and advances in obtaining durable peace in Africa, the
conditions required for sustainable development have yet to be consolidated throughout the
continent and that there is therefore an urgent need to continue developing African human and
institutional capacities, particularly in countries emerging from conflict,
Noting also that conflict prevention and the consolidation of peace would benefit from the
coordinated, sustained and integrated efforts of the United Nations system and Member States and
regional and subregional organizations, as well as international and regional financial institutions,
Reaffirming the need to strengthen the synergy between Africa’s economic and social
development programmes and its peace and security agenda,
Underlining the need to address the negative implications of the illegal exploitation of
natural resources in all its aspects for peace, security and development in Africa, and condemning
illicit trade in natural resources that fuels armed conflict, and the illicit trade in and proliferation of
arms, especially small arms and light weapons,
Reaffirming the importance of the Peacebuilding Commission as a dedicated mechanism to
address, within its existing mandate and in an integrated manner, the special needs of countries
emerging from conflict towards recovery, reintegration and reconstruction and to assist them in
laying the foundation for peace and sustainable development, taking into consideration the
principle of national ownership,
1. Takes note of the progress report of the Secretary-General32 on the implementation of
the recommendations contained in his report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa,33 and welcomes recent institutional
developments in addressing such causes and other efforts in conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding undertaken by African countries, African regional organizations
and the United Nations system;
2. Welcomes the progress made, in particular by the African Union and subregional
organizations, in the prevention, management and resolution of conflict and in post-conflict
_______________
30

See resolution 60/1.
See resolution 63/1.
32
A/63/212.
33
A/52/871-S/1998/318.
31

24

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

peacebuilding in a number of African countries, and calls for intensified efforts and a coordinated
approach between national Governments, the African Union, subregional organizations, the
United Nations system and partners with a view to achieving further progress towards the goal of
a conflict-free Africa;
3. Also welcomes the ongoing efforts of the African Union and subregional organizations
to strengthen their peacekeeping capacity and to take the lead in peacekeeping operations on the
continent, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and in close
coordination with the United Nations, through the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, as well as ongoing efforts to develop a continental early warning system, response
capacity, such as the African Standby Force, and enhanced mediation capacity, including through
the Panel of the Wise;
4. Calls upon the United Nations system and Member States to support the peace
consolidation mechanisms and processes, including the Panel of the Wise, the African Union PostConflict Reconstruction and Development Framework and the early warning system, as well as
the operationalization of the African Standby Force;
5. Calls upon Member States to support relevant United Nations bodies, including the
Peacebuilding Commission, and to assist post-conflict countries, at their request, in achieving a
smooth transition from relief to development;
6. Stresses the importance of creating an environment conducive to national
reconciliation and social and economic recovery in countries emerging from conflict;
7. Invites the United Nations and the donor community to increase efforts to support
ongoing regional efforts to build African mediation and negotiation capacity;
8. Calls upon the United Nations system and Member States to support the African
Union in its effort to effectively integrate training in international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, with particular emphasis on the rights of women and children, in
the training of civilian and military personnel of national standby contingents at both the
operational and tactical levels, as set out in article 13 of the Protocol Relating to the Establishment
of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union;34
9. Recognizes that international and regional efforts to prevent conflict and consolidate
peace in Africa should be channelled towards the sustainable development of Africa and the
human and institutional capacity-building of African countries and organizations, particularly in
priority areas identified at the continental level;
10. Recalls the signing of the declaration on enhancing cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in Addis Ababa on 16 November 200635 and the ongoing efforts in
this regard, and underlines the importance of the implementation of the ten-year capacity-building
programme for the African Union, focusing mainly on peace and security, in particular the
operationalization of the African Standby Force, urges all stakeholders to support the full
implementation of the ten-year capacity-building programme, and requests the Secretary-General
to include in his next annual report on the implementation of the recommendations contained in
his 1998 report33 a detailed account of the progress achieved in this regard;
11. Stresses the critical importance of a regional approach to conflict prevention, in
particular with respect to cross-border issues such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, the prevention of illegal exploitation of natural resources and
trafficking in high-value commodities and the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects, and emphasizes in this regard the central role of the African Union and subregional
organizations in addressing such issues;
_______________
34
35

Available from www.africa-union.org.
A/61/630, annex.

25

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

12. Notes with concern that violence against women and children everywhere continues
and often increases, even as armed conflicts draw to an end, urges further progress in the
implementation of policies and guidelines relating to the protection of and assistance to women
and children in conflict and post-conflict situations, and notes the adoption by the Security
Council of its resolution 1820 (2008) on women and peace and security;
13. Also notes with concern the tragic plight of children in conflict situations in Africa, in
particular the phenomenon of child soldiers, as well as other grave violations against children, and
stresses the need for the protection of children in armed conflicts, post-conflict counselling,
rehabilitation and education, with due regard for the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council;
14. Calls for the enhancement of the role of women in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding, consistent with Security Council resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008);
15. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the African Union to ensure the protection of the
rights of women in conflict and post-conflict situations, recalls in this regard the adoption and
entry into force of the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the
Rights of Women in Africa (2003), the Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa (2004)
and the African Union Gender Policy (2009),34 as well as the Southern African Development
Community Protocol on Gender and Development (2008),36 stresses the significance of those
instruments for all countries in Africa in strengthening the role of women in peace and conflict
prevention on the continent, and strongly urges the United Nations and all parties to redouble their
efforts and support in this regard;
16. Calls for the safeguarding of the principle of refugee protection and the resolution of
the plight of refugees, including through support for efforts aimed at addressing the causes of
refugee movement and bringing about the safe and sustainable return and reintegration of those
populations;
17. Welcomes African-led initiatives to strengthen political, economic and corporate
governance, such as the African Peer Review Mechanism, encourages even more African
countries to join this process, and calls upon the United Nations system and Member States to
assist African Member States and regional and subregional organizations in their efforts to
enhance good governance, including the promotion of the rule of law and the holding of free and
fair elections;
18. Recognizes the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in ensuring that national
ownership of the peacebuilding process in countries emerging from conflict is observed and that
nationally identified priorities are at the core of international and regional efforts in post-conflict
peacebuilding in the countries under consideration, notes the important steps taken by the
Commission in engaging with Sierra Leone, Burundi, Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic through integrated peacebuilding strategies, calls for sustained regional and international
commitment to the implementation of those strategies and their design process, recalls the
adoption of the Sierra Leone Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework37 and the Strategic
Frameworks for Peacebuilding in Burundi38 and in Guinea-Bissau,39 and calls for their
implementation;

_______________
36

Available from www.sadc.int.
PBC/2/SLE/1.
38
PBC/1/BDI/4, annex.
39
PBC/3/GNB/3.
37

26

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

19. Takes note of the conclusions of the expert group meeting on “Promoting partnerships
in support of African Peer Review Mechanism implementation”, held in Ethiopia in November
2007,40 and invites the United Nations system and Member States to take those conclusions into
account in support of good governance in Africa;
20. Calls upon the United Nations system and invites Member States to assist African
countries emerging from conflict in their efforts to build national capacities of governance,
including the rehabilitation of the security sector, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants, provision for the safe return of internally displaced persons and
refugees, the launch of income-generation activities, particularly for youth and women, and the
delivery of basic public services;
21. Stresses the importance of effectively addressing challenges that continue to hamper
the achievement of peace, stability and sustainable development on the continent, inter alia, the
food, fuel and financial crises, the increased prevalence of infectious diseases such as HIV/AIDS,
the effects of global warming and climate change, the extremely high rates of youth
unemployment, human trafficking, massive displacements of people, the illegal exploitation of
natural resources, the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, the emergence of terrorist
networks and the increased activity of transnational organized crime, including drug trafficking,
and in this regard encourages the United Nations system and Member States to assist African
countries in effectively addressing these challenges;
22. Calls upon the United Nations system and Member States, as well as bilateral and
multilateral partners, to deliver expeditiously on commitments and to ensure the full and speedy
implementation of the provisions of the political declaration on Africa’s development needs;31
23. Encourages African Governments to strengthen structures and policies to create an
environment conducive to attracting foreign direct investment, calls upon African Member States
and regional and subregional organizations to assist the African countries concerned, at their
request, by enhancing their capacity to devise and improve their national natural resources and
public revenue management structures, and in this regard invites the international community to
assist in that process by providing adequate financial and technical assistance, as well as by
renewing its commitment to efforts aimed at combating the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of those countries in conformity with international law;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth
session a report on the outcome of the review of the recommendations contained in his 1998
report,33 focusing on new and emerging challenges and persistent obstacles, as well as innovative
solutions, gains and accomplishments, in the attainment of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa, with due regard for the complexities of the transition from fragile peace to
long-term sustainable development that many African countries are undergoing;
25. Decides to continue to monitor the implementation of the recommendations contained
in the 1998 report of the Secretary-General;33
26. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session a progress report on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 63/305
Adopted at the 102nd plenary meeting, on 31 July 2009, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/63/L.77, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

_______________
40

Available from www.un.org/africa/osaa/reports.html.

27

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

63/305. Establishment of an ad hoc open-ended working group of the General Assembly to
follow up on the issues contained in the Outcome of the Conference on the World
Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 63/303 of 9 July 2009, by which it endorsed by consensus the
Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on
Development,41
Recognizing the depth of the current financial and economic crisis and the urgency of
follow-up action,
Reaffirming that this process shall continue to be driven by Member States,
1. Decides to establish immediately an ad hoc open-ended working group of the General
Assembly to follow up on the issues contained in the Outcome of the Conference on the World
Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development;41
2. Requests the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group to submit a report on the progress
of its work to the General Assembly before the end of the sixty-fourth session.
RESOLUTION 63/306
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 9 September 2009, without a vote, on the basis of draft
resolution A/63/L.70/Rev.1 and Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, France, Gabon, Germany,
Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Morocco, Niger, Panama, Peru, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine, Viet Nam

63/306. Multilingualism
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the United Nations pursues multilingualism as a means of promoting,
protecting and preserving diversity of languages and cultures globally,
Recognizing also that genuine multilingualism promotes unity in diversity and international
understanding, and recognizing the importance of the capacity to communicate to the peoples of
the world in their own languages, including in formats accessible to persons with disabilities,
Stressing the need for strict observance of the resolutions and rules establishing language
arrangements for the different bodies and organs of the United Nations,
Emphasizing the importance of multilingualism in the activities of the United Nations,
including those linked to public relations and information,
Recalling its resolution 47/135 of 18 December 1992, by which it adopted the Declaration
on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities,
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,42 in particular article 27 thereof,
concerning the rights of persons belonging to ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities,

_______________
41
42

Resolution 63/303, annex.
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

28

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling also its resolutions 2 (I) of 1 February 1946, 2480 B (XXIII) of 21 December
1968, 42/207 C of 11 December 1987, 50/11 of 2 November 1995, 52/23 of 25 November 1997,
54/64 of 6 December 1999, 56/262 of 15 February 2002, 59/309 of 22 June 2005, 61/244 of
22 December 2006, 61/266 of 16 May 2007, 63/100 B of 5 December 2008, 63/248 of
24 December 2008 and 63/280 of 8 May 2009,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General43 and the note by which the
Secretary-General transmitted the final report on the impact of the activities carried out by the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization during the International Year of
Languages (2008);44
2. Also takes note of the appointment of a new Coordinator for Multilingualism, and calls
upon the Secretary-General to continue to develop the informal network of focal points in order to
support the Coordinator;
3. Emphasizes the paramount importance of the equality of the six official languages of
the United Nations;
4. Underlines the need for full implementation of the resolutions establishing language
arrangements for the official languages of the United Nations and the working languages of the
Secretariat;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all language services are given equal
treatment and are provided with equally favourable working conditions and resources, with a view
to achieving maximum quality of those services, with full respect for the specificities of the six
official languages and taking into account their respective workloads;
6. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to complete the task of uploading all
important older United Nations documents onto the United Nations website in all six official
languages on a priority basis, so that those archives are also available to Member States through
that medium;
7. Reiterates that all content-providing offices in the Secretariat should continue their
efforts to translate into all official languages all English-language materials and databases posted
on the United Nations website in the most practical, efficient and cost-effective manner;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure, through the provision of
documentation services and meeting and publishing services under conference management,
including high-quality translation and interpretation, effective multilingual communication among
representatives of Member States in intergovernmental organs and members of expert bodies of
the United Nations equally in all the official languages of the United Nations;
9. Stresses the importance of providing United Nations information, technical assistance
and training materials, whenever possible, in the local languages of the beneficiary countries;
10. Recalls its resolution 63/248, in which it reaffirmed the provisions relating to
conference services in its resolutions on multilingualism;
11. Acknowledges the measures undertaken by the Secretary-General, in accordance with
its resolutions, to address the issue of the replacement of retiring staff in the language services, and
requests the Secretary-General to maintain and intensify those efforts, including through the
strengthening of cooperation with institutions that train language specialists to meet the need in the
six official languages of the United Nations;

_______________
43
44

A/63/338.
A/63/752.

29

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

12. Notes with satisfaction the willingness of the Secretariat to encourage staff members,
in meetings with interpretation services, to use any of the six official languages of which they have
a command;
13. Reiterates with concern its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that the rules
concerning the simultaneous distribution of documents in all six official languages are strictly
respected as regards both the distribution of printed copies and the posting of parliamentary
documentation on the Official Document System and the United Nations website, in keeping with
section III, paragraph 5, of its resolution 55/222 of 23 December 2000;
14. Emphasizes the importance of:
(a) Making appropriate use of all the official languages of the United Nations in all the
activities of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, with the aim of eliminating
the disparity between the use of English and the use of the five other official languages;
(b) Ensuring the full and equitable treatment of all the official languages of the United
Nations in all the activities of the Department of Public Information;
and, in this regard, reaffirms its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that the Department has
appropriate staffing capacity in all the official languages of the United Nations to undertake all its
activities;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure that, in accordance
with their income-generating nature, guided tours at United Nations Headquarters are consistently
available, in particular, in all six official languages of the United Nations;
16. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to develop and maintain
multilingual United Nations websites, from within existing resources, including efforts to keep the
Secretary-General’s web page up to date in all the official languages of the United Nations;
17. Reaffirms the need to achieve full parity among the six official languages on United
Nations websites;
18. Also reaffirms that the United Nations website is an essential tool for Member States,
the media, educational institutions, the general public and non-governmental organizations, and
reiterates the continued need for efforts by the Department of Public Information to maintain and
improve it;
19. Further reaffirms its request to the Secretary-General to ensure, while maintaining an
up-to-date and accurate website, the adequate distribution of financial and human resources within
the Department of Public Information allocated to the United Nations website among all official
languages, taking into consideration the specificity of each official language, on a continuous
basis;
20. Notes with concern that the multilingual development and enrichment of the United
Nations website in several official languages has improved at a much slower rate than expected,
and, in this regard, requests the Department of Public Information, in coordination with contentproviding offices, to improve the actions taken to achieve parity among the six official languages
on the United Nations website, in particular by expediting the filling of current vacant posts in
some sections;
21. Requests the Department of Public Information, in cooperation with the Office of
Information and Communications Technology of the Secretariat, to continue its efforts to ensure
that technological infrastructures and supportive applications fully support Latin, non-Latin and
bidirectional scripts in order to enhance the equality of all official languages on the United Nations
website;
22. Welcomes the cooperative arrangements undertaken by the Department of Public
Information with academic institutions in order to increase the number of web pages available in
some official languages, and requests the Secretary-General, in coordination with content30

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

providing offices, to extend these cooperative arrangements, in a cost-effective manner, to all the
official languages of the United Nations, bearing in mind the necessity of adherence to United
Nations standards and guidelines;
23. Notes with satisfaction the official launch of iSeek in Geneva in the two working
languages of the Secretariat, and encourages the Secretariat to continue its efforts to implement
iSeek at all duty stations as well as to develop and implement cost-neutral measures to provide
Member States with secure access to the information currently accessible only on the Intranet of
the Secretariat;
24. Notes with appreciation the work carried out by the United Nations information
centres, including the United Nations Regional Information Centre, in favour of the publication of
United Nations information materials and the translation of important documents into languages
other than the official languages of the United Nations, with a view to reaching the widest possible
audience and extending the United Nations message to all corners of the world in order to
strengthen international support for the activities of the Organization, and encourages United
Nations information centres to continue their multilingual activities in the interactive and proactive
aspects of their work, especially by arranging seminars and debates to further the spread of
information and the understanding and exchange of views regarding United Nations activities at
the local level;
25. Recalls its resolution 61/244, in which it reaffirmed the need to respect the equality of
the two working languages of the Secretariat, reaffirmed the use of additional working languages
in specific duty stations as mandated, and, in that regard, requested the Secretary-General to
ensure that vacancy announcements specified the need for either of the working languages of the
Secretariat, unless the functions of the post required a specific working language;
26. Also recalls section II, paragraph 17, of its resolution 61/244, in which it
acknowledged that the interaction of the United Nations with the local population in the field was
essential and that language skills constituted an important element of the selection and training
processes, and therefore affirmed that a good command of the official language(s) spoken in the
country of residence should be taken into account as an additional asset during those processes;
27. Takes note of section II.E.2 of the report of the Secretary-General,43 requests the
Secretary-General to continue his ongoing efforts in this regard, and further recalls its resolution
63/280 without prejudice to Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations;
28. Stresses that the employment of staff shall continue to be carried out in strict
accordance with Article 101 of the Charter and in line with the relevant provisions of General
Assembly resolutions;
29. Also stresses that the promotion of staff in the Professional and higher categories shall
be carried out in strict accordance with Article 101 of the Charter and in line with the provisions of
resolution 2480 B (XXIII) and the relevant provisions of resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001;
30. Encourages United Nations staff members to continue actively to use existing training
facilities to acquire and enhance their proficiency in one or more of the official languages of the
United Nations;
31. Recalls that linguistic diversity is an important element of cultural diversity, and takes
note of the entry into force, on 18 March 2007, of the Convention on the Protection and
Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions;45
32. Also recalls paragraph 25 (a) of its resolution 61/266, and welcomes the activities of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Member States, the United
Nations system and all other participating bodies aimed at fostering respect for and the promotion
_______________
45

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Thirty-third
Session, Paris, 3–21 October 2005, vol.1 and corrigenda: Resolutions, chap. V, resolution 41.

31

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and protection of all languages, in particular endangered ones, linguistic diversity and
multilingualism;
33. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth
session a comprehensive report on the full implementation of its resolutions on multilingualism;
34. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fifth session the item entitled
“Multilingualism”.
RESOLUTION 63/307
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 9 September 2009, by a recorded vote of 48 to 19, with
78 abstentions,* on the basis of draft resolution A/63/L.79, sponsored by Georgia
* In favour: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Saint Lucia,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Vanuatu
Against: Algeria, Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Ethiopia, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Cyprus, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guyana, Indonesia, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, South Africa,
Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Yemen, Zambia

63/307. Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and
the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions on the protection of and assistance to internally
displaced persons, including its resolutions 62/153 of 18 December 2007 and 62/249 of 15 May
2008,
Recalling also all relevant Security Council resolutions on Georgia relating to the need for
all parties to work towards a comprehensive peace and the return of internally displaced persons
and refugees to their places of origin, and stressing the importance of their full and timely
implementation,
Recognizing the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement46 as the key international
framework for the protection of internally displaced persons,
Concerned by forced demographic changes resulting from the conflicts in Georgia,
Concerned also by the humanitarian situation caused by armed conflict in August 2008,
which resulted in the further forced displacement of civilians,
Mindful of the urgent need to find a solution to the problems related to forced displacement
in Georgia,

_______________
46

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.

32

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Underlining the importance of the discussions that commenced in Geneva on 15 October
2008 and of continuing to address the issue of the voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered return
of internally displaced persons and refugees on the basis of internationally recognized principles
and conflict-settlement practices,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 62/249,47
1. Recognizes the right of return of all internally displaced persons and refugees and their
descendants, regardless of ethnicity, to their homes throughout Georgia, including in Abkhazia and
South Ossetia;
2. Stresses the need to respect the property rights of all internally displaced persons and
refugees affected by the conflicts in Georgia and to refrain from obtaining property in violation of
those rights;
3.

Reaffirms the unacceptability of forced demographic changes;

4. Underlines the urgent need for unimpeded access for humanitarian activities to all
internally displaced persons, refugees and other persons residing in all conflict-affected areas
throughout Georgia;
5. Calls upon all participants in the Geneva discussions to intensify their efforts to
establish a durable peace, to commit to enhanced confidence-building measures and to take
immediate steps to ensure respect for human rights and create favourable security conditions
conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered return of all internally displaced
persons and refugees to their places of origin;
6. Underlines the need for the development of a timetable to ensure the voluntary, safe,
dignified and unhindered return of all internally displaced persons and refugees affected by the
conflicts in Georgia to their homes;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session a comprehensive report on the implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for international peace, security and
development”.
RESOLUTION 63/308
Adopted at the 105th plenary meeting, on 14 September 2009, without a vote, on the basis of draft
resolution A/63/L.80/Rev.1 and Add.1, as orally revised, sponsored by: Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Swaziland, Sweden, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay

63/308. The responsibility to protect
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its respect for the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,48 especially paragraphs 138 and 139 thereof,
_______________
47
48

A/63/950.
See resolution 60/1.

33

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General49 and of the timely and productive
debate organized by the President of the General Assembly on the responsibility to protect, held
on 21, 23, 24 and 28 July 2009,50 with full participation by Member States;
2.

Decides to continue its consideration of the responsibility to protect.
RESOLUTION 63/309

Adopted at the 105th plenary meeting, on 14 September 2009, without a vote, on the basis of the report
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the General Assembly (A/63/959)

63/309. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions relating to the revitalization of its work, including
resolutions 46/77 of 12 December 1991, 47/233 of 17 August 1993, 48/264 of 29 July 1994,
51/241 of 31 July 1997, 52/163 of 15 December 1997, 55/14 of 3 November 2000, 55/285 of
7 September 2001, 56/509 of 8 July 2002, 57/300 of 20 December 2002, 57/301 of 13 March
2003, 58/126 of 19 December 2003, 58/316 of 1 July 2004, 59/313 of 12 September 2005, 60/286
of 8 September 2006, 61/292 of 2 August 2007 and 62/276 of 15 September 2008,
Stressing the importance of implementing resolutions on the revitalization of its work,
Recalling the role of the General Assembly in addressing issues of peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing the need to further enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of
the General Assembly,
Recalling paragraph 18 of the annex to its resolution 60/286 on the selection of the
Secretary-General,
Noting the role of the Office of the President of the General Assembly and the importance of
providing adequate resources for its substantive work,
Noting also the current practice of balloting observed by the General Assembly,
1. Welcomes the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
General Assembly;51
2. Decides to establish, at its sixty-fourth session, an ad hoc working group on the
revitalization of the General Assembly, open to all Member States:
(a) To identify further ways to enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of
the Assembly, inter alia, by building on previous resolutions;
(b)

To submit a report thereon to the Assembly at its sixty-fourth session;

_______________
49

A/63/677.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Plenary Meetings, 96th to 101st meetings
(A/63/PV.96–101), and corrigenda.
51
A/63/959.
50

34

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Selection of the Secretary-General
3. Affirms its commitment to continuing, in the Ad Hoc Working Group at the sixtyfourth session, its consideration of the revitalization of the role of the General Assembly in the
selection and appointment of the Secretary-General in accordance with Article 97 of the Charter;
Role and authority of the General Assembly
4. Welcomes the holding of interactive thematic debates on current issues of critical
importance to the international community in the General Assembly, and invites the President of
the Assembly to continue with this practice in consultation with Member States;
5. Notes the importance of strengthening the institutional memory of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly, and invites the President at the sixty-fourth session to submit
his views to the Ad Hoc Working Group at the sixty-fourth session for its consideration;
Working methods
6. Requests the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, in
consultation with Member States, to make proposals for the further biennialization,
triennialization, clustering and elimination of items on the agenda of the Assembly, taking into
account the relevant recommendations of the Ad Hoc Working Group, including the introduction
of a sunset clause;
7. Calls upon Member States to respond to the annual review of the Meetings and
Publishing Division of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management on the
distribution of printed documents to Missions, bearing in mind the cost savings, as well as the
reduced environmental impact, which may accrue from this exercise, in order to improve the
quality and distribution of those documents;
8. Invites the Committee on Information at its thirty-second session to consider the
sections on media and visibility in the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group, in particular those
that call for less rigid restrictions and better access to people and information, and requests the
Committee on Information to consider recommending measures for the operationalization and
implementation of aspects thereof in its report to the Assembly through the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) at its sixty-fifth session;
9. Decides that the Ad Hoc Working Group, during the sixty-fourth session, shall further
consider options for more time-effective, efficient and secure balloting, reiterating the need to
ascertain the credibility, reliability and confidentiality of the balloting process.
RESOLUTION 63/310
Adopted at the 105th plenary meeting, on 14 September 2009, without a vote, on the basis of draft
resolution A/63/L.101 and Add.1, sponsored by: Algeria (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Group of African States), Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

63/310. Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations,52
_______________
52

A/63/228-S/2008/531 and Corr.1.

35

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as its
resolutions 55/218 of 21 December 2000, 56/48 of 7 December 2001, 57/48 of 21 November
2002, 59/213 of 20 December 2004 and 61/296 of 17 September 2007,
Recalling also the principles enshrined in the Constitutive Act of the African Union adopted
in 2000 in Lomé,53
Recalling further the decisions and declarations adopted by the Assembly of the African
Union at all its ordinary and extraordinary sessions,
Welcoming the adoption of the framework for the ten-year capacity-building programme for
the African Union set out in the declaration on enhancing United Nations-African Union
cooperation, signed in Addis Ababa on 16 November 2006 by the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission,54 which highlights the key areas for cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations,
Acknowledging the decision of the African Union Peace and Security Council at its sixtyeighth meeting, held on 14 December 2006, on the establishment of a coordination and
consultation mechanism between the African Union Peace and Security Council and the United
Nations Security Council, welcoming the June 2007 agreement to hold joint meetings at least
once a year,55 and taking note of the third consultative meeting held in July 2009 in Addis Ababa,
Recalling the adoption of the African Union Non-Aggression and Common Defence Pact at
the fourth ordinary session of the Assembly of the African Union, as an instrument to reinforce
cooperation among States members of the African Union in the areas of defence and security and
which, in particular, can contribute to the work of the African Union Peace and Security Council
and its cooperation with the United Nations,
Welcoming, while taking into account the role of the General Assembly, the statements by
the President of the Security Council of 19 November 2004 on the institutional relationship with
the African Union,56 of 28 March 2007 on the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union, in the maintenance of international peace
and security,57 and of 18 March 2009 on peace and security in Africa,58 as well as Security
Council resolution 1809 (2008) of 16 April 2008,
Welcoming also the efforts to enhance cooperation between the peace and security structures
of the United Nations and the African Union in the realm of conflict prevention and resolution,
crisis management, peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding in Africa, including efforts to
implement the African Union Framework for Post-conflict Reconstruction and Development,
Acknowledging the significant contribution of the African Union towards the prevention and
combating of terrorism, and noting the centrality of the international partnership and cooperation
between the African Union, the relevant United Nations organs and the wider international
community in the global fight against terrorism,
Recognizing the need to enhance the strategic relationship between the United Nations and
the African Union, as a basis for a more effective partnership embodying the principles of mutual
respect when addressing issues of mutual concern,
Welcoming the efforts of the African Union and the United Nations, together with other
international partners, to provide effective support for peacekeeping missions undertaken in
_______________
53

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2158, No. 37733.
A/61/630, annex.
55
See S/2007/386, annex.
56
S/PRST/2004/44; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2004–31 July 2005.
57
S/PRST/2007/7; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2006–31 July 2007.
58
S/PRST/2009/3; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2008–31 July 2009.
54

36

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter by regional organizations, in particular the African
Union, with reference to start-up funding, equipment, logistics and long-term capacity-building, as
reflected in Security Council resolution 1809 (2008),
Bearing in mind the United Nations Declaration on the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development,59 and various relevant resolutions adopted since 2002,60
Recognizing the pivotal need to bring Africa into the mainstream of the global economy and
to strengthen the global partnership to address the special development needs of Africa,
particularly the eradication of poverty, and in this regard, welcoming the political declaration
adopted on 22 September 2008 on the occasion of the high-level meeting on the theme “Africa’s
development needs: state of implementation of various commitments, challenges and the way
forward”,61 and the importance of its implementation and the responsibilities of the States
members of the African Union and the United Nations in this regard, as well as the
implementation of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development,62
Stressing the need for extending the scope of cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union in the area of combating the illegal exploitation of natural resources in Africa,
Emphasizing the importance of the effective, coordinated and integrated implementation of
the United Nations Millennium Declaration,63 the Doha Development Agenda,64 the Monterrey
Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development,65 the Doha Declaration
on Financing for Development,66 the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”)67 and the 2005 World Summit
Outcome,68
Emphasizing also the importance of the 1995 World Summit for Social Development, at
which the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development was adopted,69 and the 1995 Fourth
World Conference on Women, and stressing to all Member States the importance of the full and
effective implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,70 the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population and Development71 and the outcome of the
twenty-third special session of the General Assembly,72
Recalling the African Union Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption and the
Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa,
adopted in Maputo on 11 July 2003,

_______________
59

See resolution 57/2.
Resolutions 57/7, 58/233, 59/254, 60/222 and 61/229.
61
See resolution 63/1.
62
A/57/304, annex.
63
See resolution 55/2.
64
See A/C.2/56/7, annex.
65
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
66
Resolution 63/239, annex.
67
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
68
See resolution 60/1.
69
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
70
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
71
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
72
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
60

37

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recommitting to improving the effectiveness of development assistance, including the
fundamental principles of ownership, alignment, harmonization, managing for results and mutual
accountability, calling for a continuing dialogue to improve the effectiveness of aid, including the
full implementation of the Accra Agenda for Action73 by countries and organizations that commit
to it,
Acknowledging the contribution of the United Nations Liaison Office at Addis Ababa in
strengthening coordination and cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union, as
well as the need to consolidate it so as to enhance its performance in view of the expanding scope
of cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union,
Convinced that strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union will contribute to the advancement of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
the principles of the Constitutive Act of the African Union and the development of Africa,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General,52 calls for the
implementation of the declaration on enhancing United Nations-African Union cooperation:
framework for the ten-year capacity-building programme for the African Union,54 and in this
regard requests the Secretary-General to continue to take appropriate measures to strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations Secretariat and to implement its mandate with respect to meeting
the special needs of Africa, in accordance with the established United Nations procedures;
2. Recalls the primary responsibility of the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security, and requests the United Nations system to intensify its assistance
to the African Union, as appropriate, in strengthening the institutional and operational capacity of
its Peace and Security Council, and in coordinating with other international partners when needed;
3. Emphasizes the need to pursue the ongoing measures to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of United Nations and African Union cooperation, recommends the continued
improvement of the field presence of the United Nations Secretariat at the headquarters of the
African Union, recognizing the need to ensure an appropriate level of representation at the United
Nations Liaison Office at Addis Ababa commensurate with the increasing political integration of
the African Union, the responsibilities for implementing all aspects of the ten-year capacitybuilding programme, coordinating the United Nations system in existing and emerging areas of
cooperation in peace and security and political and humanitarian affairs, in order to enhance the
strategic and operational partnership between the United Nations and the African Union and its
subregions;
4. Recognizes the need to enhance the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
financing for regional organizations when they undertake peacekeeping under a United Nations
mandate, and looks forward to the report to be submitted by the Secretary-General pursuant to the
statement by the President of the Security Council of 18 March 2009;58
5. Stresses the urgent need for the United Nations and the African Union to develop close
cooperation and concrete programmes aimed at addressing the problems posed by illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons and anti-personnel mines, within the framework of the
relevant declarations and resolutions adopted by the two organizations;
6. Calls upon the United Nations system, the African Union and the international
community to intensify their cooperation in the global fight against terrorism through the
implementation of the relevant international and regional treaties and protocols and, in particular,
the African Plan of Action adopted in Algiers on 14 September 2002, as well as their support for
the operation of the African Centre for Studies and Research on Terrorism inaugurated in Algiers
in October 2004;

_______________
73

A/63/539, annex.

38

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

7. Calls upon the United Nations system to intensify its efforts, in collaboration with the
African Union, in combating the illegal exploitation of natural resources, particularly in conflict
areas, in accordance with relevant resolutions and decisions of the United Nations and the African
Union;
8. Also calls upon the United Nations system to support the African Union and its
member States in their efforts to implement the internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals;
9. Stresses the need for closer cooperation and coordination between the United Nations
system and the African Union, in accordance with the Cooperation Agreement74 as well as other
relevant memorandums of understanding between the two organizations, particularly in the
implementation of the commitments contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration63
and the 2005 World Summit Outcome68 and as regards achieving the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, at the national, subregional
and regional levels;
10. Encourages the deepening of collaboration between the African Union, recalling its
Framework for Post-conflict Reconstruction and Development, and the Peacebuilding
Commission on enhancing international support for African countries on the agenda of the
Commission, and reiterates the need for enhanced coordination and consultations between the
Commission and the African Union on assistance for countries emerging from conflict;
11. Invites the Secretary-General to request all relevant United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes to intensify their efforts to support cooperation with the African Union, including
through the implementation of the protocols to the Constitutive Act of the African Union53 and the
Treaty establishing the African Economic Community,75 and to assist in harmonizing the
programmes of the African Union with those of the African regional economic communities with
a view to enhancing regional economic cooperation and integration;
12. Encourages the United Nations and the African Union to pursue joint initiatives for
partnerships in Africa through, inter alia, the United Nations Office for Partnerships and Global
Compact;
13. Encourages the United Nations system to effectively support the efforts of the African
Union by urging the international community to strive for the successful and timely completion of
the Doha round of trade negotiations, including negotiations aimed at substantial improvements in
areas such as trade-related measures, including market access and regional economic integration,
to promote sustainable growth in Africa;
14. Invites the United Nations system to enhance its support for African countries in their
efforts to implement the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;67
15. Encourages the United Nations to take special measures to address the challenges of
poverty eradication through the United Nations funds, programmes and agencies, noting the
importance of addressing, inter alia, debt cancellation, enhanced official development assistance,
increases in flows of foreign direct investment and voluntary transfer of technology, the World
Food Programme, the agriculture partnership to combat hunger, universal primary education
initiatives, gender equality programmes, improved maternal health programmes, and HIV/AIDS
education;
16. Calls upon the United Nations system to accelerate the implementation of the Plan of
Action contained in the document entitled “A world fit for children”, adopted on 10 May 2002 at
the twenty-seventh special session of the General Assembly on children,76 and to provide
_______________
74

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1580, No. 1044.
A/46/651, annex.
76
Resolution S-27/2, annex.
75

39

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

assistance, as appropriate, to the African Union and its member States in this regard, welcomes the
ongoing efforts of the African Union to ensure the protection of the rights of children, and recalls
in this regard the adoption of the Call for accelerated action on the implementation of the Plan of
Action towards Africa Fit for Children (2008–2012);77
17. Calls upon the United Nations system and the African Union to develop a coherent
and effective strategy, including through joint programmes and activities, for the promotion and
protection of human rights in Africa, within the framework of the implementation of regional and
international treaties, resolutions and plans of action adopted by the two organizations;
18. Urges the United Nations system to increase its support for Africa in the
implementation of the declaration of the extraordinary summit meeting of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity on HIV/AIDS, malaria,
tuberculosis and other related infectious diseases, held in Abuja in April 2001,78 and the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS79 so as to arrest the spread of these diseases, inter alia,
through sound capacity-building in human resources;
19. Also urges the United Nations system to continue to implement General Assembly
resolutions 58/149 of 22 December 2003 and 63/149 of 18 December 2008, on assistance to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa, and effectively to support African countries in
their efforts to incorporate the problems of refugees into national and regional development plans;
20. Requests the United Nations system to cooperate with the African Union and its
member States in the implementation of appropriate policies for the promotion of the culture of
democracy, good governance, respect for human rights and the rule of law and the strengthening
of democratic institutions;
21. Calls upon the Secretary-General and the international community to fulfil the
commitments they undertook during the high-level event on the Millennium Development Goals,
held in New York on 25 September 2008;
22. Welcomes and supports the ongoing efforts of the African Union to support gender
equality, the empowerment of women and social development, and recalls in this regard the
declaration of the African Women’s Decade by the Assembly of the African Union in February
2009,80 and the African Union Gender Policy,81 the Social Policy Framework for Africa82 and the
Windhoek Declaration on Social Development,82 as adopted by the Executive Council of the
African Union in January 2009;
23. Recalls its resolution 63/250 of 24 December 2008 on human resources management,
and urges the Secretary-General to encourage the United Nations system, within existing rules and
regulations, to work towards ensuring the effective and equitable representation of African men
and women at senior and policy levels at the respective headquarters of its organizations and in
their regional fields of operation;
24. Calls upon the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, working in collaboration, to review every two years the progress made in the
cooperation between the two organizations, and requests the Secretary-General to include the
results of the review in his next report;

_______________
77

A/62/653, annex.
Organization of African Unity, document OAU/SPS/ABUJA/3.
79
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
80
See A/63/848, annex II, decision Assembly/AU/Dec.229 (XII).
81
Ibid., annex I, decision EX.CL/Dec.487 (XIV).
82
Ibid., decision EX.CL/Dec.473 (XIV).
78

40

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

25. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 63/311
Adopted at the 105th plenary meeting, on 14 September 2009, without a vote, on the basis of draft
resolution A/63/L.103, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

63/311. System-wide coherence
The General Assembly,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,83
Recalling also its resolution 62/208 of 19 December 2007 on the triennial comprehensive
policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system,
Recalling further its resolution 62/277 of 15 September 2008 on system-wide coherence,
Recalling the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women,84 the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,85 and the outcome of the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly,86
Reaffirming the importance of the comprehensive policy review of operational activities for
development of the United Nations system, through which the General Assembly establishes key
system-wide policy orientations for the development cooperation and country-level modalities of
the United Nations system,
Recalling the role of the Economic and Social Council in providing coordination and
guidance to the United Nations system to ensure that those policy orientations are implemented on
a system-wide basis in accordance with resolution 62/208 and other relevant resolutions,
Having considered the discussion notes on “Further details on institutional options for
strengthening the institutional arrangements for support of gender equality and the empowerment
of women” of 5 March 2009, on “Strengthening governance of operational activities for
development of the United Nations system for enhanced system-wide coherence” of 15 April
2009 and on “Strengthening the system-wide funding architecture of operational activities of the
United Nations for development” of 3 May 2009, which the Deputy Secretary-General, on behalf
of the Secretary-General, provided to the President of the General Assembly in response to a
request from Member States,
Strengthening the institutional arrangements for support of gender equality and the
empowerment of women
1. Strongly supports the consolidation of the Office of the Special Adviser on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, the Division for the Advancement of Women, the United
Nations Development Fund for Women and the United Nations International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women, into a composite entity, taking into account the
existing mandates;
2. Supports that the composite entity shall be led by an Under-Secretary-General, who
will report directly to the Secretary-General, to be appointed by the Secretary-General, in
_______________
83

See resolution 60/1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
85
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
86
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
84

41

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

consultation with Member States, on the basis of equitable geographical representation and gender
balance;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to produce, for the consideration of the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, a comprehensive proposal specifying, inter alia, the mission
statement of the composite entity, the organizational arrangements, including an organizational
chart, funding and the executive board to oversee its operational activities in order to commence
intergovernmental negotiations;
Strengthening governance of operational activities for development of the United Nations
system for enhanced system-wide coherence
4. Reaffirms that the strengthening of the governance of operational activities for
development of the United Nations system should focus on enhancing existing intergovernmental
bodies with the purpose of making the United Nations development system more efficient and
effective in its support to developing countries for the achievement of the internationally agreed
development goals;
5. Underscores that the governance of operational activities for development should be
transparent and inclusive and should support national ownership and national development
strategies;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination, to propose to the General Assembly, at its sixty-fourth session,
actionable proposals for the further improvement of the governance of the operational activities
for development;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the members of United
Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination and the United Nations Development
Group, to propose to the General Assembly, at its sixty-fourth session, modalities for the
submission and approval of common country programmes on a voluntary basis, bearing in mind
the importance of national ownership and effective intergovernmental oversight of the
development process;
8. Reaffirms the importance of strengthening evaluation as a United Nations system
function and the guidance contained to this effect in its resolution 62/208, and in this regard
requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the members of the United Nations System
Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to propose to the General Assembly, at its sixty-fourth
session, modalities for the establishment of an independent system-wide evaluation mechanism to
assess system-wide efficiency, effectiveness and performance, bearing in mind the evaluation
functions carried out by respective United Nations organizations, the Joint Inspection Unit and the
United Nations Evaluation Group;
9. Urges the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination and the
United Nations Development Group to enhance the transparency of their activities through regular
briefings to the General Assembly and through regular reports and effective interaction with the
Economic and Social Council and relevant intergovernmental bodies;
10. Encourages continued and increased cooperation, coordination and coherence and
exchanges between the United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions, and requests the
Secretary-General, in consultation with the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, to regularly apprise the General Assembly of progress made in this regard as part of
the triennial and quadrennial comprehensive policy review reporting process;
Improving the funding system of operational activities for development of the United
Nations system for enhanced system-wide coherence
11. Emphasizes that increasing financial contributions to the United Nations development
system is key to achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including the
42

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Millennium Development Goals, and in this regard recognizes the mutually reinforcing links
between the increased effectiveness, efficiency and coherence of the United Nations development
system, achieving concrete results in assisting developing countries in eradicating poverty and
achieving sustained economic growth and sustainable development through operational activities
for development and the overall resourcing of the United Nations development system;
12. Stresses that core resources, because of their untied nature, continue to be the bedrock
of the operational activities for development of the United Nations system;
13. Notes with concern the continuing imbalance between core and non-core resources
received by the operational activities for development of the United Nations system and the
potential negative impact of non-core funding on the coordination and effectiveness of operational
activities for development at the country level, while recognizing that thematic trust funds, multidonor trust funds and other voluntary non-earmarked funding mechanisms linked to organizationspecific funding frameworks and strategies, as established by the respective governing bodies,
constitute some of the funding modalities that are complementary to regular budgets;
14. Urges donor countries and other countries in a position to do so to substantially
increase their voluntary contributions to the core/regular budgets of the United Nations
development system, in particular its funds, programmes and specialized agencies, to contribute
on a multi-year basis, in a sustained and predictable manner, and to undertake voluntary
commitments to provide a greater share of system-wide contributions to operational activities for
development as core/regular resources;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his comprehensive statistical analysis of
the financing of operational activities for development further analysis and actionable proposals
on the current situation and perspectives in respect of core and non-core funding for the United
Nations development system, notably the implications of various forms of non-core funding, in
terms of predictability, country ownership and the implementation of intergovernmental mandates;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to create a central repository of information on
operational activities for development, including disaggregated statistics on all funding sources
and expenditures, building on the his comprehensive statistical analysis of the financing of
operational activities for development, and to ensure appropriate and user-friendly online access
and regular updating of the information contained therein;
“Delivering as one”
17. Acknowledges the interim assessments of the progress made and the challenges
remaining in efforts to increase coherence in country-level programming, including in the
“programme country pilots”;
18. Encourages the Secretary-General to support “programme country pilot” countries to
undertake expeditiously their own country-led evaluations with the participation of relevant
stakeholders and with the technical support of the United Nations Evaluation Group;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to urgently undertake arrangements for an independent
evaluation of lessons learned from the above efforts, as requested in resolution 62/208, and to
inform the General Assembly of the modalities and terms of reference of this independent
evaluation at its sixty-fourth session;
20. Underscores that the independent evaluation should be guided by the principles
contained in resolution 62/208 with regard to national ownership and leadership and be conducted
in the context of system-wide norms and standards, that it should be based on an inclusive,
transparent, objective and independent approach, and that its outcome should be submitted to the
General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session;

43

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Harmonization of business practices
21. Calls upon the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the members of the United
Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to continue progress in the
simplification and harmonization of business practices within the United Nations development
system, and requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the System Chief Executives
Board, to regularly inform the Economic and Social Council about progress being made and
challenges encountered in this regard and to refer any matter requiring an intergovernmental
decision to the relevant intergovernmental bodies;
The way forward
22. Decides to continue the intergovernmental work of the General Assembly on systemwide coherence on the issues addressed in the present resolution during the sixty-fourth session,
with a view to achieving further substantive action in all areas, and resolves, at the conclusion of
its entire process on system-wide coherence, to review and take stock of all its prior actions and
deliberations in a single resolution or decision
.

44

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Contents
Resolution
No.

63/280.

Title

Page

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects ........................................ 46

45

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 63/280
Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 8 May 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/402/Add.1,para. 6)1

63/280. Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all
their aspects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling in particular its resolution 62/273 of 11 September 2008,
Affirming that the efforts of the United Nations in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
including through its peacekeeping operations, are indispensable,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to continue to improve its capabilities in the
field of peacekeeping and to enhance the effective and efficient deployment of its peacekeeping
operations,
Considering the contribution that all States Members of the United Nations make to
peacekeeping,
Noting the widespread interest in contributing to the work of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations expressed by Member States, in particular troop-contributing countries,
Bearing in mind the continuous necessity of preserving the efficiency and strengthening the
effectiveness of the work of the Special Committee,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations;2

2. Endorses the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee,
contained in paragraphs 16 to 180 of its report;
3. Urges Member States, the Secretariat and relevant organs of the United Nations to take
all necessary steps to implement the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special
Committee;
4. Reiterates that those Member States that become personnel contributors to the United
Nations peacekeeping operations in years to come or participate in the future in the Special
Committee for three consecutive years as observers shall, upon request in writing to the Chairman
of the Special Committee, become members at the following session of the Special Committee;
5. Decides that the Special Committee, in accordance with its mandate, shall continue its
efforts for a comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects and shall review the implementation of its previous proposals and consider any new
proposals so as to enhance the capacity of the United Nations to fulfil its responsibilities in this
field;
6. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”.

_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Canada, Egypt,
Japan, Nigeria and Poland.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/63/19).

46

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee*
Contents
Resolution
No.

Title

Page

*

63/246.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors................................................. 49
Resolution B .................................................................................................................................................................. 49

63/257.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea.................................................................................... 50
Resolution B ................................................................................................................................................... 50

63/258.

Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.................................................................. 51
Resolution B ................................................................................................................................................... 51

63/268.

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009............................................................ 55

63/269.

Information and communications technology, disaster recovery and business continuity for the United Nations:
arrangements for the secondary data centre at Headquarters ........................................................................................... 58

63/270.

Capital master plan......................................................................................................................................................... 59

63/271.

Amendments to the Staff Regulations............................................................................................................................. 66

63/272.

Report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2008 and programme of work for 2009 .............................................................. 68

63/273.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan ................................................................................................... 70
Resolution A ................................................................................................................................................... 70
Resolution B ................................................................................................................................................... 71

63/274.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad ...................................................... 75
Resolution A ................................................................................................................................................... 75
Resolution B ................................................................................................................................................... 76

63/275.

Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)............................................................ 79
Resolution A ................................................................................................................................................... 79
Resolution B ................................................................................................................................................... 81

63/276.

Accountability framework, enterprise risk management and internal control framework, and results-based
management framework................................................................................................................................................. 83

63/283.

Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the
General Assembly and/or the Security Council............................................................................................................... 86

63/284.

Timely submission of documents ................................................................................................................................... 86

63/285.

Rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries.................................................................................................. 87

63/286.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy.................................................................................... 88

63/287.

Support account for peacekeeping operations................................................................................................................. 89

63/288.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi................................................................................................... 97

_______________
*

Unless otherwise stated, the draft resolutions recommended in the reports were submitted by the Chairman or another officer of the Bureau of the
Committee.

47

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Resolution
No.

Title

Page

63/289.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire........................................................................................... 98

63/290.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus................................................................................... 101

63/291.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo................................ 104

63/292.

Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste............................................................................. 107

63/293.

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia......................................................................................111

63/294.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti......................................................................................113

63/295.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.................................................................116

63/296.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia.......................................................................................................119

63/297.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force................................................................................. 122

63/298.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon .......................................................................................... 125

63/299.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone............................................................................................. 129

63/300.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara ......................................................... 130

48

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 63/246 B
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/637/Add.1, para. 6)

63/246. Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of
Auditors
B1
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 62/223 B of 20 June 2008 and 63/246 A of 24 December 2008,
Having considered the financial report and audited financial statements for the twelvemonth period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 and the report of the Board of Auditors on the
United Nations peacekeeping operations,2 the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the report of the Board of Auditors on the accounts of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended 30 June 20083 and the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of
Auditors concerning the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended
30 June 2008,4
1. Accepts the audited financial statements of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;2
2. Takes note of the observations and endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Board of Auditors;5
3. Reiterates that the issue of outstanding assessed contributions is a policy matter of the
General Assembly, and urges all Member States to make every possible effort to ensure the
payment of their assessed contributions in full and on time;
4. Takes note of the observations and endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;3
5. Commends the Board of Auditors for the quality of its report and the streamlined
format thereof;
6. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning the United Nations peacekeeping
operations for the financial period ended 30 June 2008;4
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors, including those relating to expendable and nonexpendable property, and the related recommendations of the Advisory Committee in a prompt
and timely manner, subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to indicate an expected time frame for
the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors and the priorities for their
implementation, including the office holders to be held accountable and measures taken in that
regard;

_______________
1

Resolution 63/246, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/63/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 63/246 A.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 5 (A/63/5), vol. II.
3
A/63/746, sect. III.
4
A/63/784.
5
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 5 (A/63/5), vol. II, chap. II.

49

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

9. Further requests the Secretary-General to provide, in the next report on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, a full explanation for the delays in the implementation of all outstanding
recommendations of the Board, the root causes of the recurring issues and the measures to be
taken.
RESOLUTION 63/257 B
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/646/Add.2, para. 6)

63/257. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
B6
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea7 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,8
Recalling Security Council resolution 1312 (2000) of 31 July 2000, by which the Council
established the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the last of which was resolution
1798 (2008) of 30 January 2008, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission until
31 July 2008,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1827 (2008) of 30 July 2008, by which the
Council terminated the mandate of the Mission effective 31 July 2008,
Recalling further its resolution 55/237 of 23 December 2000 on the financing of the Mission
and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 63/257 A of
24 December 2008,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea as at 30 April 2009, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 17.5 million
United States dollars, representing some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only fifty-six Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,8 subject to the provisions of the
present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;

_______________
6

Resolution 63/257, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/63/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 63/257 A.
7
A/63/562.
8
A/63/746/Add.12.

50

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;7
5. Also takes note of the unencumbered balance and other income in the Special Account
for the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea in the amount of 17,611,400 dollars in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008;
6. Decides that Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission shall be credited with their respective share of the net cash available in the Special
Account for the Mission in the amount of 2,875,000 dollars as at 30 April 2009 from the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 17,611,400 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 61/243
of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008, as set out in its
resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
7. Encourages Member States that are owed credits referred to in paragraph 6 above to
apply those credits to any accounts where they have outstanding assessed contributions;
8. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the net
cash available in the Special Account for the Mission in the amount of 2,875,000 dollars as at
30 April 2009 from the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 17,611,400
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the scheme set
out in paragraph 6 above;
9. Also decides to defer until its sixty-fourth session a decision on the treatment of the
balance of 14,736,400 dollars, and requests the Secretary-General to report to it at the second part
of its resumed sixty-fourth session on the updated financial position of the Mission;
10. Further decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea”.
RESOLUTION 63/258 B
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/647/Add.1, para. 6)

63/258. Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
B9
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur10 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,11 the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the audit of the use of extraordinary measures for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur12 and the related note by the Secretary-General,13

_______________
9

Resolution 63/258, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/63/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 63/258 A.
10
A/63/717.
11
A/63/746/Add.4.
12
A/63/668.
13
A/63/668/Add.1.

51

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 1769 (2007) of 31 July 2007, by which the Council
established the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur for an initial period of
twelve months as from 31 July 2007, and Council resolution 1828 (2008) of 31 July 2008, by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation until 31 July 2009,
Recalling also its resolution 62/232 A of 22 December 2007 on the financing of the
Operation and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 63/258 A of
24 December 2008,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of
11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Operation with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
Noting the hybrid nature of the Operation, and in that regard stressing the importance of
ensuring full coordination of efforts between the African Union and the United Nations at the
strategic level, unity of command at the operational level and clear delegation of authority and
accountability lines,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Operation with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur as at 30 April 2009, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
200.0 million United States dollars, representing some 8 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only thirty-seven Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Operation in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Operation;
9. Acknowledges with appreciation that the use of the logistics hub in Entebbe, Uganda,
has been cost-effective and has resulted in savings for the United Nations, and welcomes the
expansion of the logistics hub to provide logistical support to peacekeeping operations in the
region and to contribute further to their enhanced efficiency and responsiveness, taking into
account the ongoing efforts in this regard;
52

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
11. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,11 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
12. Takes note of paragraph 52 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions;11
13. Requests the Secretary-General to take steps to ensure that all personnel adhere fully to
the security procedures in place;
14. Reaffirms section XX of resolution 61/276, and encourages the Secretary-General,
where feasible, to enhance regional and inter-mission cooperation with a view to achieving greater
synergies in the use of the resources of the Organization and the implementation of the mandates
of the missions, while bearing in mind that individual missions are responsible for the preparation
and implementation of their own budgets and for controlling their own assets and logistical
operations;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Operation is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
17. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that future budget submissions
contain sufficient information, explanation and justification of the proposed resource requirements
relating to operational costs in order to allow Member States to take well-informed decisions;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the activities of the Child Protection
Unit are carried out in an integrated manner and that its resource requirements are appropriately
reflected in the next budget submission;
19. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing General
Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Operation against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Operation;
20. Takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services12 and the
comments of the Secretary-General thereon,13 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the
full implementation of the recommendations;
21. Stresses the importance of strengthened accountability in the Organization and of
ensuring greater accountability of the Secretary-General to Member States, inter alia, for the
effective and efficient implementation of legislative mandates on procurement and the related use
of financial and human resources, as well as the provision of necessary information on
procurement-related matters to enable Member States to make well-informed decisions;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all procurement projects for the
Organization are in full compliance with relevant resolutions;
23. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that lessons learned from the previous
application of flexibility in administrative procedures are fully taken into account and to report
thereon in the performance report on the Operation;
24. Further requests, in this regard, the Independent Audit Advisory Committee, in
accordance with its terms of reference, to advise the General Assembly on measures to ensure the
compliance of management with the audit and recommendations of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services;

53

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
25. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur the amount of 1,669,397,800 dollars for the period from 1 July 2009
to 30 June 2010, inclusive of 1,598,942,200 dollars for the maintenance of the Operation,
58,636,200 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 11,819,400 dollars for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
26. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 139,116,483 dollars
for the period from 1 to 31 July 2009, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2009, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
27. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 26 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
2,694,308 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,088,358 dollars
approved for the Operation, the prorated share of 508,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 97,250 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
28. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 1,530,281,317 dollars for
the period from 1 August 2009 to 30 June 2010, at a monthly rate of 139,116,483 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2009, as set out in resolution 61/237, and for 2010,14 subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Operation;
29. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 28
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 29,637,392 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 22,971,942 dollars approved for the Operation, the prorated
share of 5,595,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 1,069,750 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
30. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
31. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Operation under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
32. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
33. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur”.

_______________
14

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

54

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 63/268
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 7 April 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/648/Add.5, para. 10)

63/268. Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009
The General Assembly,
I
United Nations Postal Administration
Recalling section XIV of its resolution 62/238 of 22 December 2007,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the contingent liability reserve for
the United Nations Postal Administration15 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,16
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the contingent liability reserve for
the United Nations Postal Administration;15
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions16 subject to the provisions of the
present resolution;
3.

Takes note of paragraph 8 of the report of the Advisory Committee;16

4.

Decides not to create a reserve for contingent liabilities for postal services;
II
Standards of accommodation for air travel

Recalling its resolution 42/214 of 21 December 1987, section IV, paragraph 14, of its
resolution 53/214 of 18 December 1998, section IV of its resolution 60/255 of 8 May 2006 and
section XV of its resolution 62/238 of 22 December 2007, and its decision 57/589 of 18 June
2003,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on standards of accommodation for
air travel17 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,18
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on standards of accommodation for
air travel;17
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;18
3. Requests the Secretary-General to explore all possible options, including the use of
mileage points accumulated from official travel, for reducing the cost of air travel, and to present
his conclusions thereon in the context of the comprehensive report referred to in paragraph 7 of
the report of the Advisory Committee;18

_______________
15

A/63/320.
A/63/568.
17
A/63/524.
18
A/63/715.
16

55

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

III
Business continuity management
Recalling section VII of its resolution 62/238,
Recalling also its resolution 63/262 of 24 December 2008,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the revised estimates under
sections 3, 17, 18, 20, 21, 27, 28C to G, 33 and 35 of the programme budget for the biennium
2008–2009 related to business continuity management19 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,20
Recognizing the multiplicity of risks currently facing the United Nations and its increasing
dependency on information and communications technology systems,
Noting the complementarities and the close linkages between disaster recovery for
information and communications technology and business continuity management,
Emphasizing the importance of close coordination of business continuity management
policies among all United Nations entities, and of systematically sharing and exploiting lessons
learned and best practices on a system-wide basis,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;19

2. Also takes note of the work undertaken and progress achieved so far by the SecretaryGeneral on business continuity management in response to the business risks faced by the United
Nations;
3. Further takes note of the establishment by the Secretary-General of the Senior
Emergency Policy Team and the Crisis Operations Group;
4. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,20 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
5. Reaffirms paragraphs 6 and 12 of section IV of its resolution 63/262, and stresses the
need for a comprehensive, unified and multi-hazard approach to business continuity;
6. Notes that the proposals of the Secretary-General on business continuity overlap and
duplicate proposals contained in other reports, in particular on information and communications
technology;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to further develop and justify the approach as set out in
his report,19 including by clarifying the relationship with other initiatives, in particular on
information and communications technology, and the roles of the various actors in the process,
with a view to avoiding a piecemeal approach to business continuity;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all departments and offices of the
United Nations Secretariat, offices away from Headquarters and the regional commissions have
business continuity plans in place and that the respective heads of departments and offices of the
United Nations Secretariat and of the offices away from Headquarters and regional commissions
are held accountable for their implementation;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that lessons learned within the
Secretariat for human influenza pandemic preparedness are taken into account as the work on
business continuity management is implemented;

_______________
19
20

A/63/359 and Corr.1.
A/63/584.

56

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure a coordinated approach to business
continuity management between the United Nations Secretariat, offices away from Headquarters
and the regional commissions, including systematic support, appropriate coordination structures
and regular consultations between the business continuity management focal points in New York
and in other duty stations;
11. Stresses the need to draw upon the experiences of other United Nations entities in
formulating the business continuity strategy;
12. Also stresses the importance of cooperation with host country authorities both at
Headquarters and at all other duty stations;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to strive for economies of scale through coordination
among organizations within the United Nations system on relevant issues, including the use of
backup centres for information and communications technology, the use of consultants, the
procurement of specialized equipment and medical supplies and training;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all steps necessary to ensure that medical
supplies and materials, including vaccines and antibiotics, are procured in compliance with the
relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution 62/269 of 20 June 2008, in particular, among
others, paragraph 20 thereof;
15. Takes note of paragraphs 14 to 16 and 19 to 21 of the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;20
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a fully justified proposal for post and nonpost resources in relation to the work currently under way on business continuity management in
the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2010–2011;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to report in the context of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013 on progress made;
IV
Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices
and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly
and/or the Security Council
Recalling its resolution 62/237 A of 22 December 2007, section V of its resolution 62/238 of
22 December 2007, section III of its resolution 62/245 of 3 April 2008 and section XI of its
resolution 63/263 of 24 December 2008,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the estimates in respect of special
political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly
and/or the Security Council21 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,22
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;21

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,22 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
3. Takes note of the revised narrative and logical framework for the budget of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the implementation of Security Council resolution
1559 (2004) for the period 1 January to 31 December 2009, and of paragraphs 28 and 29 (e) of the
related report of the Advisory Committee;22
_______________
21
22

A/63/346/Add.6.
A/63/779.

57

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Approves the revised budgets totalling 26,848,900 United States dollars for the United
Nations Representative on the International Advisory and Monitoring Board of the Development
Fund for Iraq, the United Nations International Independent Investigation Commission and the
United Nations Mission in Nepal presented in the report of the Secretary-General;21
5. Takes note of the balance of 17,973,900 dollars of the appropriations for these
missions for the biennium 2008–2009 based on actual expenditures incurred in 2008;
6. Decides to appropriate, after taking into account the unencumbered balance of
17,973,900 dollars for the three missions mentioned in paragraph 4 above, under the procedure
provided for in paragraph 11 of annex I to resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986, an amount of
8,875,000 dollars under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium
2008–2009;
7. Also decides to appropriate an amount of 1,663,100 dollars under section 35, Staff
assessment, to be offset by a corresponding amount under income section 1, Income from staff
assessment, of the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a revised budget proposal for the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia for 2009 for consideration by the General Assembly during
the second part of its resumed sixty-third session.
RESOLUTION 63/269
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 7 April 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/648/Add.5, para.. 10)

63/269. Information and communications technology, disaster recovery and business
continuity for the United Nations: arrangements for the secondary data centre at
Headquarters
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 63/262 of 24 December 2008,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Information and
communications technology, disaster recovery and business continuity for the United Nations:
arrangements for the secondary data centre at Headquarters”23 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,24
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;23

2. Reaffirms the need for a global operational framework to enable the United Nations to
respond effectively to emergency situations that may impair operations of critical elements of its
information and communications technology infrastructure and facilities;
3. Encourages the Secretary-General to take a unified approach to disaster recovery and
business continuity, utilizing all available infrastructure, in order to achieve economies of scale
and cost efficiencies;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the United Nations uses enterprise data
centres rather than local data centres as far as possible;
5.
project;

Notes with concern the continued deficiencies in the planning and management of the

_______________
23
24

A/63/743.
A/63/774.

58

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Regrets that the proposal of the Secretary-General did not provide the necessary
assurances that its implementation would sufficiently mitigate risks, including risks related to the
physical security of data, during the relocation of the primary data centre to the North Lawn at
Headquarters;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, when utilizing the services of the International
Computing Centre, to ensure compliance with all regulations and rules regarding procurement, in
order to guarantee the cost-effectiveness of the services provided by the Centre;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,24 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
9. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, expressed in section IV, paragraph 7, of
its resolution 63/262, to ensure that the leased space is fully utilized if it is not possible to
terminate the lease;
10. Notes with concern that the delays caused by the lack of reliable disaster recovery and
business continuity services for Headquarters may lead to further cost escalation, including in
respect of the capital master plan, and risk to data;
11. Decides that any further proposal for risk mitigation measures to protect data and the
information and communications systems of the Secretariat during the construction work of the
capital master plan, if necessary, shall be reported in the context of the annual progress report on
the capital master plan;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to absorb 5,096,880 United States dollars within the
approved budget of the capital master plan, and decides that 2,031,860 dollars shall be financed
from the resources to be approved for the support account for peacekeeping operations for the
period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 in order to pursue the most reliable and cost-effective
risk mitigation measures during the migration of the primary data centre to the North Lawn;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to carry out a classification of critical/non-critical
systems of the Secretariat and to provide to the General Assembly an inventory of systems
classified according to their degree of criticality at the time of its consideration of the proposal for
a permanent secondary data centre;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the level of protection proposed
has been subject to a thorough cost-benefit analysis;
15. Recalls paragraph 12 of section IV of resolution 63/262, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the General Assembly no later than at the main part of its sixty-fifth session a
unified disaster recovery and business continuity plan, including a permanent solution for
Headquarters.
RESOLUTION 63/270
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 7 April 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/648/Add.5, para. 10)

63/270. Capital master plan
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/249 of 23 December 1999, 55/238 of 23 December 2000,
56/234 and 56/236 of 24 December 2001, 56/286 of 27 June 2002, section II of its resolution
57/292 of 20 December 2002, its resolution 59/295 of 22 June 2005, section II of its resolution
60/248 of 23 December 2005, its resolutions 60/256 of 8 May 2006, 60/282 of 30 June 2006,
61/251 of 22 December 2006, 62/87 of 10 December 2007 and section II.B of its resolution
63/248 of 24 December 2008, and its decision 58/566 of 8 April 2004,
59

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recognizing the importance of ensuring that persons with disabilities have access to the
physical environment on an equal basis with others,
Having considered the sixth annual progress report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the capital master plan,25 the report of the Secretary-General on associated
costs related to the capital master plan,26 the report of the Board of Auditors on the capital master
plan for the year ended 31 December 2007,27 the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors on the capital master plan,28
section IV.A of the annual report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services for the period from
1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008,29 the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the
comprehensive audit of the capital master plan30 and the related report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,31
1. Takes note of the sixth annual progress report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the capital master plan,25 the report of the Secretary-General on associated
costs related to the capital master plan,26 the report of the Board of Auditors on the capital master
plan for the year ended 31 December 2007,27 the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors on the capital master plan,28
section IV.A of the annual report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services for the period from
1 July 2007 to 30 June 200829 and the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the
comprehensive audit of the capital master plan;30
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,31 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
3. Accepts the report of the Board of Auditors on the capital master plan for the year
ended 31 December 2007;27
4.

Approves the recommendations of the Board of Auditors contained in its report;27

5. Reiterates its serious concern at the hazards, risks and deficiencies of the United
Nations Headquarters building in its current condition, which endanger the safety, health and wellbeing of staff, delegations, visitors and tourists;
6. Stresses the special role of the host country Government with regard to support for
United Nations Headquarters, in New York;
7. Notes the benefits, including economic ones, accruing to host countries from the
presence of the United Nations, and the costs incurred;
8. Recalls the current practices of host Governments with regard to support for United
Nations headquarters and United Nations bodies located in their territories;
9. Takes note of paragraph 21 of the sixth annual progress report of the SecretaryGeneral,25 and recalls paragraph 23 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,31 and stresses that any arrangement with the host country shall
safeguard the integrity of the relevant body of international law, including the Headquarters

_______________
25

A/63/477.
A/63/582.
27
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 5 (A/63/5), vol. V.
28
A/63/327, sect. III.
29
See A/63/302 (Part I).
30
A/63/266.
31
A/63/736.
26

60

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Agreement between the United Nations and the host country32 and the Convention on the
Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations;33
I
Sixth annual progress report
Financial management
1. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure by all means that project costs are brought
back within the approved budget;
2. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General make every effort to avoid budget
increases through sound project management practices and to ensure that the capital master plan is
completed within the budget as approved in its resolution 61/251;
Value engineering
3. Welcomes the success of value engineering activities in identifying over 100 million
United States dollars in potential cost savings;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to include detailed information on the following in his
seventh annual progress report:
(a)

Value engineering activities, as well as costs and fees;

(b) The advantages that could potentially be realized as a result of the prevailing market
conditions;
(c)

A cost-benefit analysis of any additional sustainability options;

5. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue finding efficiency gains and cost
reductions throughout the implementation of the capital master plan;
6. Emphasizes that the value engineering exercise shall not undermine the quality,
durability and sustainability of the materials used, the original design of Headquarters or the
commitment of the project to the highest standards of safety, health and well-being of staff and
delegations, in particular with regard to the handling of asbestos;
Schedule
7. Notes the delay in the process of relocating Secretariat staff to office swing space, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the current schedule is adhered to as a matter of
urgency;
8. Recalls paragraph 14 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,31 and urges the Secretary-General to take all steps necessary to avoid any
further slippage in the relocation schedule in order to prevent costly delays, including those which
may disrupt the work of the General Assembly;
Sustainability
9. Welcomes the implementation of projects relating to sustainability approved by the
General Assembly, and notes that those projects are being pursued within existing resources;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to consider cost-beneficial ways of
improving energy efficiency and lowering energy consumption and to report thereon in his
seventh annual progress report;
_______________
32
33

See resolution 169 (II).
Resolution 22 A (I).

61

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

11. Recalls paragraph 10 of its resolution 61/251 and paragraph 37 of its resolution 62/87,
and reaffirms that any scope options in addition to those already approved by the General
Assembly shall be submitted by the Secretary-General to the Assembly for its consideration and
approval;
Procurement
12. Reaffirms its resolution 62/269 of 20 June 2008, and requests the Secretary-General to
comply fully with the relevant provisions contained therein;
13. Recalls paragraph 33 of its resolution 62/269, and stresses that, until a decision is taken
by the General Assembly on the issue of environmentally friendly and sustainable procurement,
the Secretary-General shall not use any criteria that unduly restrict the ability of vendors to
participate in procurement processes owing to environmental friendliness or sustainability
requirements;
14. Notes the lack of diversification in the origin of vendors subcontracted by the
construction manager of the capital master plan and also notes that no procurement contract has
been awarded to vendors from developing countries or countries with economies in transition;
15. Reiterates its requests to the Secretary-General in its resolutions 61/276 of 29 June
2007 and 62/269 to continue to explore additional innovative ways to promote procurement from
developing countries and countries with economies in transition and to identify obstacles
preventing their participation in United Nations procurement contracts and to report on concrete
measures taken in this regard;
16. Reaffirms paragraph 18 of its resolution 62/87 on procurement opportunities for
developing countries and countries with economies in transition, as well as paragraph 28 of its
resolution 62/269 relating to bidding by joint ventures, and reiterates its request to the SecretaryGeneral to submit a report in this regard for consideration by the General Assembly at its sixtyfourth session;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the construction manager, in
consultation with the Procurement Division of the Department of Management of the Secretariat,
prepares and implements an action plan to promote procurement opportunities for contractors and
vendors from developing countries and countries with economies in transition, and to include
detailed information on the action plan and its implementation in his forthcoming annual progress
reports;
18. Reaffirms paragraphs 19 to 23 of its resolution 62/87, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to report on their implementation in the annual progress reports on the capital
master plan;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to review all expression of interest notices and
invitations to bid issued by the construction manager in order to ensure that their contents fully
comply with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and do not unduly restrict the
diversification of the origin of vendors;
20. Notes that some measures taken to avoid delays in the capital master plan procurement
process, in particular the ex post facto review of contracts, risk having a negative impact in terms
of internal controls, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the procurement processes
are in full compliance with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations;34
21. Also notes that the Office of Internal Oversight Services is engaged in the preparation
of a comprehensive report on all aspects of the procurement process related to the capital master
plan, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office to include in its report
_______________
34

ST/SGB/2003/7.

62

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

factors that may restrict the diversification of the origin of vendors, including the current
subcontracting process, local regulations, labour laws and sustainability options, as well as
information on vendors’ compliance with existing rules and regulations of the United Nations and
general conditions of contract, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session;
Health and safety
22. Reaffirms its commitment to the safety, security, health and well-being of staff,
delegations, visitors and tourists at the United Nations, and requests the Secretary-General to
ensure that concrete safeguards for the achievement of those objectives are in place and are part of
the standard operating procedures throughout the implementation of the capital master plan;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure, in particular, strict compliance with the
highest applicable standards for the handling of asbestos, and to report to the General Assembly on
measures taken in this regard in the context of the forthcoming annual reports and the regular
briefings on the implementation of the capital master plan;
24. Reaffirms its resolution 63/8 of 3 November 2008, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to designate sheltered smoking areas in order to make the renovated United
Nations Headquarters premises smoke-free;
Donations
25. Decides not to endorse the donation policy related to the capital master plan, and
requests the Secretary-General to make new proposals in this regard that allow all Member States,
without distinction or conditions, to make donations, in full conformity with the international and
intergovernmental character of the Organization as well as the Financial Regulations and Rules of
the United Nations34 and without prejudice to the scope, specifications and design of the project,
and to report thereon to the General Assembly;
26. Stresses that the donations shall be used, where possible, to offset approved estimated
costs of the project, as well as associated costs approved by the General Assembly;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to develop a gift registry accessible by all staff
members in the Secretariat for declaring gifts received from governmental and non-governmental
sources;
28. Also requests the Secretary-General to promulgate an administrative issuance on
policies and procedures addressing the acceptance, reporting, recording, storing and disposing of
gifts to the Organization in the context of relocations related to the capital master plan;
29. Reaffirms paragraphs 44 and 45 of its resolution 62/87, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to fully ensure the appropriate handling of works of art, masterpieces and other gifts
throughout all stages of construction work;
Parking
30. Reaffirms paragraph 10 of its resolution 61/251, by which it approved the capital
master plan and its budget, including the resources for additional scope options, in particular the
structural strengthening of various components of the existing structure to provide greater blast
resistance;
31. Also reaffirms paragraph 37 of its resolution 62/87, in which it decided that any scope
options in addition to those already approved by the General Assembly should be submitted by the
Secretary-General to the Assembly for its consideration and approval;
32. Further reaffirms that the General Assembly has the sole prerogative of deciding on
any changes to the capital master plan project, budget and implementation strategy, as approved in
its resolutions;
63

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

33. Notes with concern the existing difficulties with regard to the availability of parking at
the United Nations, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the total number of parking
spaces available to Member States will not diminish upon the completion of the capital master
plan;
Accessibility
34. Recalls paragraph 5 of its resolutions 61/106 of 13 December 2006 and paragraph 5 of
its resolution 62/170 of 18 December 2007;
35. Requests the Secretary-General to provide specific information in his next annual
report about the measures taken to eliminate physical, communication or technical barriers to
persons with disabilities at United Nations Headquarters in the framework of the capital master
plan;
36. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that measures to be taken in the context
of the capital master plan with a view to applying host city building, fire and safety codes do not
violate the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,35 especially
those related to accessibility, and also requests the Secretary-General to report on this subject in
future annual progress reports;
Oversight
37. Reaffirms paragraphs 16 and 17 of its resolution 62/87, and stresses the importance of
ensuring effective oversight and audit coverage of the implementation of the capital master plan;
38. Requests the Secretary-General to develop adequate and effective tools to permanently
monitor essential elements of progress made in the context of the implementation of the capital
master plan, including a summary scoreboard to describe the development of the project at any
given time, and to include detailed information on such tools in forthcoming annual progress
reports;
Advisory board
39. Regrets that the advisory board requested in its resolutions 57/292, 61/251 and 62/87
has not yet been established;
40. Decides that the advisory board shall be established no later than 31 December 2009,
as originally intended, within its current mandate and in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph 26 of General Assembly resolution 62/87;
41. Also decides that if the advisory board has not been established by 31 December 2009,
the General Assembly will appoint five members, one from each regional group, for a nonrenewable term of four years, and in that event will request the Secretary-General to seek
candidatures from Member States;
Seventh annual progress report
42. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to report on the status of the project, the
schedule, the projected completion cost, the status of contributions, the working capital reserve,
the status of the advisory board and the letter of credit in his seventh annual progress report;

_______________
35

Resolution 61/106, annex I.

64

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

II
Associated costs
1. Recalls paragraph 34 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,31 and notes with concern that a number of the requirements set out in the
report of the Secretary-General on associated costs26 do not relate directly to the capital master
plan, but rather are investment costs and long-term commitments;
2. Decides that the approved associated costs for the capital master plan will be financed
from within the approved budget of the capital master plan unless otherwise specified by the
General Assembly;
3. Decides not to approve the overall level of associated costs at this time, bearing in
mind opportunities for further cost reductions posed by the present economic circumstances as
well as savings realized by the Secretary-General;
4. Expresses its regret that the Secretary-General has entered into commitments for the
financial period 2008–2009 for associated costs absent the formal approval of the Assembly,
which is inconsistent with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations,34 and
further expresses its concern that the Secretary-General has not complied with paragraph 43 of its
resolution 62/87;
5. Recalls paragraph 60 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,31 and decides not to suspend the provisions for the application of credits
under regulations 3.2 (d), 5.3 and 5.4 of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United
Nations;34
6. Also recalls section II.B of its resolution 63/248, and regrets that the Secretary-General
did not consult Member States on the need to upgrade the broadcast facility, even though the
upgrade was conceived long before the conception of the capital master plan;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to utilize the existing furniture where possible in a
cost-effective manner;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to reduce the projected costs of furniture for the
new facilities of the United Nations;
9. Recalls paragraph 50 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,31 and requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to absorb the
associated costs for the biennium 2008–2009 from within the overall budget approved for the
capital master plan in a total amount of 30,272,400 dollars (net), broken down as follows:
(a) 995,300 dollars for the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management;
(b)

3,823,100 dollars for the Department of Public Information;

(c)

11,720,100 dollars for the Office of Central Support Services;

(d)

1,636,000 dollars for the Office of Information and Communications Technology;

(e)

7,576,300 dollars for the Department of Safety and Security;

(f) 4,521,600 dollars for construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance
activities at Headquarters;
(g) 1,496,300 dollars for staff assessment requirements, to be offset by the equivalent
amount of income from staff assessment;
and to report the related expenditures in financial statements of the Organization in accordance
with established procedures;

65

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, for its decision at
the main part of its sixty-fourth session, in the context of his seventh annual progress report on the
implementation of the capital master plan, proposals for financing the associated costs required for
the year 2010 from within the approved budget for the capital master plan;
11. Recalls section II.B of its resolution 63/248, and requests the Secretary-General to
continue to provide adequate information technology support for conference services, within the
existing resources of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management, in
order to ensure their seamless operation throughout the implementation of the capital master plan.
RESOLUTION 63/271
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 7 April 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/639/Add.1, para. 6)

63/271. Amendments to the Staff Regulations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 59/266 of 23 December 2004, 61/244 of 22 December 2006,
62/248 of 3 April 2008 and 63/250 of 24 December 2008,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on amendments to the Staff
Regulations36 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,37
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;36

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,37 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
3. Approves the amendments to the Staff Regulations as contained in the report of the
Secretary-General, subject to the provisions of the present resolution and the modified
amendments contained in the annex hereto;
4.

Reaffirms section II of its resolution 63/250;

5. Stresses that staff regulation 4.5 (b) does not prejudice the possibility of renewal of a
temporary appointment, taking fully into account the provisions of paragraph 7 of section II of its
resolution 63/250;
6. Also stresses that staff regulation 4.4 shall not preclude consideration of external
candidates in filling vacant positions under conditions defined by the Secretary-General in
accordance with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
provisions of the resolutions of the General Assembly;
7. Emphasizes that the change of the term “personnel” to the term “human resources” in
the “Scope and purpose” of the Staff Regulations, as well as in regulations 8.1 (a) and 8.2, is
strictly to harmonize the language of the Staff Regulations with the current terminology in effect at
the United Nations;
8. Reaffirms that staff members recruited through the national competitive examinations
and language competitive examinations who hold probationary appointments as at 30 June 2009
will be considered for conversion to permanent appointments upon successful completion of their
probationary appointments on or after l July 2009;
_______________
36
37

A/63/694.
A/63/754.

66

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

9. Emphasizes that nothing in the regulations approved in the present resolution and the
annex to it precludes persons with disabilities from being considered for employment under any
type of contract in full compliance with the Charter, in particular Article 101, paragraph 3;
10. Recalls paragraph 4 of section II of its resolution 63/250, and stresses that the
implementation of the part of the new staff regulation 4.5 concerning conversion to continuing
appointments shall require further decisions by the General Assembly on the criteria for eligibility;
11. Also recalls paragraph 2 of section I of its resolution 63/250, and stresses the
importance of a meaningful and constructive dialogue between staff and management to
overcome differences;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to it at its sixty-fourth session on the full
implications of converting all currently eligible staff to permanent appointments, including the
financial impact and the effects on workforce management;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fifth session regarding the status of the review of staff members eligible for consideration as
at 30 June 2009 for a permanent appointment;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Staff Rules and related
administrative issuances derived from the Staff Regulations comply with the provisions of its
relevant resolutions;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at the main part of
its sixty-fourth session on the provisional new Staff Rules.
Annex
Modified amendments to the Staff Regulations
Regulation 4.5
...
(c) A fixed-term appointment does not carry any expectancy, legal or otherwise, of
renewal or conversion, irrespective of the length of service;
Regulation 9.3
(a) The Secretary-General may, giving the reasons therefor, terminate the appointment of
a staff member who holds a temporary, fixed-term or continuing appointment in accordance with
the terms of his or her appointment or for any of the following reasons:
…
(vi) In the interest of the good administration of the Organization and in accordance with
the standards of the Charter, provided that the action is not contested by the staff member
concerned;
(b) In addition, in the case of a staff member holding a continuing appointment, the
Secretary-General may terminate the appointment without the consent of the staff member if, in
the opinion of the Secretary-General, such action would be in the interest of the good
administration of the Organization, to be interpreted principally as a change or termination of a
mandate, and in accordance with the standards of the Charter;
...
(d) The Secretary-General may, where the circumstances warrant and he or she considers
it justified, pay to a staff member terminated, provided that the termination is not contested, a
termination indemnity payment not more than 50 per cent higher than that which would otherwise
be payable under the Staff Regulations.

67

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Annex I
Salary scales and related provisions
...
6. The Secretary-General shall fix the salary scales for staff members in the General Service
and related categories, normally on the basis of the best prevailing conditions of employment in
the locality of the United Nations Office concerned, provided that the Secretary-General may,
where he or she deems it appropriate, establish rules and salary limits for payment of a nonresident allowance to General Service staff members recruited from outside the local area. The
gross pensionable remuneration of such staff shall be determined in accordance with the
methodology specified in article 54 (a) of the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund and are shown in the salary scales applicable to such staff.
Annex II
Letters of appointment
...
(viii) That a fixed-term appointment does not carry any expectancy, legal or otherwise, of
renewal or conversion, irrespective of the length of service;
RESOLUTION 63/272
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 7 April 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/786, para. 6)

63/272. Report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2008 and programme of work for 2009
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the Joint Inspection Unit, in particular resolutions
31/192 of 22 December 1976, 50/233 of 7 June 1996, 54/16 of 29 October 1999, 55/230 of
23 December 2000, 56/245 of 24 December 2001, 57/284 A and B of 20 December 2002, 58/286
of 8 April 2004, 59/267 of 23 December 2004, 60/258 of 8 May 2006, 61/238 of 22 December
2006, 61/260 of 4 April 2007, 62/226 of 22 December 2007 and 62/246 of 3 April 2008,
Reiterating that the impact of the Unit on the cost-effectiveness of activities within the
United Nations system is a shared responsibility of the Member States, the Unit and the
secretariats of the participating organizations,
Reaffirming the commitment by the Unit, the legislative organs and the secretariats of the
participating organizations to implement a system of follow-up to the recommendations of the
Unit, as set out in resolution 54/16,
Reaffirming also the statute of the Unit38 and the unique role of the Unit as the only external
and independent system-wide inspection, evaluation and investigation body,
Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2008 and programme of work
for 200939 and the note by the Secretary-General on the report of the Unit for 2008,40
1.

Recalls its resolutions 61/260, 62/226 and 62/246;

_______________
38

Resolution 31/192, annex.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 34 and corrigendum (A/63/34 and
Corr.1).
40
A/63/731.
39

68

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2008 and
programme of work for 2009;39
3.

Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General;40

4. Affirms that oversight is a shared responsibility of Member States, the organizations
and the internal and external oversight bodies;
5. Welcomes progress in the reform process of the Unit and its improved collaboration
with participating organizations and other oversight bodies, and invites the Unit to report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session on measures taken in this regard;
6.

Acknowledges the Unit’s undertaking to apply results-based management in its work;

7. Requests the Unit, in line with its mandate, to continue to focus its work and reports on
system-wide issues of interest and relevance to the participating organizations and the States
Members of the United Nations and to provide advice on ways to ensure the avoidance of
duplication and more efficient and effective use of resources in implementing the mandates of the
Organization;
8. Reiterates its request to the executive heads of the participating organizations to fully
comply with the statutory procedures for consideration of the reports of the Unit and, in particular,
to submit their comments and to distribute reports in time for their consideration by legislative
organs;
9. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General and the other executive heads of the
participating organizations to fully assist the Unit with the timely provision of all information
requested by it;
10. Reiterates its invitation to the legislative organs of the participating organizations to
take concrete action on the recommendations of the Unit;
11. Requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chairman of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to expedite the implementation of the present
resolution, including through the expected provision of support to the Unit by the secretariats of
the participating organizations in the preparation of its reports, notes and confidential letters, and
the consideration of and action on the Unit’s recommendations in the light of pertinent resolutions
of the General Assembly, and to report to the Assembly on an annual basis on the results achieved;
12. Notes with appreciation the ongoing efforts of the Unit to report on the impacts of its
recommendations, as illustrated in chapter I, section E, of its annual report,39 and in this context
requests the Unit, in coordination with participating organizations, to provide information on the
improvement of the presentation of those impacts and their financial implications, wherever
possible, in future annual reports;
13. Invites the Unit, in this context, to include in its annual report information on its
experience in the implementation of the follow-up system by the participating organizations, and
in this regard requests the Unit to continue working towards implementation of a web-based
follow-up system to monitor the status of recommendations and receive updates from individual
organizations;
14. Recalls paragraph 17 of its resolution 62/246, and encourages the Secretary-General,
in his capacity as Chairman of the Chief Executives Board, to continue enhancing the dialogue of
the Board with the Unit, including, where appropriate, through the invitation to participate in the
meetings of its Committees and networks;
15. Welcomes the coordination of the Unit with the Board of Auditors and the Office of
Internal Oversight Services of the Secretariat, and encourages those bodies to continue sharing
experiences, knowledge, best practices and lessons learned with other United Nations audit and
oversight bodies as well as with the Independent Audit Advisory Committee;

69

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

16. Requests the Secretary-General to expedite the appointment of the Executive Secretary
of the Joint Inspection Unit after consultation with the Unit and the Chief Executives Board, in full
accordance with article 19 of the statute of the Unit38 as well as the relevant provisions of the
resolutions of the General Assembly regarding staff selection;
17. Acknowledges the undertaking by the Unit of a medium- and long-term strategy
approach for 2010–2019, as contained in annex III to its report, stresses the need for the Unit to
continuously update and improve its medium- and long-term strategy for 2010–2019, taking into
account the dynamics and challenges of the environment in which it undertakes its activities, and
decides to consider any resources associated with the implementation of the medium- and longterm strategy approach in the context of future programme budgets;
18. Encourages the Unit to keep the General Assembly informed, if necessary, about any
difficulty or delay in obtaining visas for the official travel of the inspectors, as well as members of
its secretariat.
RESOLUTIONS 63/273 A and B
63/273. Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
Resolution A
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 7 April 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/787, para. 6)

A
The General Assembly,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General on the financing arrangements for the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 200941 and the
related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,42
Recalling Security Council resolution 1812 (2008) of 30 April 2008, in which the Council
decided to extend the mandate of the Mission until 30 April 2009,
Recalling also its resolution 62/267 of 20 June 2008 on the financing of the Mission,
1. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,42 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
2. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan the amount of 56,173,100 United States dollars for the maintenance of the Mission for the
period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009, in addition to the amount of 820,720,600 dollars already
appropriated for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
under the terms of its resolution 62/267;
Financing of the appropriation
3. Also decides, taking into account the amount of 715,642,666 dollars already
apportioned under the terms of its resolution 62/267 for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 April
2009, to apportion among Member States the additional amount of 42,129,825 dollars for the
_______________
41
42

A/63/756.
A/63/777.

70

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

period from 1 July 2008 to 30 April 2009, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008 and 2009, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
4. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 3 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 973,833
dollars, representing the increase in the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 April 2009;
5. Decides, taking into account the amount of 143,128,534 dollars already apportioned
under the terms of its resolution 62/267 for the period from 1 May to 30 June 2009, to apportion
among Member States the additional amount of 8,425,965 dollars at a monthly rate of 4,212,982
dollars for the period from 1 May to 30 June 2009, in accordance with the levels updated in
General Assembly resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2009, as
set out in its resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate
of the Mission;
6. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 5
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 194,767 dollars, representing the
increase in the estimated staff assessment income approved for the Mission for the period from
1 May to 30 June 2009;
7. Further decides to keep under review during its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan”.
Resolution B
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/787/Add.1, para. 7)

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan43 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,44
Recalling Security Council resolution 1590 (2005) of 24 March 2005, by which the Council
established the United Nations Mission in the Sudan for an initial period of six months as from
24 March 2005, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission, the latest of which was resolution 1870 (2009) of 30 April 2009, by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission until 30 April 2010,
Recalling also its resolution 59/292 of 21 April 2005 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 63/273 A of 7 April 2009,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,

_______________
43
44

A/63/604 and A/63/714.
A/63/746/Add.5.

71

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Trust Fund in
Support of the Peace Process in the Sudan,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in the Sudan as
at 30 April 2009, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 65.5 million United
States dollars, representing some 2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern
that only seventy-nine Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all
other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Acknowledges with appreciation that the use of the logistics hub at Entebbe, Uganda,
has been cost-effective and has resulted in savings for the United Nations, and welcomes the
expansion of the logistics hub to provide logistical support to peacekeeping operations in the
region and to contribute further to their enhanced efficiency and responsiveness, taking into
account the ongoing efforts in this regard;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
11. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,44 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
12. Takes note of paragraph 35 (b) of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to
approve the post of Chief Operations Officer at the P-5 level for the Joint Operations Centre;
13. Also takes note of paragraph 35 (c) of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
decides to establish the post of Programme Officer at the P-3 level in the Office of the Force
Commander;

72

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

14. Further takes note of paragraph 35 (d) of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
decides to establish the post of Senior Security Sector Reform Officer at the P-5 level in the Rule
of Law, Judicial System and Prison Advisory Section;
15. Takes note of paragraph 35 (h) (ii) of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
decides to establish the post of Field Service Security Officer (internal audit) and 10 posts of Field
Service Security Officer (risk assessment) in the Safety and Security Section;
16. Also takes note of paragraphs 35 (g) and (k) of the report of the Advisory Committee,
and decides to establish the 187 disarmament, demobilization and reintegration-related posts and
positions, and to apply a 50 per cent vacancy factor to the new international posts, comprising 20
posts at the P-3 level and 18 Field Service posts, for the period 2009/10;
17. Further takes note of paragraph 51 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
18. Reaffirms section XX of resolution 61/276, and encourages the Secretary-General,
where feasible, to enhance regional and inter-mission cooperation with a view to achieving greater
synergies in the use of the resources of the Organization and the implementation of mandates of
the missions, while bearing in mind that individual missions are responsible for the preparation
and implementation of their own budgets and for controlling their own assets and logistical
operations;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that future budget submissions contain
sufficient information, explanation and justification of the proposed resource requirements relating
to operational costs in order to allow Member States to take well-informed decisions;
20. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
21. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
22. Requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing General
Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General Service posts,
commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
23. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;45
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
24. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan the amount of 1,000,577,700 dollars for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010,
inclusive of 958,350,200 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 35,143,600 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 7,083,900 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
25. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 833,814,750 dollars
for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 April 2010, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2009, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006, and for 2010;46

_______________
45
46

A/63/604.
To be adopted by the General Assembly.

73

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

26. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 25 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
22,145,833 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 18,514,333 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 3,048,750 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 582,750 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
27. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 166,762,950 dollars for the
period from 1 May to 30 June 2010, at a monthly rate of 83,381,475 dollars, taking into account
the scale of assessments for 2010,46 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the
mandate of the Mission;
28. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 27
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 4,429,167 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 3,702,867 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 609,750 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 116,550 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
29. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 25
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
82,199,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the
levels updated in its resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008,
as set out in its resolution 61/237;
30. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 82,199,100 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 29
above;
31. Also decides that the increase of 2,348,600 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 82,199,100 dollars referred to in paragraphs 29 and 30 above;
32. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
33. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
34. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
35. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan”.

74

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTIONS 63/274 A and B
63/274. Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
Resolution A
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 7 April 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/788, para. 6)

A
The General Assembly,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General on the financing arrangements for the
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad for the period from 1 July 2008
to 30 June 200947 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,48
Recalling Security Council resolution 1861 (2009) of 14 January 2009, in which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission until 15 March 2010, authorized the deployment of a
military component of the Mission to follow up the European Union-led military force in both
Chad and the Central African Republic at the end of its mandate, decided that the transfer of
authority between the European Union-led military force and the military component of the
Mission would take place on 15 March 2009, and also decided that the Mission should include a
maximum of 300 police officers, 25 military liaison officers, 5,200 military personnel, and an
appropriate number of civilian personnel,
1. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,48 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June
2009 in a total amount not exceeding 139,671,300 United States dollars, inclusive of the amount
of 49,868,400 dollars previously authorized by the Advisory Committee under the terms of
section IV of General Assembly resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994, and in addition to the
amount of 301,124,200 dollars already appropriated for the maintenance of the Mission for the
period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 under the terms of Assembly resolution 62/233 B of
20 June 2008;
Financing of the commitment authority
3. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 139,671,300 dollars for the
period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008 and 2009, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
4. Also decides to keep under review during its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad”.

_______________
47
48

A/63/727.
A/63/768.

75

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Resolution B
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/788/Add.1, para. 6)

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad,49 the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions50 and the oral statement by the Chairman
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,51
Recalling Security Council resolution 1778 (2007) of 25 September 2007, by which the
Council established in Chad and the Central African Republic a multidimensional presence,
including a United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was
resolution 1861 (2009) of 14 January 2009, by which the Council decided to extend the mandate
of the Mission until 15 March 2010 and authorized the deployment of a military component of the
Mission,
Recalling also its resolution 62/233 A of 22 December 2007 on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad and its subsequent resolutions thereon,
the latest of which was resolution 63/274 A of 7 April 2009,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals, in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007 and other
relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad as at 30 April 2009, including the contributions outstanding in the
amount of 66.4 million United States dollars, representing some 14 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only thirty-eight Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;

_______________
49

A/63/565 and A/63/817.
A/63/746/Add.13.
51
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Fifth Committee, 50th meeting
(A/C.5/63/SR.50), and corrigendum.
50

76

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of the
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Acknowledges with appreciation that the use of the logistics hub at Entebbe, Uganda,
has been cost-effective and has resulted in savings for the United Nations, and welcomes the
expansion of the logistics hub to provide logistical support to peacekeeping operations in the
region and to contribute further to their enhanced efficiency and responsiveness, taking into
account ongoing efforts in this regard;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
11. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions50 and the oral statement by the
Chairman of the Advisory Committee,51 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
12. Takes note of paragraphs 24, 31, 44, 46, 49 and 60 of the report of the Advisory
Committee;
13. Decides to reclassify the post of Chief of Staff in the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General from the D-1 to the D-2 level;
14. Takes note of paragraph 41 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and recognizes
that improvement of national airport infrastructure is the responsibility of the host country, where
possible;
15. Welcomes the dispatch of a Tiger Team to the Mission, which considerably expedited
the recruitment of national and international staff, and requests the Secretary-General to continue
his efforts in this regard;
16. Commends the initiative of the Mission to prepare a water production and
conservation policy, and requests the Secretary-General, in this regard, to ensure that lessons
learned are shared with other operations in similar situations;
17. Also commends the Mission for its efforts to assist in increasing the number of female
officers in the Détachement intégré de sécurité, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure
continued efforts in this regard;
18. Reaffirms section XX of resolution 61/276, and encourages the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad and other United Nations missions in the
region to continue, where possible, the efforts to achieve greater synergies, while bearing in mind
that individual missions are responsible for the preparation and implementation of their own
budgets and for controlling their own assets and logistical operations;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
77

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

20. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
21. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
22. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;52
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
23. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad the amount of 721,167,400 dollars for the period from 1 July
2009 to 30 June 2010, inclusive of 690,753,100 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission,
25,312,100 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 5,102,200 dollars for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
24. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 509,857,584 dollars
for the period from 1 July 2009 to 15 March 2010, in accordance with the levels updated in
General Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2009, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006, and for 2010;53
25. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 24 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the
amount of 7,379,117 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 5,160,026
dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 1,862,981 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 356,110 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
26. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 211,309,816 dollars for the
period from 16 March to 30 June 2010 at a monthly rate of 60,097,283 dollars, taking into account
the scale of assessments for 2010,53 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the
mandate of the Mission;
27. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of resolution 973 (X), there shall
be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 26
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 3,058,283 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 2,138,574 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 772,119 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 147,590 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
28. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 24
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
18,647,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the
levels updated in General Assembly resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237;
_______________
52
53

A/63/565.
To be adopted by the General Assembly.

78

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

29. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 18,647,300 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 28
above;
30. Also decides that the decrease of 1,537,800 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 18,647,300 dollars referred to in paragraphs 28 and 29 above;
31. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
32. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
33. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
34. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad”.
RESOLUTIONS 63/275 A and B
63/275. Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)
Resolution A
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 7 April 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/789, para. 6)

A
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of support for the
African Union Mission in Somalia for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 200954 and the
related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,55
Recalling Security Council resolution 1863 (2009) of 16 January 2009, in which the Council
expressed its intent to establish a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia as a followon force to the African Union Mission in Somalia, subject to a further decision of the Council by
1 June 2009, and requested the Secretary-General, in order for the forces of the Mission to be
incorporated into a United Nations peacekeeping operation, to provide a United Nations logistical
support package to the Mission, including equipment and services,
Recognizing that the costs of this support to the African Union Mission in Somalia are
expenses of the Organization to be borne by Member States in accordance with Article 17,
paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling that, in its resolution 1863 (2009), the Security Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to submit a report on a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia by 15 April
2009,
_______________
54
55

A/63/758.
A/63/780.

79

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1. Requests the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of facilities and
equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to minimize the costs of
procurement for the logistical support package;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,55 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures to ensure effectiveness,
efficiency and transparency with regard to the use of United Nations resources, bearing in mind
the specific nature of the support package;
Estimates for the period from 1 May 2007 to 30 June 2009
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to establish a special account for the support
provided to the African Union Mission in Somalia, for the purpose of accounting for the income
received and the expenditure incurred;
5. Also authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the support of the
African Union Mission in Somalia for the period from 1 May 2007 to 30 June 2009 in a total
amount not exceeding 77,790,900 United States dollars, inclusive of the amount of 50 million
dollars previously authorized by the Advisory Committee under the terms of section IV of General
Assembly resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994, which comprises the amount of 2,149,000
dollars for the period from 1 May 2007 to 30 June 2008 and the amount of 47,851,000 dollars for
the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009;
Financing of the commitment authority
6. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 2,149,000 dollars for the
period from 1 May 2007 to 30 June 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2007 and 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
7. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 6 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 290,387
dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment income approved for the period from 1 May
2007 to 30 June 2008;
8. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 69,338,401 dollars
for the period from 1 July 2008 to 31 May 2009, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008 and 2009,
as set out in its resolution 61/237;
9. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be
set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 8 above,
their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 239,250 dollars, representing the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the period from 1 July 2008 to 31 May 2009;
10. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 6,303,499 dollars for
the period from 1 to 30 June 2009, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008 and 2009, as set out
in its resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate;
11. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 10
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 21,750 dollars, representing the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the period from 1 to 30 June 2009, subject to a
decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate;

80

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

12. Invites voluntary contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund established to support
the African Union Mission in Somalia;
13. Decides to keep under review during its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)”.
Resolution B
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/789/Add.1, para. 6)

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of support of the
African Union Mission in Somalia for the period from 1 July to 31 December 200956 and the
related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,57
Recalling Security Council resolution 1863 (2009) of 16 January 2009, by which the
Council expressed its intent to establish a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia as a
follow-on force to the African Union Mission in Somalia, subject to its further decision by 1 June
2009, and requested the Secretary-General, in order for the forces of the Mission to be
incorporated into a United Nations peacekeeping operation, to provide a United Nations logistical
support package to the Mission, including equipment and services,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1872 (2009) of 26 May 2009, in which the
Council requested the Secretary-General to continue to provide a logistical support package for
the African Union Mission in Somalia until 31 January 2010,
Recalling further its resolution 63/275A of 7 April 2009 on the financing of activities arising
from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009),
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the United Nations
Trust Fund established to support the African Union Mission in Somalia,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of the facilities and
equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to minimize the costs of
procurement for the logistical support package;
2. Acknowledges with appreciation that the use of the logistics hub at Entebbe, Uganda,
has been cost-effective and has resulted in savings for the United Nations, and welcomes the
expansion of the logistics hub to provide logistical support to peacekeeping operations in the
region and to contribute further to their enhanced efficiency and responsiveness, taking into
account the ongoing efforts in this regard;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on relevant legislative mandates;
4. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,57 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
_______________
56
57

A/63/867.
A/63/874.

81

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures to ensure effectiveness,
efficiency and transparency with regard to the use of United Nations resources, bearing in mind
the specific nature of the support package;
Estimates for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2009
6. Takes note of paragraph 20 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions;
7. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the support of the
African Union Mission in Somalia for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2009 in a total
amount not exceeding 138,802,500 United States dollars;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a full 2009/10 budget in a timely manner,
with a view to taking a decision thereon no later than 31 October 2009;
Financing of the commitment authority
9. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 138,802,500 dollars for the
period from 1 July to 31 December 2009, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2009, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
10. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 9 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
1,347,800 dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment income approved for the period
from 1 July to 31 December 2009;
Estimates for the support account for peacekeeping operations and the United Nations
Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
11. Further decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the support of the African
Union Mission in Somalia the amount of 6,102,400 dollars for the period from 1 July 2009 to
30 June 2010, comprising 5,078,700 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations
and 1,023,700 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
12. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 6,102,400 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2009, as set out in resolution 61/237, and the scale of assessments for 2010;58
13. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 12
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 629,700 dollars, comprising the
prorated share of 528,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
support account and the prorated share of 101,000 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
14. Invites voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund in Support of the African Union
Mission to Somalia;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Financing of activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)”.

_______________
58

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

82

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 63/276
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 7 April 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/649/Add.1, para. 8)

63/276. Accountability framework, enterprise risk management and internal control
framework, and results-based management framework
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 59/272 of 23 December 2004 and 60/254 of 8 May 2006, section I
of its resolution 60/260 of 8 May 2006, its resolution 60/283 of 7 July 2006, paragraph 4 of its
resolution 61/245 of 22 December 2006, paragraph 22 of its resolution 62/236 of 22 December
2007 and paragraphs 15 and 16 of its resolution 62/250 of 20 June 2008,
Recalling also its resolutions 55/231 of 23 December 2000, 56/253 of 24 December 2001,
57/290 B of 18 June 2003 and 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and paragraph 2 of its resolution 60/257 of
8 May 2006,
Aware of the significant flaws in terms of internal monitoring, inspection and accountability
regarding, for example, the management of the United Nations oil-for-food programme,
Noting that since its sixtieth session, the General Assembly has included in its agenda the
item entitled “Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative management and internal
oversight of the Independent Inquiry Committee into the United Nations Oil-for-Food
Programme”,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the accountability framework,
enterprise risk management and internal control framework, and results-based management
framework,59 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,60 as well as the related section of the report of the Independent Audit Advisory
Committee on its activities for the period from 1 January to 31 July 2008,61
Having also considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the review
of results-based management in the United Nations,62 and the report of the Joint Inspection Unit
on results-based management in the United Nations in the context of the reform process63 and the
comments of the Secretary-General thereon,64
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the accountability framework,
enterprise risk management and internal control framework, and results-based management
framework,59 and the related section of the report of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee
on its activities for the period from 1 January to 31 July 2008;61
2. Also takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the review
of results-based management in the United Nations,62 and the report of the Joint Inspection Unit
on results-based management in the United Nations in the context of the reform process63 and the
comments of the Secretary-General thereon;64
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,60 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
_______________
59

A/62/701 and Corr.1 and Add.1.
A/63/457.
61
A/63/328, sect. III.D.
62
A/63/268.
63
See A/61/805.
64
See A/62/704.
60

83

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Reaffirms its commitment to strengthening accountability in the Secretariat and the
accountability of the Secretary-General to Member States and the achievement of results, and
emphasizes the importance of establishing real, effective and efficient mechanisms that foster
institutional and personal accountability;
5. Stresses that accountability is a central pillar of effective and efficient management that
requires attention at the highest level;
6. Reaffirms paragraph 2 of its resolution 60/257, in which it endorsed the benchmarking
framework for the implementation of results-based management in the United Nations, and that
the implementation of any proposal on the accountability of the Secretariat to Member States shall
in no way call into question the sole prerogative of Member States in respect of defining the roles
and responsibilities of the intergovernmental bodies and oversight bodies for results-based
management, including all aspects of programme planning, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation;
7. Strongly urges the Secretary-General to respect the sole prerogative of Member States
regarding the application of the proposed actions included in paragraph 86 of his report,65 in
particular principle 4, and requests him to refrain from redefining the roles and responsibilities of
the intergovernmental bodies and oversight bodies for results-based management, including all
aspects of programme planning, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation;
8.

Decides not to endorse the proposed accountability framework;

9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, for consideration
at the first part of its resumed sixty-fourth session, in consultation with the respective oversight
bodies, drawing on the expertise of relevant United Nations entities and taking fully into account
all relevant resolutions on accountability, a comprehensive report including, inter alia:
(a) A clear definition of accountability and proposals on accountability mechanisms,
including clear parameters for their application and the instruments for their rigorous enforcement,
without exceptions at any level, and a clear definition of roles and responsibilities;
(b) Clear and specific measures to ensure the access of Member States to timely and
reliable information on results achieved and resources used by the United Nations Secretariat, as
well as its performance including on measures to improve performance reporting;
(c) Concrete measures to ensure the timely implementation of the recommendations of the
oversight bodies;
(d) Measures to strengthen personal accountability within the Secretariat and institutional
accountability towards Member States on the results achieved and resources used;
(e) Measures to ensure transparency in the selection and appointment process of senior
managers, including at the Assistant Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-General levels;
(f) Concrete proposals on the reform of the performance appraisal system, taking fully
into account the views of staff, as well as on sanctions for under-performance and rewards for
outstanding performance to be applied for staff and senior management, including at the Assistant
Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-General levels;
(g) A clear definition of responsibilities resulting from the delegation of authority, and
clear guidelines for programme managers for exercising that authority and actions to improve the
system of the delegation of authority, including, inter alia, through systematic reporting
mechanisms on how the delegated authority is exercised;
(h) Measures taken to implement the results-based management framework, including
measures taken by the Secretary-General to strengthen the senior management’s leadership and

_______________
65

A/62/701 and Corr.1.

84

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

commitment to promoting and supporting a culture of results in the United Nations, as well as a
common understanding of results-based management and its implications;
(i) Scope, parameters and time frame for the application of a reliable results-based
management information system, including detailed information on its compatibility with existing
and projected information management systems;
(j) A proposed detailed plan and road map for the implementation of the enterprise risk
management and internal control framework;
(k) An explanation of how the measures to strengthen the Secretariat’s accountability
mechanisms would address the significant flaws in terms of internal monitoring, inspection and
accountability regarding the management of the United Nations oil-for-food programme;
10. Approves, under the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009, the creation of
one position at the P-4 level under section 28A, Office of the Under-Secretary-General for
Management, to be financed under general temporary assistance for nine months, the primary
objective being the preparation of the report referred to in paragraph 9 above, and to be reported in
the context of the second performance report on the programme budget;
11. Also approves, under the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009, the
redeployment of two posts (one P-4 and one General Service (Principal-level)) from section 29,
Internal oversight, to section 28A, Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management, as
well as the amount of 24,000 United States dollars in non-post resources;
12. Takes note of paragraph 38 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions with regard to the pilot project referred to in paragraph 104 (b) of the
report of the Secretary-General;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report, to be considered by the Fifth
Committee at the first part of the resumed sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly, on the
modalities to be applied regarding the sharing of information contained in consultants’ reports on
management-related issues;
14. Decides that the consultants’ reports referred to in paragraph 13 above are to be made
available by the Secretary-General, upon the request of Member States, subject to approval by the
General Assembly of the modalities to be applied;
15. Notes the existing practice of informal sharing of consultants’ reports, and decides that
the Secretary-General is to continue this practice, pending a decision on the report mentioned in
paragraph 13 above;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight Services
with carrying out a review of the practices of the Secretariat in this regard;
17. Invites the Sixth Committee to consider the legal aspects of the report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled “Information-sharing practices between the United Nations and national law
enforcement authorities, as well as referrals of possible criminal cases related to United Nations
staff, United Nations officials and experts on mission”,66 without prejudice to the role of the Fifth
Committee as the Main Committee of the General Assembly responsible for administrative and
budgetary matters.

_______________
66

A/63/331.

85

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 63/283
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/648/Add.6, para. 6)

63/283. Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political
initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 62/237 A of 22 December 2007, section V of its resolution 62/238 of
22 December 2007, section III of its resolution 62/245 of 3 April 2008, section XI of its resolution
63/263 of 24 December 2008 and section IV of its resolution 63/268 of 7 April 2009,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the estimates in respect of special
political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly
and/or the Security Council67 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,68
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;67

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,68 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Decides to establish one Legal Affairs Officer position (P-4), one Senior Security
Sector Reform Officer position (P-5) and one Human Rights Officer position (P-4);
4. Approves the revised budget for the United Nations Political Office for Somalia for
2009 in the amount of 16,178,500 United States dollars gross (15,262,300 dollars net);
5. Takes note of the balance of 6,641,400 dollars under the appropriation for the
biennium 2008–2009 based on actual expenditures incurred in 2008;
6. Decides to appropriate, after taking into account the unencumbered balance of
6,641,400 dollars, under the procedure provided for in paragraph 11 of annex I to General
Assembly resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986, an amount of 8,620,900 dollars under
section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009;
7. Also decides to appropriate an amount of 916,200 dollars under section 35, Staff
assessment, to be offset by a corresponding amount under income section 1, Income from staff
assessment, of the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009.
RESOLUTION 63/284
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/638/Add.1, para. 6)

63/284. Timely submission of documents
The General Assembly,
Recalling section IV, paragraph 12, of its resolution 63/248 of 24 December 2008,

_______________
67
68

A/63/346/Add.7.
A/63/868.

86

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on action taken to improve the timely
submission of documents for the Fifth Committee69 and the related reports of the Committee on
Conferences70 and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,71
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on action taken to improve the timely
submission of documents for the Fifth Committee;69
2.

Welcomes the report of the Committee on Conferences;70

3. Reiterates the importance of the timely issuance of documents for the Fifth
Committee;
4. Welcomes the progress achieved so far by the task force concerning the timely
issuance of documents for the Fifth Committee on peacekeeping financing;
5. Notes with concern the lack of conference services being provided to the Human
Rights Council, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Council, as a subsidiary
body of the General Assembly, is provided with all necessary conference services to support its
activities, including the universal periodic review;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight Services
with a review of the circumstances that led to insufficient conference services being put at the
disposal of the Human Rights Council in 2009 and to submit its recommendations to the General
Assembly at the main part of its sixty-fourth session in order to avoid similar situations;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to maintain the support to major groups
participating in the 2009 substantive session of the Economic and Social Council, to be held in
Geneva.
RESOLUTION 63/285
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/894, para. 14)

63/285. Rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 62/252 of 20 June 2008,
Recalling also its resolutions 55/274 of 14 June 2001 and 59/298 of 22 June 2005,
Having considered the updated report of the Secretary-General on the review of the
methodology for rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries72 and the related report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,73
1. Takes note of the updated report of the Secretary-General on the review of the
methodology for rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries;72
2. Endorses the recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,73 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;

_______________
69

A/63/735.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 32A (A/63/32/Add.1).
71
A/63/746, sect. II.
72
A/63/697.
73
A/63/746, sect. IV.E.
70

87

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Decides that the cost of any equipment purchased in a foreign currency by a troopcontributing country as well as the salary of any troop paid in a foreign currency may be reported
in that currency;
4. Also decides to approve the increase in the number of days of recreational leave
allowance paid to members of the military contingents and formed police units from seven to
fifteen.
RESOLUTION 63/286
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/894, para. 14)

63/286. Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XIV of its resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994 and its resolution
62/231 of 22 December 2007,
Recalling also its decision 50/500 of 17 September 1996 on the financing of the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which
was resolution 62/251 of 20 June 2008,
Recalling further its resolution 56/292 of 27 June 2002 concerning the establishment of the
strategic deployment stocks and its subsequent resolutions on the status of the implementation of
the strategic deployment stocks, the latest of which was resolution 62/251,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Logistics Base,74 the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,75 and the oral statement of the Chairman of the Advisory Committee,76
Reiterating the importance of establishing an accurate inventory of assets,
1. Notes with appreciation the facilities provided by the Government of Italy to the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions75 and the oral statement of the
Chairman of the Advisory Committee,76 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
3. Recalls paragraphs 9 and 13 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that indicators of achievement reflect more fully the scope of
functions and services provided by the United Nations Logistics Base to peacekeeping operations
and other field missions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take measures to expedite receipt and inspection
procedures on strategic deployment stocks shipped from the United Nations Logistics Base and to
report thereon in the context of the next budget submission;
5. Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to submit proposals to the General
Assembly on a global support strategy for United Nations peacekeeping operations as referred to
in paragraph 24 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
ensure that his proposals include a thorough cost-benefit analysis;
_______________
74

A/63/626 and A/63/824 and Corr.1.
A/63/746/Add.17.
76
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Fifth Committee, 52nd meeting
(A/C.5/63/SR.52), and corrigendum.
75

88

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Recalls paragraph 51 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to relocate
the Standing Police Capacity to the United Nations Logistics Base;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of
29 June 2007, as well as other relevant resolutions;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
8. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
United Nations Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;77
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
9. Approves the cost estimates for the United Nations Logistics Base amounting to
57,954,100 United States dollars for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;
Financing of the budget estimates
10. Decides that the requirements for the United Nations Logistics Base for the period
from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 shall be financed as follows:
(a) The unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 3,209,800 dollars
in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008 to be applied against the resources required
for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;
(b) The balance of 54,744,300 dollars to be prorated among the budgets of the active
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;
(c) The estimated staff assessment income of 5,404,400 dollars, comprising the amount of
5,093,900 dollars for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 and the increase of 310,500
dollars in respect of the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008, to be offset against the balance
referred to in subparagraph (b) above, to be prorated among the budgets of the individual active
peacekeeping operations;
11. Also decides to consider at its sixty-fourth session the question of the financing of the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy.
RESOLUTION 63/287
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/894, para. 14)

63/287. Support account for peacekeeping operations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/258 of 3 May 1991, 47/218 A of 23 December 1992, 48/226 A
of 23 December 1993, 55/238 of 23 December 2000, 56/241 of 24 December 2001, 56/293 of
27 June 2002, 57/318 of 18 June 2003, 58/298 of 18 June 2004, 59/301 of 22 June 2005, 60/268
of 30 June 2006, 61/245 and 61/246 of 22 December 2006, 61/256 of 15 March 2007, 61/279 of
29 June 2007 and 62/250 of 20 June 2008, its decisions 48/489 of 8 July 1994, 49/469 of
23 December 1994 and 50/473 of 23 December 1995 and its other relevant resolutions,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the support
account for peacekeeping operations78 and on strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to
_______________
77
78

A/63/626.
A/63/698 and Add.1 and A/63/767 and Corr.1.

89

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

manage and sustain peacekeeping operations,79 the reports of the Independent Audit Advisory
Committee on the proposed budget for the Office of Internal Oversight Services under the support
account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 201080 and on
vacant posts in the Office,81 the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit of
the Secretariat’s structure for managing and sustaining peacekeeping operations82 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,83
Recognizing the importance of the United Nations being able to respond and deploy rapidly
to a peacekeeping operation upon adoption of a relevant resolution of the Security Council, within
thirty days for traditional peacekeeping operations and ninety days for complex peacekeeping
operations,
Recognizing also the need for adequate support during all phases of peacekeeping
operations, including the liquidation and termination phases,
Mindful that the level of the support account should broadly correspond to the mandate,
number, size and complexity of peacekeeping missions,
Attaching great importance to the provision of adequate resources for peacekeeping
operations and their backstopping as well as for all priority activities of the Organization, in
particular activities in the area of development, and underlining the need for genuine and
meaningful partnership between the Security Council, the troop-contributing Governments and
other Member States,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the support
account for peacekeeping operations78 and on strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to
manage and sustain peacekeeping operations,79 the reports of the Independent Audit Advisory
Committee on the proposed budget for the Office of Internal Oversight Services under the support
account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 201080 and on
vacant posts in the Office81 and the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit
of the Secretariat’s structure for managing and sustaining peacekeeping operations;82
2. Reaffirms its role in carrying out a thorough analysis and approval of human and
financial resources and policies with a view to ensuring the full, effective and efficient
implementation of all mandated programmes and activities and the implementation of policies in
this regard;
3. Also reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the
General Assembly entrusted with responsibility for administrative and budgetary matters;
4.

Further reaffirms rule 153 of its rules of procedure;

5. Reaffirms that the support account funds shall be used for the sole purpose of financing
human resources and non-human resource requirements for backstopping and supporting
peacekeeping operations at Headquarters, and that any changes in this limitation require the prior
approval of the General Assembly;
6. Also reaffirms the need for adequate funding for the backstopping of peacekeeping
operations, as well as the need for full justification for that funding in support account budget
submissions;

_______________
79

A/63/702 and Corr.1.
A/63/703.
81
A/63/737.
82
A/63/837.
83
A/63/841.
80

90

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Further reaffirms the need for effective and efficient administration and financial
management of peacekeeping operations, and urges the Secretary-General to continue to identify
measures to increase the productivity and efficiency of the support account;
8. Reiterates that the delegation of authority on the part of the Secretary-General should
be in order to facilitate the better management of the Organization, but stresses that the overall
responsibility for management of the Organization rests with the Secretary-General as the Chief
Administrative Officer;
9. Affirms the need for the Secretary-General to ensure that the delegation of authority to
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Field Support and field missions
is in strict compliance with relevant resolutions and decisions, as well as relevant rules and
procedures of the General Assembly on this matter;
10. Stresses that heads of departments report to and are accountable to the SecretaryGeneral;
11. Requests the Secretary-General, when submitting his budget proposals, to include
details of the full annual cost of posts for the subsequent budget;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of General Assembly resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and
61/276 of 29 June 2007 and other relevant resolutions;
13. Notes that the overall benefits of the restructuring of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support, remain yet to be fully assessed, and, in this
regard, requests the Secretary-General to continue to make every effort to strengthen the capacity
of the Organization to manage and sustain peacekeeping operations in the face of their surge in
volume and complexity;
14. Reiterates that the Secretary-General should address systemic issues that hamper good
management of the Organization, including by improving work processes and procedures, and, in
that context, stresses that structural change is no substitute for managerial improvement;
15. Stresses the need for the Secretary-General to ensure a strategic and coherent vision
when undertaking reform initiatives, and, in this context, emphasizes that any new proposal for
reform should fully take into account ongoing and past management reforms;
16. Emphasizes the importance of preserving the unity of command in missions at all
levels, as well as a coherence in policy and strategy and clear command structures in the field and
up to and including Headquarters;
17. Also emphasizes the importance of interaction and coordination with troopcontributing countries;
18. Further emphasizes the need to ensure the safety and security of United Nations
personnel;
19. Takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services,82 and urges the
Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the recommendations therein;
20. Also takes note of the observations and recommendations contained in the report of the
Independent Audit Advisory Committee on vacant posts in the Office of Internal Oversight
Services,81 and requests the Secretary-General to fill the vacancies in the Office, in accordance
with the existing relevant provisions governing recruitment in the United Nations and the
provisions of the present resolution;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight Services to
implement the recommendations of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee contained in
paragraphs 22 to 29 and 33 to 35 of its report;80

91

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

22. Stresses, in this regard, the importance for the Office of Internal Oversight Services, in
its reports on investigations of fraud and corruption in the Organization, to define and make a clear
differentiation between the actual value of financial loss to the Organization, if any, and other
findings that may not have direct financial implication and the total number and value of contracts
investigated, in order to convey an accurate perception of the value of financial loss;
23. Reiterates the importance of strengthened accountability in the Organization and of
ensuring greater accountability of the Secretary-General to Member States, inter alia, for the
effective and efficient implementation of legislative mandates and the use of human and financial
resources;
24. Reiterates its regret at the delay in the response of the Secretary-General to its
outstanding requests in its resolutions 59/288 of 13 April 2005, 61/246 of 22 December 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007 and 62/269 of 20 June 2008, and urges him, as a matter of priority, to
submit a report on procurement governance and other issues, as requested in resolutions 61/246,
61/276 and 62/269, with full justification of the reasons for the delay;
25. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,83 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
26. Notes the observation of the Board of Auditors that there is no defined formula to
show the relationship between the level and complexity of peacekeeping operations and the level
of the support account,84 and, in this regard, emphasizes the need to develop a sound approach for
determining the proposed support account staffing requirements, so that Member States can make
fully informed decisions on resources;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to review the level of the support account on a regular
basis, taking into consideration the number, size and complexity of peacekeeping operations;
28. Takes note of paragraph 45 of the report of the Advisory Committee,83 and requests the
Secretary-General, taking into account the relevant legislative mandates, to include, in his
rejustification of the totality of support account staffing requirements, inter alia, information on
and an analysis of the following:
(a) The lead agency, entity, department and/or offices for major strands of activity and the
scope of their respective responsibilities;
(b)

Comprehensive assessment of the evolution of the support account;

(c) Related human resources funded from the regular budget and other sources of funding,
including in other departments of the United Nations Secretariat, resources in field missions and,
where relevant, the specialized agencies and funds and programmes;
(d) Impact of the requested resources on the improvement to the administrative and
financial management of peacekeeping operations;
(e) All functions covered by the proposed resources other than that of backstopping
peacekeeping operations;
(f) The impact of information and communications technology initiatives, including
related business process improvements, on the enhancement of productivity and on the level of
resources requested;
(g)

The outcome of business process improvements;

_______________
84

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 5 (A/63/5), vol. II, chap. II,
para. 62.

92

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(h) Lessons learned from recent experience of operating the support account, including on
the conversion of general temporary assistance positions;
29. Recalls section I, paragraph 6, of resolution 55/238, paragraph 11 of resolution 56/241,
paragraph 19 of resolution 61/279, and paragraph 22 of resolution 62/250, and requests the
Secretary-General to make further concrete efforts to ensure proper representation of troopcontributing countries in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support, taking into account their contribution to United Nations peacekeeping;
30. Reiterates section III, paragraph 10, of resolution 63/250, and invites the SecretaryGeneral, when appointing officials at the D-1 and D-2 levels in the Departments of the Secretariat
that provide backstopping and/or policy guidance to field missions, to fully consider the relevant
field experience of the candidates, as one of the highly desirable appointment criteria;
31. Recalls its resolution 63/280 of 8 May 2009 and decides to establish the Security
Sector Reform Unit in the Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions;
32. Also recalls paragraph 17 of resolution 60/268, and reiterates its request to the
Secretary-General to entrust to the Office of Internal Oversight Services the task of refining the
methodology for allocating resident auditors, taking also into account the risks and complexity of
the operation of individual peacekeeping operations, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly;
33. Stresses that the due process rights afforded to staff under investigation have to
withstand review by the system of the administration of justice, including in the context of the
establishment of the new system;
34. Notes with serious concern the decision to advertise vacancies for positions not
approved by the General Assembly, and stresses the need for vacancy announcements to be made
in accordance with existing relevant provisions governing recruitment in the United Nations and
that any changes involving administrative and financial implications shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Assembly in accordance with established procedures;
35. Decides to maintain, for the financial period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010, the
funding mechanism for the support account used in the current period, from 1 July 2008 to
30 June 2009, as approved in paragraph 3 of its resolution 50/221 B of 7 June 1996;
36. Takes note of paragraph 175 of the report of the Advisory Committee;83
37. Decides not to introduce the proposed structure based on the hub approach at this
stage, and decides to designate, as a pilot project, centres of investigation in Nairobi, Vienna and
New York from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2012;
38. Recognizes the value of resident investigators, and decides to maintain resident
investigations staff presence in some peacekeeping operations, pending its consideration of the
comprehensive report referred to in paragraph 40 below;
39. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a preliminary report on the status of
implementation of the pilot project at the second part of its resumed sixty-fifth session;
40. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly for
consideration, in the context of the 2012/13 support account budget, after full consultations with
all relevant stakeholders, integrating in particular the comments and observations of field
missions, a comprehensive report on the pilot project, with a view to deciding on a restructuring of
the Investigations Division of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, including:
(a) A complete qualitative analysis of the implementation of the three-year pilot project,
including the lessons learned;
(b) A clear and transparent presentation of the existing structure and the pilot project
structure and their respective coverage of field missions;

93

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(c) A comprehensive cost-benefit analysis, including of the effectiveness and efficiency of
the structure of the pilot project based on accurate assumptions, including an analysis of the longterm trend of investigations in field missions;
(d) Fully justified rationale for all deployments of investigations staff and resources and
the ability of the Office of Internal Oversight Services to respond to changing caseload
requirements;
(e)

Complete and updated information on the current staffing, vacancy rate and caseload;

41. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to
request the Board of Auditors to conduct an audit of the implementation of the pilot project for the
period of 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2012, without prejudice to the role of the Independent Audit
Advisory Committee, and to report thereon separately to the General Assembly at the second part
of its resumed sixty-sixth session;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
42. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;85
Budget estimates for the financial period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
43. Approves the support account requirements in the amount of 294,030,900 United
States dollars for the financial period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010, including 1,182
continuing posts, and 63 new temporary posts contained in annex I to the present resolution, and
83 continuing and 60 new general temporary assistance positions contained in annex II, as well as
their related post and non-post requirements;
Financing of the budget estimates
44. Decides that the requirements for the support account for peacekeeping operations for
the financial period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 shall be financed as follows:
(a) The unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 15,056,300
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008, to be applied to the resources
required for the financial period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;
(b) The amount of 7,322,600 dollars representing the excess of the authorized level of the
Peacekeeping Reserve Fund in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008, to be applied to
the resources required for the financial period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;
(c) The amount of 62,800 dollars representing the excess of the appropriation for the
support account requirements in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, to be applied
to the resources required for the financial period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;
(d) The balance of 271,589,200 dollars to be prorated among the budgets of the active
peacekeeping operations for the financial period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;
(e) The estimated staff assessment income of 28,273,500 dollars, comprising the amount
of 27,486,900 dollars for the financial period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 and the increase of
786,600 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008, to be set off against the
balance referred to in subparagraph (d) above, to be prorated among the budgets of the individual
active peacekeeping operations.

_______________
85

A/63/698 and Add.1.

94

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Annex I
Support account posts to be established for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
Number of
posts

Organizational unit

Post level

Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Office of Operations

GTA conversion

1

1 P-5

Office of Rule of Law and Security
Institutions

New

20

1 D-1, 1 P-5, 10 P-4, 6 P-3,
2 GS (OL)

GTA conversion

1

P-3

Subtotal

22

Department of Field Support
Office of the Under Secretary-General

New

1

1 GS (PL)

Field Budget and Finance Division

New

2

2 P-4

Field Personnel Division

GTA conversion

2

2 P-3

Logistics Support Division

New

7

3 P-4, 3 P-3, 1 GS (PL)

Reclassification
GTA conversion
Subtotal

1 P-3 to P-4
1

1 GS (OL)

13

Department of Management
Office of Programme Planning, Budget and New
Accounts
GTA conversion

2

1 P-4, 1 GS (OL)

4

1 P-4, 3 P-3

Reclassification
Office of Human Resources Management

Office of Central Support Services

1 P-3 to P-4; 1 P-4 to P-5

New

11

1 P-4, 5 P-3, 1 P-2, 1 GS (PL),
3 GS (OL)

GTA conversion

3

2 P-4, 1 GS (OL)

New

3

1 P-4, 2 P-3

Subtotal

23

Office of Internal Oversight Services
Inspection and Evaluation Division

New

1

1 P-4

Internal Audit Division

New

1

1 P-5

Subtotal
Office of Legal Affairs

New

2
Subtotal

Office of the United Nations
Ombudsman

2

New

1 P-5, 1 P-4

2
1

Subtotal

1

Total

63

1 P-5

1D-1, 5 P-5, 23 P-4, 22 P-3,
1 P-2, 3 GS (PL), 8 GS (OL)

Abbreviations: GS (OL), General Service (Other Level); GS (PL), General Service (Principal Level); GTA (General
Temporary Assistance).

95

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Annex II
Support account general temporary assistance positions to be established for the period
from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
Number of
positions

Organizational unit

Position level

Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Office of Operations

Continuation

2

1 P-4, 1 GS (OL)

Office of Rule of Law and Security
Institutions

New

1

1 P-3

Policy, Evaluation and Training Division

Continuation

8

1 P-5, 3 P-4, 3 P-3, 1 GS (OL)

Subtotal

11

Department of Field Support
Field Personnel Division

Continuation

6

4 P-3, 2 GS (OL)

New

13

11 P-3, 2 GS (OL)

Field Budget and Finance Division

Continuation

1

1 P-4

Logistics Support Division

Continuation

2

2 P-3

New

1

1 P-3

Subtotal

23

Department of Management
Office of the Under-Secretary-General

New

2

1 P-4, 1 GS (OL)

Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Continuation
Accounts

14

5 P-4, 4 P-3, 1 P-2, 4 GS (OL)

Office of Human Resources Management* New

22

4 P-4, 4 P-3, 2 P-2, 12 GS (OL)

Office of Central Support Services

Continuation

3

3 GS (OL)

New

4

3 P-3, 1 P-2

Subtotal

45

Office of Internal Oversight Services
Investigations Division

Continuation

2

New York: 1 P-3, 1 GS (OL)

New

7

New York: 1 P-5, 3 P-4, 1 P-3,
2 GS (OL)

Continuation

14

Vienna: 1 D-1, 1 P-5, 2 P-4, 7 P-3,
2 GS (OL), 1 GS (PL)

New

6

Nairobi: 1 D-1, 1 P-5, 1 P-4,
1 P-3, 2 GS (OL)

Continuation

10

Nairobi: 3 P-4, 5 P-3, 2 GS (OL)

Continuation

12

MONUC: 1 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 NGS
UNMIL: 1 P-4, 2 P-3, 1 NGS
UNMIS: 1 P-4, 2 P-3
MINUSTAH: 1 P-4
UNOCI: 1 P-4

Subtotal

96

51

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Number of
positions

Organizational unit

1

Position level

Office of Legal Affairs

New

Ethics Office

Continuation

Office of Information and
Communications Technology

Continuation

7

5 P-3, 2 GS (OL)

New

3

1 P-5, 2 P-3

Subtotal

1 P-4

1
2

Subtotal

1 P-3, 1 GS (OL)

2

Subtotal

10

Total

143

*Note: General temporary assistance positions equivalent to 2,018,900 dollars (before the application of the approved
vacancy rates).
Abbreviations: GS (OL), General Service (Other Level); GS (PL), General Service (Principal Level); NGS (National
General Service); MONUC (United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo);
UNMIL (United Nations Mission in Liberia); UNMIS (United Nations Mission in the Sudan); MINUSTAH (United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti); UNOCI (United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire).

RESOLUTION 63/288
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/895, para. 6)

63/288. Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Operation in Burundi86 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,87
Recalling Security Council resolution 1545 (2004) of 21 May 2004, by which the Council
authorized, for an initial period of six months as from 1 June 2004, with the intention to renew it
for further periods, the deployment of a peacekeeping operation called the United Nations
Operation in Burundi, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate
of the Operation, the last of which was resolution 1692 (2006) of 30 June 2006, by which the
Council extended the mandate of the Operation until 31 December 2006,
Recalling also its resolution 58/312 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Operation and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 62/253 of 20 June 2008,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Operation in Burundi as
at 31 March 2009, including the credits in the amount of 49.4 million United States dollars;

_______________
86
87

A/63/551.
A/63/773.

97

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,87 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
Disposition of assets
3. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Operation in Burundi;86
4. Encourages Member States that are owed credits for the closed peacekeeping mission
accounts to apply those credits to any accounts where they have outstanding assessed
contributions;
5. Urges all Member States to make every possible effort to ensure the payment of their
assessed contributions in full;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi”.
RESOLUTION 63/289
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/896, para. 6)

63/289. Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire,88 the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions89 and the report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on the programme evaluation of the performance and the achievement of results by the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire,90
Recalling Security Council resolution 1528 (2004) of 27 February 2004, by which the
Council established the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire for an initial period of twelve
months as from 4 April 2004, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Operation, the latest of which was resolution 1865 (2009) of 27 January 2009, by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation until 31 July 2009,
Recalling also its resolution 58/310 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Operation and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 62/254 of 20 June 2008,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Operation with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly

_______________
88

A/63/610 and A/63/724.
A/63/746/Add.7.
90
A/63/713.
89

98

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire as at 30 April 2009, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
132.2 million United States dollars, representing some 6 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only forty-nine Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Operation in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Operation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to give consideration to making the fullest possible use
of the facilities at the logistics hub at Entebbe, Uganda;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
11. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,89 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
12. Takes note of paragraph 10 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Operation is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
15. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Operation against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Operation;
16. Takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the programme
evaluation of the performance and the achievement of results by the Operation,90 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the recommendations therein;
17. Expresses concern at the comments of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
contained in paragraphs 14, 31 and 32 of its report;

99

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
18. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Operation for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;91
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
19. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire the amount of 513,442,600 dollars for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010,
inclusive of the amount of 491,774,100 dollars for the maintenance of the Operation, 18,033,500
dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 3,635,000 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
20. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 42,786,883 dollars for
the period from 1 to 31 July 2009 in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2009, as set out in Assembly resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
21. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 20 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
990,333 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 803,992 dollars approved
for the Operation, the prorated share of 156,441 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of 29,900 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
22. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 470,655,717 dollars for the
period from 1 August 2009 to 30 June 2010, at a monthly rate of 42,786,883 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2009, as set out in resolution 61/237, and for 2010,92 subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Operation;
23. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 22
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 10,893,667 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 8,843,908 dollars approved for the Operation, the prorated
share of 1,720,859 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 328,900 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
24. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Operation, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 20
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
19.5 million dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
25. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Operation, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 19.5 million dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 24
above;
_______________
91
92

A/63/610.
To be adopted by the General Assembly.

100

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

26. Also decides that the decrease of 156,100 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 19.5 million dollars referred to in paragraphs 24 and 25 above;
27. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
28. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Operation under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
29. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
30. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire”.
RESOLUTION 63/290
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/897, para. 6)

63/290. Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus93 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,94
Recalling Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964, regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was
resolution 1873 (2009) of 29 May 2009, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force
until 15 December 2009,
Recalling also its resolution 47/236 of 14 September 1993 on the financing of the Force and
its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 62/255 of
20 June 2008,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force by
certain Governments,
Noting that voluntary contributions were insufficient to cover all the costs of the Force,
including those incurred by troop-contributing Governments prior to 16 June 1993, and regretting
the absence of an adequate response to appeals for voluntary contributions, including that
contained in the letter dated 17 May 1994 from the Secretary-General to all Member States,95

_______________
93

A/63/536 and A/63/693.
A/63/746/Add.9.
95
S/1994/647.
94

101

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
Acknowledging paragraph 31 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus as at 30 April 2009, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 16.6 million
United States dollars, representing some 5 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only forty-eight Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa ;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of the
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
10. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,94 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
11. Notes the reduction in rotation travel costs, and requests the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts to increase efficiency gains in this regard;
12. Takes note of paragraph 38 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
13. Welcomes the progress which has been made so far by the host Government and the
Force regarding the renovation of the accommodation of military contingent personnel as well as
other personnel of the Force, and requests the Secretary-General to continue making every effort,
in coordination with the host Government, to ensure that the renovations are completed as
scheduled, without delay, and to report thereon in the context of the next budget submission;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;

102

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

15. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Force is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
16. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
17. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Force for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;96
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
18. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus the amount of 56,794,900 dollars for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June
2010, inclusive of 54,412,700 dollars for the maintenance of the Force, 1,982,600 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 399,600 dollars for the United Nations Logistics
Base;
Financing of the appropriation
19. Notes with appreciation that a one-third share of the net appropriation, equivalent to
18,074,373 dollars, will be funded through voluntary contributions from the Government of
Cyprus and the amount of 6.5 million dollars from the Government of Greece;
20. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 32,220,527 dollars at a
monthly rate of 2,685,044 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2009, as set out in Assembly resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006, and for 2010,97 subject to a
decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
21. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 20 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
2,517,500 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,271,700 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 206,400 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 39,400 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
22. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Force, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 20 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 704,903
dollars for the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in
resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008, as set out in
resolution 61/237;
23. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Force, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 704,903 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 22
above;

_______________
96
97

A/63/536.
To be adopted by the General Assembly.

103

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

24. Also decides, that the increase in the estimated staff assessment income of 214,000
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 704,903 dollars referred to in paragraphs 22 and 23 above;
25. Further decides, taking into account its voluntary contribution for the financial period
ended 30 June 2008, that one third of other income in the amount of 436,090 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2008 shall be returned to the Government of Cyprus;
26. Decides, taking into account its voluntary contribution for the financial period ended
30 June 2008, that the prorated share of other income in the amount of 169,307 dollars in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2008 shall be returned to the Government of Greece;
27. Also decides to continue to maintain as separate the account established for the Force
for the period prior to 16 June 1993, invites Member States to make voluntary contributions to that
account, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in appealing for voluntary
contributions to the account;
28. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
29. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United
Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
30. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
31. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus”.
RESOLUTION 63/291
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/898, para. 6)

63/291. Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,98 the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,99 and the oral statement by the
Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,100
Recalling Security Council resolutions 1258 (1999) of 6 August 1999 and 1279 (1999) of
30 November 1999 regarding, respectively, the deployment to the region of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo of military liaison personnel and the establishment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which were resolution
1843 (2008) of 20 November 2008, by which the Council authorized a temporary increase of the
_______________
98

A/63/563 and A/63/806.
A/63/746/Add.16.
100
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Fifth Committee, 51st meeting
(A/C.5/63/SR.51), and corrigendum.
99

104

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

authorized military strength of the Mission by up to 2,785 military personnel and the strength of
its formed police unit by up to 300 personnel, and resolution 1856 (2008) of 22 December 2008,
by which the Council extended the deployment of the Mission until 31 December 2009 and
authorized the continuation until that date of up to 19,815 military personnel, 760 military
observers, 391 police personnel and 1,050 personnel of formed police units,
Recalling also its resolution 54/260 A of 7 April 2000 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 62/256 of 20 June 2008,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as at 30 April 2009, including the contributions
outstanding in the amount of 274.0 million United States dollars, representing some 4 per cent of
the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only forty-two Member States have paid
their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in
arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Acknowledges with appreciation that the use of the logistics hub at Entebbe, Uganda,
has been cost-effective and has resulted in savings for the United Nations, and welcomes the
expansion of the logistics hub to provide logistical support to peacekeeping operations in the
region and to contribute further to their enhanced efficiency and responsiveness, taking into
account the ongoing efforts in this regard;

105

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
11. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,99 and the oral statement by the
Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,100 subject to
the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full
implementation;
12. Takes note of paragraphs 48 and 49 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
decides to approve 16 general temporary assistance positions for the Office of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region for six months;
13. Also takes note of paragraph 69 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
16. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
17. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;101
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
18. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo the amount of 1,405,912,000 dollars for the
period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010, inclusive of 1,346,584,600 dollars for the maintenance
of the Mission, 49,374,900 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and
9,952,500 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
19. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 702,956,000 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2009, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2009, as set out in Assembly resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
20. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 19 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the
amount of 16,179,450 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 13,118,150
dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 2,570,050 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 491,250 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
21. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 702,956,000 dollars for the
period from 1 January to 30 June 2010 at a monthly rate of 117,159,333 dollars, in accordance

_______________
101

A/63/563.

106

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2010,102 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
22. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 21
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the amount of 16,179,450 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 13,118,150 dollars approved for the Mission,
the prorated share of 2,570,050 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
support account and the prorated share of 491,250 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
23. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 19
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
69,974,500 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
24. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 69,974,500 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 23
above;
25. Also decides that the decrease of 330,100 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 69,974,500 dollars referred to in paragraphs 23 and 24 above;
26. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
27. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
28. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
29. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo”.
RESOLUTION 63/292
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/899, para. 7)

63/292. Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste,103 the related report of the Advisory Committee on
_______________
102
103

To be adopted by the General Assembly.
A/63/607 and A/63/710 and Add.1.

107

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Administrative and Budgetary Questions,104 and the oral statement by the Chairman of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,105
Recalling Security Council resolution 1704 (2006) of 25 August 2006, by which the Council
decided to establish a follow-on mission in Timor-Leste, the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste, for an initial period of six months, with the intention to renew it for further periods,
and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the
latest of which was resolution 1867 (2009) of 26 February 2009, by which the Council extended
the mandate of the Mission until 26 February 2010,
Recalling also its resolutions 61/249 A of 22 December 2006 and 61/249 B of 2 April 2007
on the financing of the Mission, and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was
resolution 62/258 of 20 June 2008,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste as at 30 April 2009, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
42.2 million United States dollars, representing some 8 per cent of the total assessed contributions,
notes with concern that only thirty-five Member States have paid their assessed contributions in
full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
_______________
104

A/63/746/Add.3.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Fifth Committee, 48th meeting
(A/C.5/63/SR.48), and corrigendum.
105

108

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
10. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,104 and the oral statement by the
Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,105 subject to
the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full
implementation;
11. Takes note of paragraph 19 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
12. Also takes note of paragraph 26 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
13. Further takes note of paragraph 33 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
decides to approve the establishment of posts and United Nations Volunteer positions as proposed
in paragraphs 59 to 87 of the report of the Secretary-General,106 except for one Field Service post
for a CarLog/FuelLog Supervisor, four United Nations Volunteer positions for English Language
Teachers, two national General Service posts for Administrative Assistants and nine national
General Service posts for Security Assistants;
14. Takes note of paragraph 36 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
15. Also takes note of paragraph 40 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Mission provides all the necessary
support for the local elections planned for 2009 in Timor-Leste, as mandated by the Security
Council in its resolution 1867 (2009), and, in this regard, decides to approve the resource
requirements of 3,073,200 dollars for the support of local elections in Timor-Leste;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
18. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
19. Requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing General
Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General Service posts,
commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
20. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to take the steps necessary to facilitate
the acceleration of the recruitment process and improve incumbency levels in the Mission;
21. Welcomes the introduction in July 2008 of the new database, the misconduct tracking
system, to record and track allegations of misconduct aimed at having a more accurate recording
of all complaints and allegations received by the Mission, notes the increased number of
allegations of serious and minor misconduct, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
necessary measures are being taken in order to address this situation;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
22. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;107
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
23. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste the amount of 215,011,500 dollars for the period from 1 July 2009 to
_______________
106
107

A/63/710.
A/63/607.

109

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

30 June 2010, inclusive of 205,939,400 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 7,550,200
dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 1,521,900 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
24. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 142,061,175 dollars
for the period from 1 July 2009 to 26 February 2010, in accordance with the levels updated in
General Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2009, as set out in Assembly resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006, and for
2010;108
25. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 24 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
5,746,230 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 5,127,605 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 519,320 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 99,305 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
26. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 72,950,325 dollars for the
period from 27 February to 30 June 2010 at a monthly rate of 17,917,625 dollars, in accordance
with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2010,108 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
27. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 26
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 2,950,770 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 2,633,095 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 266,680 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 50,995 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
28. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 24
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
14,477,500 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the
levels updated in General Assembly resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237;
29. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 14,477,500 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 28
above;
30. Also decides that the decrease of 761,200 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 14,477,500 dollars referred to in paragraphs 28 and 29 above;
31. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
32. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the

_______________
108

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

110

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
33. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
34. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste”.
RESOLUTION 63/293
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/900, para. 6)

63/293. Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia109 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,110
Recalling Security Council resolution 854 (1993) of 6 August 1993, by which the Council
approved the deployment of an advance team of up to ten United Nations military observers for a
period of three months and the incorporation of the advance team into a United Nations observer
mission if such a mission was formally established by the Council,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 858 (1993) of 24 August 1993, by which the
Council established the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Observer Mission, the last of which
was resolution 1866 (2009) of 13 February 2009,
Recalling further its decision 48/475 A of 23 December 1993 on the financing of the
Observer Mission and its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was
resolution 62/260 of 20 June 2008,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Observer Mission with the financial
resources necessary to enable it to complete its administrative liquidation,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia as at 30 April 2009, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 14.2 million
United States dollars, representing some 4 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only seventy-four Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Observer Mission in full;

_______________
109
110

A/63/517 and A/63/684.
A/63/746/Add.6.

111

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Takes note of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions;110
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
administrative liquidation of the Observer Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency
and economy;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit the administrative liquidation budget for
the Observer Mission to the General Assembly at the main part of its sixty-fourth session for
consideration;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
6. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Observer Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;111
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2009
7. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia the amount of 15 million dollars for the administrative liquidation of the
Observer Mission for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2009;
Financing of the appropriation
8. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 10 million dollars for
the period from 1 July to 31 December 2009, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2009, as set out in Assembly resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
Estimates for the support account for peacekeeping operations and the United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
9. Further decides to appropriate to the Special Account the amount of 652,700 dollars
for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010, comprising 543,200 dollars for the support
account for peacekeeping operations and 109,500 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy;
10. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 652,700 dollars for the
period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010, in accordance with the levels updated in resolution
61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2009, as set out in resolution 61/237,
and for 2010;112
11. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 10 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 67,400
dollars, comprising the prorated share of 56,600 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of 10,800 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
12. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Observer Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in
paragraph 8 above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
amount of 3,560,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance
with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2008, as set out in resolution 61/237;
_______________
111
112

A/63/517.
To be adopted by the General Assembly.

112

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

13. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Observer Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share
of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 3,560,400 dollars in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 12
above;
14. Also decides that the decrease of 164,500 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 3,560,400 dollars referred to in paragraphs 12 and 13 above;
15. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Observer Mission under the auspices of
the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution
1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia”.
RESOLUTION 63/294
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/901, para. 6)

63/294. Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti113 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,114
Recalling Security Council resolution 1529 (2004) of 29 February 2004, by which the
Council declared its readiness to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support
continuation of a peaceful and constitutional political process and the maintenance of a secure and
stable environment in Haiti,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1542 (2004) of 30 April 2004, by which the
Council decided to establish the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for an initial period
of six months, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission, the latest of which was resolution 1840 (2008) of 14 October 2008, by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission until 15 October 2009,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Recalling its resolution 58/311 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 62/261 of 20 June 2008,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,

_______________
113
114

A/63/549 and Corr.1 and A/63/709.
A/63/746/Add.10.

113

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti as at 30 April 2009, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 132.8 million
United States dollars, representing some 6 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only sixty-six Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of the
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
10. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,114 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
11. Takes note of paragraph 41 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and emphasizes
the importance of providing appropriate training for national staff, as it contributes to building
national capacity;
12. Also takes note of paragraphs 32 and 47 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
15. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
16. Stresses the importance of hiring Haitian nationals against national posts in the
Mission, taking into account the need to promote national capacity-building and in order to bring
to the Mission experience and knowledge of the local culture, language, traditions and institutions,
and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to ensure accurate and timely posting of vacancy
announcements for national staff on the Mission website;
114

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

17. Decides to allocate up to 3 million dollars for quick-impact projects for the period
from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen the coordination between the Mission,
the United Nations country team and other United Nations entities, including in addressing the
root causes of unexpected emergencies, such as the unrest generated by the food crisis in Haiti;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
19. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;115
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
20. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti the amount of 638,706,400 dollars for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June
2010, inclusive of 611,751,200 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 22,433,300 dollars for
the support account for peacekeeping operations and 4,521,900 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
21. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 186,289,366 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 15 October 2009, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2009, as set out in Assembly resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
22. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 21 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
4,914,321 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 4,102,960 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 681,161 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 130,200 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
23. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 452,417,034 dollars for the
period from 16 October 2009 to 30 June 2010 at a monthly rate of 53,225,533 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2009, as set out in resolution 61/237, and for 2010,116 subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
24. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 23
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 11,934,779 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 9,964,340 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 1,654,239 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 316,200 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
25. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 21
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
19,025,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the

_______________
115
116

A/63/549 and Corr.1.
To be adopted by the General Assembly.

115

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
26. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 19,025,400 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 25
above;
27. Also decides that the increase in the estimated staff assessment income of 44,300
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 19,025,400 dollars referred to in paragraphs 25 and 26 above;
28. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
29. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
30. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
31. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti”.
RESOLUTION 63/295
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/902, para. 7)

63/295. Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo117 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,118
Recalling Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
Recalling also its resolution 53/241 of 28 July 1999 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 62/262 of 20 June 2008,
Acknowledging the complexity of the Mission,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolution of the Security
Council,
_______________
117
118

A/63/569 and A/63/803 and Corr.1.
A/63/746/Add.14.

116

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful also of the need to ensure coordination and cooperation with the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo as at 30 April 2009, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
62.7 million United States dollars, representing some 2 per cent of the total assessed contributions,
notes with concern that only eighty-eight Member States have paid their assessed contributions in
full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
10. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,118 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
11. Decides to create three positions at the P-5, P-4 and P-3 levels in the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, to be funded under general temporary assistance
and accommodated within the level of the approved budget;
12. Takes note of paragraph 35 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
15. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;

117

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
16. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;119
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
17. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo the amount of 48,864,900 dollars for the period from 1 July
2009 to 30 June 2010, inclusive of 46,809,000 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission,
1,711,000 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 344,900 dollars for the
United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
18. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 48,864,900 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006,
and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2009, as set out in Assembly resolution
61/237 of 22 December 2006, and for 2010;120
19. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among
Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund in the amount of 4,204,600 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment
income of 3,992,400 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 178,100 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of
34,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics
Base;
20. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 18 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
5,413,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
21. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 5,413,700 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 20 above;
22. Further decides that the increase of 317,000 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 5,413,700 dollars referred to in paragraphs 20 and 21 above;
23. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
24. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;

_______________
119
120

A/63/569.
To be adopted by the General Assembly.

118

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

25. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo”.
RESOLUTION 63/296
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/903, para. 6)

63/296. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia121 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,122
Recalling Security Council resolution 1497 (2003) of 1 August 2003, by which the Council
declared its readiness to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support the transitional
government and to assist in the implementation of a comprehensive peace agreement in Liberia,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1509 (2003) of 19 September 2003, by which the
Council decided to establish the United Nations Mission in Liberia for a period of twelve months,
and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the
latest of which was resolution 1836 (2008) of 29 September 2008, by which the Council extended
the mandate of the Mission until 30 September 2009,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Recalling its resolution 58/261 A of 23 December 2003 on the financing of the Mission and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 62/263 of 20 June 2008,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in Liberia as at
30 April 2009, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 96.6 million United States
dollars, representing some 2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that
only sixty-seven Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other
Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed
contributions;
_______________
121
122

A/63/588 and Corr.1 and A/63/734.
A/63/746/Add.8.

119

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to give consideration to making the fullest possible use
of facilities at the logistics hub at Entebbe, Uganda;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
11. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,122 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
12. Recalls paragraph 40 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the
Secretary-General to enhance his efforts to carry out the approved quick-impact projects in a
timely manner, while addressing the underlying issues hampering implementation at the Mission;
13. Also recalls paragraph 19 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and encourages the
Secretary-General to improve the presentation of the needs for personnel in order to have a clear
view of the new posts proposed;
14. Takes note of paragraph 36 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
15. Stresses the importance of maintaining experienced staff during the drawdown period
of the Mission and of expanding the skills of all staff, including national staff;
16. Recalls paragraph 44 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the
Secretary-General to continue to make efforts to implement all planned activities, especially those
related to national capacity-building;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the staffing structure of the Mission under
review and to report to the General Assembly about possible post reductions, in particular for the
support activities, in the context of the budget for the period 2010/11;
18. Welcomes the efforts of the Mission with regard to environmental issues;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
20. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
21. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
120

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
22. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;123
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
23. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in
Liberia the amount of 585,682,100 dollars for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010,
inclusive of 560,978,700 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 20,559,300 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 4,144,100 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
24. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 146,420,525 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 30 September 2009, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2009, as set out in Assembly resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
25. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among
Member States, as provided for in paragraph 24 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 3,419,800 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of
2,782,450 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 535,075 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 102,275
dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
26. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 439,261,575 dollars for the
period from 1 October 2009 to 30 June 2010, at a monthly rate of 48,806,842 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2009, as set out in resolution 61/237, and for 2010,124 subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
27. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of resolution 973 (X), there shall
be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 26
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 10,259,400 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 8,347,350 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 1,605,225 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 306,825 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
28. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 24
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
54,157,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
29. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 54,157,100 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 28
above;
_______________
123
124

A/63/588 and Corr.1.
To be adopted by the General Assembly.

121

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

30. Also decides that the decrease of 758,400 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 54,157,100 dollars referred to in paragraphs 28 and 29 above;
31. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
32. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
33. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
34. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia”.
RESOLUTION 63/297
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/904, para. 6)

63/297. Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force125 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,126
Recalling Security Council resolution 350 (1974) of 31 May 1974 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was
resolution 1848 (2008) of 12 December 2008,
Recalling also its resolution 3211 B (XXIX) of 29 November 1974 on the financing of the
United Nations Emergency Force and of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 62/264 of 20 June 2008,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force as at 30 April 2009, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
_______________
125
126

A/63/521 and A/63/686 and Corr.2.
A/63/746/Add.2.

122

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

17.0 million United States dollars, representing some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions,
notes with concern that only forty-five Member States have paid their assessed contributions in
full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
10. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,126 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
11. Recalls paragraph 10 of resolution 62/264 and paragraph 12 of General Assembly
resolution 62/265 of 20 June 2008, and decides not to endorse the recommendation contained in
paragraph 32 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
12. Takes note of paragraph 31 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Force is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
15. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
16. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Force for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;127
17. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force the amount of 2,517,200 dollars for the maintenance of the Force for the period
from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008, in addition to the amount of 41,586,600 dollars already

_______________
127

A/63/521.

123

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

appropriated for the Force for the same period under the terms of General Assembly resolution
61/287 of 29 June 2007;
Financing of the additional appropriation for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
18. Also decides, taking into account the amount of 41,586,600 dollars already
apportioned under the terms of resolution 61/287, to apportion among Member States the
additional amount of 2,517,200 dollars for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July
2007 to 30 June 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution
61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007 and 2008,
as set out in Assembly resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
19. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among
Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund in the amount of 79,000 dollars, representing the additional staff assessment
income for the Force for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
20. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force the amount of 47,020,300 dollars for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010,
inclusive of 45,029,700 dollars for the maintenance of the Force, 1,656,700 dollars for the support
account for peacekeeping operations and 333,900 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
21. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 47,020,300 dollars at a
monthly rate of 3,918,358 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2009, as set out in resolution 61/237, and for
2010,128 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
22. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 21
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund in the amount of 1,543,400 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,338,000 dollars approved for the Force for
the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010, the prorated share of 172,500 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of
32,900 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics
Base;
23. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Force, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 21 above,
their respective share of other income in the total amount of 2,076,200 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in resolution 61/243,
and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008, as set out in resolution 61/237;
24. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Force, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of
other income in the total amount of 2,076,200 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2008, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 23 above;
25. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;

_______________
128

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

124

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

26. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United
Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
27. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
28. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session, under the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item
entitled “United Nations Disengagement Observer Force”.
RESOLUTION 63/298
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/63/905, para. 12), 129 by a recorded vote of 134 to 2, with no abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: None

63/298. Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon130 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,131
Recalling Security Council resolution 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was resolution
1832 (2008) of 27 August 2008, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force until
31 August 2009,
Recalling also its resolution S-8/2 of 21 April 1978 on the financing of the Force and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 62/265 of 20 June 2008,

_______________
129

The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Sudan
(on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China).
130
A/63/520 and A/63/689 and Corr.1.
131
A/63/746/Add.11.

125

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Reaffirming its resolutions 51/233 of 13 June 1997, 52/237 of 26 June 1998, 53/227 of
8 June 1999, 54/267 of 15 June 2000, 55/180 A of 19 December 2000, 55/180 B of 14 June 2001,
56/214 A of 21 December 2001, 56/214 B of 27 June 2002, 57/325 of 18 June 2003, 58/307 of
18 June 2004, 59/307 of 22 June 2005, 60/278 of 30 June 2006, 61/250 A of 22 December 2006,
61/250 B of 2 April 2007, 61/250 C of 29 June 2007 and 62/265 of 20 June 2008,
Reaffirming also the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon with the task of formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and
61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the Force as at 30 April 2009, including the
contributions outstanding in the amount of 115.8 million United States dollars, representing some
2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only seventy-five Member
States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in
particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses deep concern that Israel did not comply with resolutions 51/233, 52/237,
53/227, 54/267, 55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325, 58/307, 59/307, 60/278,
61/250 A, 61/250 B, 61/250 C and 62/265;
5. Stresses once again that Israel should strictly abide by resolutions 51/233, 52/237,
53/227, 54/267, 55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325, 58/307, 59/307, 60/278,
61/250 A, 61/250 B, 61/250 C and 62/265;
6. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
7. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
8. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
9. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
10. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;

126

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

12. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,131 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
13. Recalls paragraph 10 of General Assembly resolution 62/264 of 20 June 2008 and
paragraph 12 of resolution 62/265, and decides not to endorse the recommendation contained in
paragraph 16 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
14. Takes note of paragraph 29 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
15. Decides to apply a vacancy factor of 18 per cent for both international and national
staff of the Force;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Force is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
18. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
19. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to take the measures necessary to ensure
the full implementation of paragraph 8 of resolution 51/233, paragraph 5 of resolution 52/237,
paragraph 11 of resolution 53/227, paragraph 14 of resolution 54/267, paragraph 14 of resolution
55/180 A, paragraph 15 of resolution 55/180 B, paragraph 13 of resolution 56/214 A,
paragraph 13 of resolution 56/214 B, paragraph 14 of resolution 57/325, paragraph 13 of
resolution 58/307, paragraph 13 of resolution 59/307, paragraph 17 of resolution 60/278,
paragraph 21 of resolution 61/250 A, paragraph 20 of resolution 61/250 B, paragraph 20 of
resolution 61/250 C and paragraph 21 of resolution 62/265, stresses once again that Israel shall
pay the amount of 1,117,005 dollars resulting from the incident at Qana on 18 April 1996, and
requests the Secretary-General to report on this matter to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
20. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Force for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;132
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
21. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon the amount of 615,775,300 dollars for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010,
inclusive of 589,799,200 dollars for the maintenance of the Force, 21,618,500 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 4,357,600 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
22. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 102,629,217 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 31 August 2009, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2009, as set out in Assembly resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
23. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of General Assembly resolution
973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
_______________
132

A/63/520.

127

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

States, as provided for in paragraph 22 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund in
the amount of 2,263,183 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,816,400
dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share of 375,100 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 71,683 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
24. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 513,146,083 dollars for the
period from 1 September 2009 to 30 June 2010 at a monthly rate of 51,314,608 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2009, as set out in resolution 61/237, and for 2010,133 subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
25. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of resolution 973 (X), there shall
be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 24
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund in the amount of 11,315,917 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 9,082,000 dollars approved for the Force, the
prorated share of 1,875,500 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
support account and the prorated share of 358,417 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
26. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Force, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 22 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
154,291,500 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
27. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Force, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 154,291,500 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 26
above;
28. Also decides that the decrease of 2,703,200 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 154,291,500 dollars referred to in paragraphs 26 and 27 above;
29. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
30. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United
Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
31. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
32. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session, under the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item
entitled “United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”.

_______________
133

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

128

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 63/299
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/906, para. 6)

63/299. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the final performance of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone134 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,135
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Observer Mission in
Sierra Leone and the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone as at 30 April 2009, including the
credits in the amount of 44.9 million United States dollars;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,135 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
3. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the final performance of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone;134
4. Decides that Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission shall be credited with their respective share of the net cash available in the Special
Account for the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone in the amount of 15,633,000 dollars as at
30 April 2009, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256 of
23 December 2003, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in
Assembly resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
5. Encourages Member States that are owed credits referred to in paragraph 4 above to
apply those credits to any accounts where they have outstanding assessed contributions;
6. Urges all Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their
assessed contributions in full;
7. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, their respective share of the net cash available in the Special Account for the Mission in
the amount of 15,633,000 dollars as at 30 April 2009 shall be set off against their outstanding
obligations, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 4 above;
8. Also decides that updated information on the financial position of the Mission shall be
included in the report on the updated position of closed peacekeeping missions, to be considered
by the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session under the item entitled “Administrative and
budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations”;
9. Further decides to delete from its agenda the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone”.

_______________
134
135

A/63/681.
A/63/746/Add.1.

129

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 63/300
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/63/907, para. 6)

63/300. Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara136 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,137
Recalling Security Council resolution 690 (1991) of 29 April 1991, by which the Council
established the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was
resolution 1871 (2009) of 30 April 2009, by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission until 30 April 2010,
Recalling also its resolution 45/266 of 17 May 1991 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 62/268 of 20 June
2008,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara as at 30 April 2009, including the contributions outstanding in the
amount of 46.1 million United States dollars, representing some 6 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only eighty-six Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;

_______________
136
137

A/63/608 and A/63/757.
A/63/746/Add.15.

130

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
10. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,137 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
11. Takes note of paragraph 35 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
15. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;138
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
16. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara the amount of 55,877,200 dollars for the period from 1 July 2009
to 30 June 2010, inclusive of 53,527,600 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 1,955,400
dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 394,200 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
17. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 46,564,333 dollars for
the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 April 2010, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2009, as set out in Assembly resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006, and for
2010;139
18. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among
Member States, as provided for in paragraph 17 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 2,026,000 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of
1,823,917 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 169,583 dollars of the estimated

_______________
138
139

A/63/608.
To be adopted by the General Assembly.

131

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

staff assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 32,500 dollars
of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
19. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 9,312,867 dollars for the
period from 1 May to 30 June 2010, at a monthly rate of 4,656,433 dollars, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2010,139
subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
20. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of resolution 973 (X), there shall
be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 19
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 405,200 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 364,783 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share
of 33,917 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and
the prorated share of 6,500 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
United Nations Logistics Base;
21. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 17
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
1,723,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
22. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 1,723,400 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2008, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 21
above;
23. Also decides that the increase of 151,600 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2008 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 1,723,400 dollars referred to in paragraphs 21 and 22 above;
24. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
25. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
26. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
27. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara”.

132

IV. Decisions
Contents
Decision
No.

Title

Page

A. Elections and appointments
63/405.

Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences ................................................................................135
Decision B .....................................................................................................................................................135

63/408.

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions ..............................................................................135
Decision B .....................................................................................................................................................135

63/414.

Election of twenty members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination....................................................136
Decision B .....................................................................................................................................................136

63/416.

Appointment of a member of the Joint Inspection Unit ........................................................................................136

63/417.

Appointment of the judges of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal .......................................................................137
Decision A .....................................................................................................................................................137
Decision B.....................................................................................................................................................137

63/418.

Appointment of the judges of the United Nations Appeals Tribunal.......................................................................137

63/419.

Confirmation of the appointment of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme ....................138

63/420.

Election of eighteen members of the Human Rights Council ................................................................................138

63/421.

Election of the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session...........................................................138

63/422.

Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session.......................139

63/423.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session..................................................139

63/424.

Confirmation of the appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development..................................................................................................................................................139

63/425.

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994.........................................................................................................139

63/426.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 ..............................................141
B. Other decisions
1. Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

63/503.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items ........................................................................................143
Decision B .....................................................................................................................................................143

63/553.

General debate of the sixty-fourth regular session of the General Assembly............................................................144

63/555.

Arrangements and organization of work of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its
Impact on Development (New York, 1 to 3 June 2009)........................................................................................144

63/556.

New dates of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development ...............145

133

IV. Decisions
Decision
No.

Title

Page

63/558.

Commemoration of the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.................................................................................................................................145

63/559.

Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte.......................................................................................................145

63/560.

Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS ..........145

63/561.

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994.........................................................................................................146

63/562.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 ..............................................146

63/563.

Prevention of armed conflict.............................................................................................................................146

63/564.

High-Level Dialogue of the General Assembly on Financing for Development.......................................................146

63/565.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and related
matters...........................................................................................................................................................146
Decision A .....................................................................................................................................................146
Decision B .....................................................................................................................................................147

63/566.

Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative management and internal oversight of the Independent
Inquiry Committee into the United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme....................................................................147

63/567.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor .......................................................................................148

63/568.

The scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction........................................................................148

63/569.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan..........................................................................................148

63/570.

Request for an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on whether the unilateral declaration of
independence of Kosovo is in accordance with international law...........................................................................148

63/571.

Report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict.........................................148
2. Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

63/550.

Questions deferred for future consideration ........................................................................................................148
Decision B .....................................................................................................................................................148
Decision C.....................................................................................................................................................150

63/554.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea...........................................................................152

63/557.

Closed peacekeeping missions..........................................................................................................................152

134

IV. Decisions

A. Elections and appointments
63/405. Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences
B1
At its 75th plenary meeting, on 20 February 2009, the General Assembly, in accordance with
paragraph 2 of its resolution 43/222 B of 21 December 1988, took note of the appointment by its
President, after consultations with the Chairman of the regional group concerned, of MEXICO as a
member of the Committee on Conferences for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January
2009, to fill the seventh vacancy.
As a result, the Committee on Conferences is composed of the following twenty-one
Member States: ARGENTINA,** AUSTRIA,** BELARUS,* CHINA,** CONGO,*** FRANCE,***
GERMANY,* GRENADA,* HONDURAS,* JAPAN,** KENYA,** MALAYSIA,*** MEXICO,***
MOZAMBIQUE,*** NIGERIA,* PHILIPPINES,*** RUSSIAN FEDERATION,*** SENEGAL,* SYRIAN
ARAB REPUBLIC,* TUNISIA** and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.**
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2009.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2010.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2011.

63/408. Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions
B2
At its 84th plenary meeting, on 26 May 2009, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,3 appointed Ms. Gönke Roscher as a member of the
Committee on Contributions for a term of office beginning on 26 May 2009 and ending on
31 December 2011, as a result of the resignation of Mr. Thomas Thomma.
As a result, the Committee on Contributions is composed as follows: Mr. Joseph ACAKPOSATCHIVI (Benin),** Mr. Kenshiro AKIMOTO (Japan),* Mr. Meshal AL-MANSOUR (Kuwait),*

Mr. Abdelmalek BOUHEDDOU (Algeria),** Mr. Petru DUMITRIU (Romania),* Mr. Gordon
ECKERSLEY (Australia),** Mr. Bernardo GREIVER DEL HOYO (Uruguay),** Mr. Luis Mariano
HERMOSILLO SOSA (Mexico),** Mr. Ihor V. HUMENNY (Ukraine),* Mr. Vyacheslav Anatolievich
LOGUTOV (Russian Federation),*** Ms. Gobona Susan MAPITSE (Botswana),* Mr. Richard
MOON (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland),*** Mr. PARK Hae-yun
(Republic of Korea),*** Mr. Eduardo Manuel da Fonseca Fernandes RAMOS (Portugal),**
Ms. Gönke ROSCHER (Germany),*** Ms. Lisa P. SPRATT (United States of America),*
Mr. Courtney H. WILLIAMS (Jamaica)*** and Mr. WU Gang (China).***
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2009.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2010.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2011.

_______________
1

Decision 63/405, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/63/49), vol. II, becomes decision 63/405 A.
2
Decision 63/408, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/63/49), vol. II, becomes decision 63/408 A.
3
A/63/529/Add.1, para. 4.

135

IV. Decisions

63/414. Election of twenty members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination
B4
At its 87th plenary meeting, on 10 June 2009, the General Assembly, on the basis of the
nomination by the Economic and Social Council5 and in accordance with the annex to Council
resolution 2008 (LX) of 14 May 1976, paragraph 1 of Council resolution 1987/94 of 4 December
1987, as well as Assembly decision 42/450 of 17 December 1987, elected ISRAEL as a member of
the Committee for Programme and Coordination for a term of office beginning on 10 June 2009
and expiring on 31 December 2009.
As a result, the Committee for Programme and Coordination is composed of the following
thirty-one Member States:6 ARGENTINA,*** ARMENIA,*** BANGLADESH,** BELARUS,***
BRAZIL,*** CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC,*** CHINA,** COMOROS,* CUBA,*** FRANCE,*
GUINEA,*** HAITI,* INDIA,*** IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF),*** ISRAEL,* ITALY,***
JAMAICA,** KAZAKHSTAN,*** KENYA,** LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA,** NIGER,** NIGERIA,***
PAKISTAN,*** REPUBLIC OF KOREA,** RUSSIAN FEDERATION,* SOUTH AFRICA,*** SPAIN,***
UKRAINE,*** URUGUAY,*** VENEZUELA (BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF)* and ZIMBABWE.*
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2009.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2010.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2011.

63/416. Appointment of a member of the Joint Inspection Unit
At its 75th plenary meeting, on 20 February 2009, the General Assembly, pursuant to
article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint Inspection Unit, contained in the annex to
resolution 31/192 of 22 December 1976, reappointed Mr. Tadanori Inomata as a member of the
Joint Inspection Unit for a five-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2010 and expiring on
31 December 2014.7
As a result, the Joint Inspection Unit is composed as follows: Mr. Gérard BIRAUD
(France),* Mr. Nicolay V. CHULKOV (Russian Federation),** Mr. Papa Louis FALL (Senegal),*
Mr. Even Francisco FONTAINE ORTIZ (Cuba),** Mr. Tadanori INOMATA (Japan),***
Mr. Mohamed MOUNIR-ZAHRAN (Egypt),** Mr. István POSTA (Hungary),* Mr. Enrique ROMÁNMOREY (Peru),** Mr. Cihan TERZI (Turkey),* Ms. Deborah WYNES (United States of America)**
and Mr. ZHANG Yishan (China).**
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2010.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2012.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2014.

_______________
4

Decision 63/414 in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/63/49), vol. II, becomes decision 63/414 A.
5
See A/63/312/Add.1; see also Economic and Social Council decision 2009/201 C.
6
At the same meeting, the General Assembly was informed that an election would be held at a later date, on the basis
of nominations by the Economic and Social Council, to fill the remaining seats on the Committee for Programme and
Coordination.
7
See A/63/667.

136

IV. Decisions

63/417. Appointment of the judges of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal
A
At its 76th plenary meeting, on 2 March 2009, the General Assembly, pursuant to article 4 of
the statute of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal, contained in annex I to resolution 63/253 of
24 December 2008, and on the recommendation of the Internal Justice Council,8 appointed the
following persons as judges of the Tribunal for a term of office beginning on 1 July 2009:
Mr. Thomas LAKER (Germany) for a seven-year term of office as full-time judge in Geneva,
Mr. Vinod BOOLELL (Mauritius) for a seven-year term of office as full-time judge in Nairobi,
Ms. Memooda EBRAHIM-CARSTENS (Botswana) for a three-year term of office as full-time judge
in New York, Ms. Coral SHAW (New Zealand) for a seven-year term of office as half-time judge
and Mr. Goolam Hoosen Kader MEERAN (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland) for a three-year term of office as half-time judge.
B
At its 78th plenary meeting, on 31 March 2009, the General Assembly, pursuant to its
resolution 63/253 of 24 December 2008, and on the recommendation of the Internal Justice
Council,9 appointed the following persons as ad litem judges of the United Nations Dispute
Tribunal for a one-year term of office beginning on 1 July 2009: Mr. Michael ADAMS (Australia),
Mr. Jean-François COUSIN (France) and Ms. Nkemdilim Amelia IZUAKO (Nigeria).
At the same meeting, the General Assembly decided that the three ad litem judges would
remain eligible for appointment as either full-time or half-time judges of the Tribunal in
accordance with its statute once they have completed their one-year term.
As a result, the United Nations Dispute Tribunal is composed as follows: Mr. Michael
ADAMS (Australia, ad litem),* Mr. Vinod BOOLELL (Mauritius, full-time, Nairobi),*** Mr. JeanFrançois COUSIN (France, ad litem),* Ms. Memooda EBRAHIM-CARSTENS (Botswana, full-time,
New York),** Ms. Nkemdilim Amelia IZUAKO (Nigeria, ad litem),* Mr. Thomas LAKER
(Germany, full-time, Geneva),*** Mr. Goolam Hoosen Kader MEERAN (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, half-time)** and Ms. Coral SHAW (New Zealand, halftime).***
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 30 June 2010.

**

Term of office expires on 30 June 2012.

***

Term of office expires on 30 June 2016.

63/418. Appointment of the judges of the United Nations Appeals Tribunal
At its 77th plenary meeting, on 2 March 2009, the General Assembly, pursuant to article 3 of
the statute of the United Nations Appeals Tribunal, contained in annex II to resolution 63/253 of
24 December 2008, and on the recommendation of the Internal Justice Council,8 appointed the
following persons as judges of the Tribunal for a term of office beginning on 1 July 2009: for a
seven-year term of office, Ms. Sophia ADINYIRA (Ghana), Ms. Rose BOYKO (Canada), Mr. Luis
Maria SIMÓN (Uruguay) and Ms. Inés WEINBERG DE ROCA (Argentina); and for a three-year term
of office, Mr. Jean COURTIAL (France), Mr. Kamaljit Singh GAREWAL (India) and Mr. Mark P.
PAINTER (United States of America).
As a result, the United Nations Appeals Tribunal is composed as follows: Ms. Sophia
ADINYIRA (Ghana),** Ms. Rose BOYKO (Canada),** Mr. Jean COURTIAL (France),*

_______________
8
9

See A/63/489.
See A/63/489/Add.1.

137

IV. Decisions

Mr. Kamaljit Singh GAREWAL (India),* Mr. Mark P. PAINTER (United States of America),*
Mr. Luis Maria SIMÓN (Uruguay)** and Ms. Inés WEINBERG DE ROCA (Argentina).**
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 30 June 2012.

**

Term of office expires on 30 June 2016.

63/419. Confirmation of the appointment of the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme
At its 78th plenary meeting, on 31 March 2009, the General Assembly confirmed the
appointment by the Secretary-General of Ms. Helen CLARK as Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme for a four-year term of office beginning on 20 April 2009 and
ending on 19 April 2013.10
63/420. Election of eighteen members of the Human Rights Council
At its 83rd plenary meeting, on 12 May 2009, the General Assembly, pursuant to its
resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006, elected as members of the Human Rights Council, for a
three-year term of office beginning on 19 June 2009, BANGLADESH, BELGIUM, CAMEROON,
CHINA, CUBA, DJIBOUTI, HUNGARY, JORDAN, KYRGYZSTAN, MAURITIUS, MEXICO, NIGERIA,
NORWAY, RUSSIAN FEDERATION, SAUDI ARABIA, SENEGAL, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and
URUGUAY to fill the vacancies occurring on the expiration of the terms of office of AZERBAIJAN,
BANGLADESH, CAMEROON, CANADA, CHINA, CUBA, DJIBOUTI, GERMANY, JORDAN, MALAYSIA,
MAURITIUS, MEXICO, NIGERIA, RUSSIAN FEDERATION, SAUDI ARABIA, SENEGAL, SWITZERLAND
and URUGUAY.
As a result, the Human Rights Council is composed of the following forty-seven Member
States: ANGOLA,* ARGENTINA,** BAHRAIN,** BANGLADESH,*** BELGIUM,*** BOLIVIA
(PLURINATIONAL STATE OF),* BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA,* BRAZIL,** BURKINA FASO,**
CAMEROON,*** CHILE,** CHINA,*** CUBA,*** DJIBOUTI,*** EGYPT,* FRANCE,** GABON,**
GHANA,** HUNGARY,*** INDIA,* INDONESIA,* ITALY,* JAPAN,** JORDAN,*** KYRGYZSTAN,***
MADAGASCAR,* MAURITIUS,*** MEXICO,*** NETHERLANDS,* NICARAGUA,* NIGERIA,***
NORWAY,*** PAKISTAN,** PHILIPPINES,* QATAR,* REPUBLIC OF KOREA,** RUSSIAN
FEDERATION,*** SAUDI ARABIA,*** SENEGAL,*** SLOVAKIA,** SLOVENIA,* SOUTH AFRICA,*
UKRAINE,** UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,** UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA,*** URUGUAY*** and ZAMBIA.**
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 18 June 2010.

**

Term of office expires on 18 June 2011.

***

Term of office expires on 18 June 2012.

63/421. Election of the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session11
At its 86th plenary meeting, on 10 June 2009, the General Assembly, in accordance with
Article 21 of the Charter of the United Nations, rule 30 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly
and paragraph 1 of the annex to resolution 33/138 of 19 December 1978, elected by acclamation
Mr. Ali Abdussalam TREKI of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya as President of the General Assembly at
its sixty-fourth session.

_______________
10

See A/63/109.
In accordance with rule 38 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, the General Committee consists of
the President of the Assembly, the twenty-one Vice-Presidents and the Chairmen of the six Main Committees.
11

138

IV. Decisions

63/422. Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session11
On 10 June 2009, the six Main Committees of the General Assembly held meetings in
accordance with rules 99 (a) and 103 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly for the purpose of
electing their Chairmen.
At the 87th plenary meeting, on 10 June 2009, the President of the General Assembly
announced that the following persons had been elected as Chairmen of the six Main Committees
of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session:
First Committee:

Mr. José Luis CANCELA (Uruguay)

Special Political and
Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee):
Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz AL-NASSER (Qatar)
Second Committee:

Mr. PARK In-kook (Republic of Korea)

Third Committee:

Mr. Normans PENKE (Latvia)

Fifth Committee:

Mr. Peter MAURER (Switzerland)

Sixth Committee:

Mr. Mourad BENMEHIDI (Algeria)

63/423. Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session11
At its 87th plenary meeting, on 10 June 2009, the General Assembly, in accordance with
rule 30 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly and paragraphs 2 and 3 of the annex to
resolution 33/138 of 19 December 1978, elected by acclamation the following twenty-one
Member States as Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session: BARBADOS,
BELGIUM, CAMEROON, CHINA, EL SALVADOR, FINLAND, FRANCE, GHANA, GUINEA-BISSAU,
INDIA, KAZAKHSTAN, MALDIVES, NEPAL, RUSSIAN FEDERATION, SLOVENIA, SOUTH AFRICA,
SUDAN, TURKMENISTAN, VENEZUELA (BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF), UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
63/424. Confirmation of the appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development
At its 94th plenary meeting, on 6 July 2009, the General Assembly confirmed the
appointment by the Secretary-General of the United Nations of Mr. SUPACHAI Panitchpakdi as
Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development for a second
four-year term of office beginning on 1 September 2009 and ending on 31 August 2013.12
63/425. International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 9 September 2009, the General Assembly, having
considered letters from the Secretary-General dated 19 June,13 26 June14 and 7 July 2009,15 as

_______________
12

See A/63/891.
A/63/942.
14
A/63/941.
15
A/63/940.
13

139

IV. Decisions

well as the letter from the President of the Security Council dated 8 July 2009, transmitting the
text of Council resolution 1878 (2009) of 7 July 2009,16 decided that:
(a) The extension of the term of office of the permanent judges of the International
Tribunal, who are members of the Appeals Chamber, would be reviewed by 31 December 2009,
in the light of the progress made by the International Tribunal in the implementation of the
Completion Strategy;
(b) The term of office of the following permanent judges of the International Tribunal,
who are members of the Trial Chambers, would extend until 31 December 2010, or until the
completion of the cases to which they are assigned if sooner:
Sir Charles Michael Dennis BYRON (Saint Kitts and Nevis)
Mr. Joseph Asoka Nihal DE SILVA (Sri Lanka)
Ms. Khalida Rachid KHAN (Pakistan)
Ms. Arlette RAMAROSON (Madagascar)
Mr. William H. SEKULE (United Republic of Tanzania)
(c) The term of office of the permanent judge appointed to replace Mr. Sergei Alekseevich
Egorov (Russian Federation) would extend until 31 December 2010, or until the completion of the
cases to which he or she will be assigned if sooner;
(d) The term of office of the following ad litem judges, currently serving on the
International Tribunal, would extend until 31 December 2010, or until the completion of the cases
to which they are assigned if sooner:
Mr. Aydin Sefa AKAY (Turkey)
Ms. Florence Rita ARREY (Cameroon)
Ms. Solomy Balungi BOSSA (Uganda)
Ms. Taghreed HIKMAT (Jordan)
Mr. Vagn JOENSEN (Denmark)
Mr. Gberdao Gustave KAM (Burkina Faso)
Mr. Joseph Edward Chiondo MASANCHE (United Republic of Tanzania)
Mr. Lee Gacuiga MUTHOGA (Kenya)
Mr. Seon Ki PARK (Republic of Korea)
Mr. Mparany Mamy Richard RAJOHNSON (Madagascar)
Mr. Emile Francis SHORT (Ghana)
(e) Ad litem judge Vagn Joensen may serve in the International Tribunal beyond the
cumulative period of service provided for under the Statute of the International Tribunal;
(f) In the light of the exceptional circumstances, Judge Joseph Asoka de Silva and Judge
Emile Francis Short may work part-time and engage in another judicial occupation or occupation
of equivalent independent status in their home countries during the remainder of their terms of
office until the completion of the cases to which they were assigned;
(g) On an exceptional basis, Judge Sergei Alekseevich Egorov, once replaced as a member
of the International Tribunal, would complete the cases which he began before his resignation;
(h) Article 13, paragraph 3, of the Statute of the International Tribunal would be amended
as set out in the annex to Security Council resolution 1878 (2009) so that the President may assign
to the Appeals Chamber up to four additional permanent judges serving in the Trial Chambers, on
the completion of the cases to which each judge is assigned.

_______________
16

A/63/956.

140

IV. Decisions

At the same meeting, the General Assembly also took note of the appointment by the
Secretary-General of Mr. Bakhtiyar TUZMUKHAMEDOV (Russian Federation) as a permanent
judge of the Tribunal for a term of office beginning on 18 August 2009 and expiring on
31 December 2010, or until the completion of the cases to which he will be assigned if sooner.17
63/426. International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 9 September 2009, the General Assembly, having
considered the letter from the Secretary-General dated 19 June 2009,13 as well as the letter from
the President of the Security Council dated 8 July 2009, transmitting the text of Council resolution
1877 (2009) of 7 July 2009,18 decided that:
(a) The extension of the term of office of the permanent judges of the International
Tribunal, who are members of the Appeals Chamber, would be reviewed by 31 December 2009,
in the light of the progress made by the International Tribunal in the implementation of the
Completion Strategy;
(b) The term of office of the following permanent judges of the International Tribunal
would extend until 31 December 2010, or until the completion of the cases to which they are
assigned if sooner:
Mr. Carmel A. AGIUS (Malta)
Mr. Jean-Claude ANTONETTI (France)
Mr. Christoph FLÜGGE (Germany)
Mr. O-gon KWON (Republic of Korea)
Mr. Bakone Melema MOLOTO (South Africa)
Mr. Alphonsus Martinus Maria ORIE (Netherlands)
Mr. Kevin Horace PARKER (Australia)
Mr. Patrick Lipton ROBINSON (Jamaica)
(c) The term of office of the permanent judges appointed to replace Mr. Iain BONOMY
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), Mr. Mohamed SHAHABUDDEEN
(Guyana) and Ms. Christine VAN DEN WYNGAERT (Belgium) would extend until 31 December
2010, or until the completion of the cases to which they will be assigned if sooner;
(d) The term of office of the following ad litem judges, currently serving at the
International Tribunal, would extend until 31 December 2010, or until the completion of the cases
to which they are assigned if sooner:
Mr. Melville BAIRD (Trinidad and Tobago)
Mr. Pedro DAVID (Argentina)
Ms. Elizabeth GWAUNZA (Zimbabwe)
Mr. Frederik HARHOFF (Denmark)
Mr. Uldis KINIS (Latvia)
Ms. Flavia LATTANZI (Italy)
Mr. Antoine MINDUA (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
Ms. Michèle PICARD (France)
Mr. Árpád PRANDLER (Hungary)
Mr. Stefan TRECHSEL (Switzerland)

_______________
17
18

See A/63/947.
A/63/957.

141

IV. Decisions

(e) The term of office of the following ad litem judges, who were not appointed to serve at
the International Tribunal, shall extend until 31 December 2010, or until the completion of the
cases to which they may be assigned if sooner:
Mr. Frans BAUDUIN (Netherlands)
Sir Burton HALL (Bahamas)
Mr. Raimo LAHTI (Finland)
Mr. Jawdat NABOTY (Syrian Arab Republic)
Ms. Chioma Egondu NWOSU-IHEME (Nigeria)
Ms. Prisca Matimba NYAMBE (Zambia)
Mr. Brynmor POLLARD (Guyana)
Ms. Vonimbolana RASOAZANANY (Madagascar)
Tan Sri Dato’ Lamin bin Haji Mohd YUNUS (Malaysia)
(f) Ad litem judges Harhoff, Lattanzi, Mindua, Prandler and Trechsel may serve in the
International Tribunal beyond the cumulative period of service provided for under the Statute of
the International Tribunal;
(g) The Tribunal may exceed temporarily the statutory maximum number of twelve ad
litem judges serving at the Tribunal and assign up to thirteen ad litem judges, returning to a
maximum of twelve by 31 December 2009;
(h) Article 14, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Statute of the International Tribunal would be
amended as set out in the annex to Security Council resolution 1877 (2009) so that the President
may assign to the Appeals Chamber up to four additional permanent judges serving in the Trial
Chambers, on the completion of the cases to which each judge is assigned.
At the same meeting, the General Assembly also took note of the appointment by the
Secretary-General of Mr. Guy DELVOIE (Belgium), Sir Burton HALL (Bahamas) and Mr. Howard
MORRISON (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) as permanent judges of the
Tribunal for a term of office beginning on 1 September 2009, 7 August 2009 and 31 August 2009,
respectively, until 31 December 2010, or until the completion of the cases to which they will be
assigned if sooner.19

_______________
19

See A/63/946.

142

IV. Decisions

B. Other decisions
1. Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
63/503. Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
B20
At its 75th plenary meeting, on 20 February 2009, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the General Committee as set forth in its third report,21 decided to include in
the agenda of its sixty-third session an additional item entitled “Financing of activities arising from
Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)” under heading I (Organizational, administrative and
other matters), and to allocate it to the Fifth Committee.
At its 80th plenary meeting, on 22 April 2009, the General Assembly decided to consider
directly in plenary meeting sub-item (d) of agenda item 49 entitled “Protection of global climate
for present and future generations of mankind”, under heading B (Promotion of sustained
economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences), and to proceed expeditiously with the
consideration of a draft resolution.22
At its 81st plenary meeting, on 24 April 2009, the General Assembly decided to reopen
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 65, entitled “Special economic assistance to
individual countries or regions”, under heading E (Effective coordination of humanitarian
assistance efforts) in order to consider expeditiously a draft resolution.23 The Assembly further
agreed to proceed immediately to its consideration.
At its 84th plenary meeting, on 26 May 2009, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the
President of the General Assembly,24 decided to reconsider the dates for the holding of the
Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development, which
had originally been scheduled for 1 to 3 June 2009 pursuant to its resolution 63/277 of 7 April
2009.
At the same meeting, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 105, entitled “Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions”,
under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters) in order to consider
expeditiously a recommendation of the Fifth Committee.25 The Assembly further agreed to
proceed immediately to its consideration.
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 29 June 2009, the General Assembly decided to reopen
consideration of agenda item 20, entitled “The situation in Central America: progress in fashioning
a region of peace, freedom, democracy and development”, under heading A (Maintenance of
international peace and security) upon the request of several Member States. The Assembly
further agreed to proceed immediately to its consideration.

_______________
20

Decision 63/503, in section B.1 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/63/49), vol. II, becomes decision 63/503 A.
21
See A/63/250/Add.2.
22
A/63/L.69.
23
A/63/L.67.
24
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Plenary Meetings, 84th meeting (A/63/PV.84),
and corrigendum.
25
See A/63/529/Add.1.

143

IV. Decisions

At its 100th plenary meeting, on 28 July 2009, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the General Committee as set forth in its fourth report,26 decided to include in
the agenda of its sixty-third session an additional item entitled “The scope and application of the
principle of universal jurisdiction”, under heading F (Promotion of justice and international law),
and to consider it directly in plenary meeting.
At its 103rd plenary meeting, on 11 August 2009, the General Assembly, on the proposal of
the Secretary-General,27 having waived the relevant provisions of rule 40 of its rules of procedure,
decided to include in the agenda of its sixty-third session two additional items entitled
“International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994” and
“International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991”, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to consider them
directly in plenary meeting.
At the same meeting, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of agenda
item 29, entitled “United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East”, under heading A (Maintenance of international peace and security), and to consider it
directly in plenary meeting, in order to consider expeditiously a draft decision.28
At its 105th plenary meeting, on 14 September 2009, the General Assembly, on the proposal
of Serbia,29 decided to reopen consideration of agenda item 71, entitled “Request for an advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on whether the unilateral declaration of independence
of Kosovo is in accordance with international law”, under heading F (Promotion of justice and
international law).
63/553. General debate of the sixty-fourth regular session of the General Assembly
At its 75th plenary meeting, on 20 February 2009, the General Assembly, on the proposal of
the President of the General Assembly,30 recalling its resolutions 51/241 of 31 July 1997, in
particular paragraphs 19 and 20 (a) of the annex thereto, and 57/301 of 13 March 2003, in
particular paragraph 2 thereof, decided that the general debate of the sixty-fourth session would be
held from Wednesday, 23 September, to Saturday, 26 September, and from Monday,
28 September, to Wednesday, 30 September 2009, and that these arrangements would in no way
create a precedent for future sessions.
63/555. Arrangements and organization of work of the Conference on the World Financial
and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development (New York, 1 to 3 June 2009)
At its 82nd plenary meeting, on 8 May 2009, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the
President of the General Assembly,31 noting the provisions contained in the note by the Secretariat
on the proposed organization of work of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic
Crisis and Its Impact on Development,32 decided to adopt the arrangements and organization of
work of the Conference as set out in the note by the Secretariat and to recommend for adoption by
_______________
26

See A/63/250/Add.3.
A/63/238.
28
A/63/L.78.
29
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Plenary Meetings, 105th meeting
(A/63/PV.105), and corrigendum.
30
A/63/L.65.
31
A/63/L.71.
32
A/63/825.
27

144

IV. Decisions

the Conference the provisional rules of procedure, the provisional agenda and the proposed
timetable for the work of the Conference, as set out in annexes I to III to the note by the
Secretariat.
63/556. New dates of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its
Impact on Development
At its 84th plenary meeting, on 26 May 2009, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the
President of the General Assembly,24 decided to postpone the Conference on the World Financial
and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development, which had originally been scheduled for 1
to 3 June 2009 pursuant to its resolution 63/277 of 7 April 2009, to 24 to 26 June 2009.
63/558. Commemoration of the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
At its 103rd plenary meeting, on 11 August 2009, the General Assembly, on the proposal of
Egypt and Norway,28 recalling its resolution 63/91 of 5 December 2008, in particular paragraph 5
thereof, by which it decided to commemorate the work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East on the occasion of the sixtieth anniversary of its
establishment at a high-level meeting to be convened on 1 October 2009, decided to reschedule
the high-level meeting to 24 September 2009, mindful of the need to ensure the participation of
Member States at the ministerial level.
63/559. Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 9 September 2009, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the General Committee as set forth in its fifth report,33 decided to defer
consideration of the item entitled “Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte” and to include it
in the draft agenda of its sixty-fourth session.
63/560. Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political
Declaration on HIV/AIDS
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 9 September 2009, the General Assembly, on the proposal
of the President of the General Assembly,34 guided by the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS35 and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS,36 and recalling its decision 55/488 of 7
September 2001, decided:
(a)

To take note of the following:

(i) Report of the Secretary-General on progress made in the implementation of the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS;37
(ii) The submission of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the review of the progress
made by the United Nations system organizations in achieving Millennium Development
Goal 6, Target 7, to combat HIV/AIDS,38 and the note by the Secretary-General containing

_______________
33

See A/63/250/Add.4.
A/63/L.73. See also Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Plenary Meetings, 104th
meeting (A/63/PV.104), and corrigendum.
35
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
36
Resolution 60/262, annex.
37
A/63/812.
38
A/63/152.
34

145

IV. Decisions

the comments of the Secretary-General and those of the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination on the report of the Joint Inspection Unit;39
(b) To include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration
on HIV/AIDS”.
63/561. International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 9 September 2009, the General Assembly decided to
include the item entitled “International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994” in the draft agenda of its sixty-fourth session and to consider it directly in
plenary meeting.
63/562. International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 9 September 2009, the General Assembly decided to
include the item entitled “International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991” in the draft agenda of its sixty-fourth session and to consider it directly in
plenary meeting.
63/563. Prevention of armed conflict
At its 105th plenary meeting, on 14 September 2009, the General Assembly decided to defer
consideration of the item entitled “Prevention of armed conflict” and to include it in the draft
agenda of its sixty-fourth session.
63/564. High-Level Dialogue of the General Assembly on Financing for Development
At its 105th plenary meeting, on 14 September 2009, the General Assembly, on the proposal
of Mexico:40
(a) Decided to hold its fourth High-Level Dialogue on Financing for Development on 23
and 24 November 2009 at United Nations Headquarters;
(b)
event.

Requested the Secretary-General to prepare a note on the organization of work of that

63/565. Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the
Security Council and related matters
A
At its 105th plenary meeting, on 14 September 2009, the General Assembly, recalling its
previous resolutions and decisions relevant to the question of equitable representation on and
_______________
39
40

A/63/152/Add.1.
A/63/L.102.

146

IV. Decisions

increase in the membership of the Security Council and other matters related to the Council, in
particular its decision 62/557 of 15 September 2008, having considered the report of the Openended Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in the
Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters related to the Security Council, which was
established pursuant to its resolution 48/26 of 3 December 1993, on its deliberations during the
sixty-third session of the General Assembly,41 bearing in mind the United Nations Millennium
Declaration of 8 September 2000, adopted by Heads of State and Government,42 in which they
resolved, in respect of reform of the Security Council, to intensify their efforts to achieve a
comprehensive reform of the Security Council in all its aspects, and recalling also the 2005 World
Summit Outcome of 16 September 2005,43 in which Heads of State and Government expressed
support for early reform of the Council and recommended that the Council continue to adapt its
working methods:
(a) Took note of the report of the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of
Equitable Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and Other
Matters related to the Security Council on its work during the sixty-third session of the General
Assembly;41
(b) Noted with appreciation the Chairperson’s initiative to stimulate an active discussion
relating to the comprehensive reform of the Security Council by the Working Group, as well as the
work done by the Vice-Chairperson;
(c) Decided to convene the Working Group during the sixty-fourth session of the General
Assembly if Member States so decide;
(d) Decided to include in the agenda of the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly
an item entitled “Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the
Security Council and other matters related to the Security Council”.
B
At its 105th plenary meeting, on 14 September 2009, the General Assembly decided to
immediately continue intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council reform in informal
plenary of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session as mandated by General Assembly
decision 62/557 of 15 September 2008, building on the progress achieved during its sixty-third
session, as well as the positions of and proposals made by Member States, while noting with
appreciation the initiative and efforts of the President of the General Assembly and the
Chairperson of the Open Ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on
and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters related to the Security
Council in the process of a comprehensive reform of the Security Council.
63/566. Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative management and internal
oversight of the Independent Inquiry Committee into the United Nations Oil-forFood Programme
At its 105th plenary meeting, on 14 September 2009, the General Assembly decided to defer
consideration of the item entitled “Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative
management and internal oversight of the Independent Inquiry Committee into the United Nations
Oil-for-Food Programme” and to include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-fourth session.

_______________
41

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 47 (A/63/47).
See resolution 55/2.
43
See resolution 60/1.
42

147

IV. Decisions

63/567. Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor
At its 105th plenary meeting, on 14 September 2009, the General Assembly decided to defer
consideration of the item entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor” and to
include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-fourth session.
63/568. The scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction
At its 105th plenary meeting, on 14 September 2009, the General Assembly, on the
proposal of the United Republic of Tanzania,44 decided to include in the draft agenda of its sixtyfourth session the item entitled “The scope and application of the principle of universal
jurisdiction” and recommended that it be considered by the Sixth Committee at that session.
63/569. The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan
At its 105th plenary meeting, on 14 September 2009, the General Assembly decided to defer
consideration of the item entitled “The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan” and to
include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-fourth session.
63/570. Request for an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on whether
the unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo is in accordance with
international law
At its 105th plenary meeting, on 14 September 2009, the General Assembly, on the proposal
of Serbia,45 decided to include the item entitled “Request for an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on whether the unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo is
in accordance with international law” in the draft agenda of its sixty-fourth session.
63/571. Report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict
At its 105th plenary meeting, on 14 September 2009, the General Assembly decided to defer
until the sixty-fourth session consideration of the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict,46 under the items entitled “Report of the Peacebuilding
Commission” and “Report of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Fund”.

2.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

63/550. Questions deferred for future consideration
B47
At its 79th plenary meeting, on 7 April 2009, the General Assembly, on the recommendation
of the Fifth Committee:48

_______________
44

A/63/L.100.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Plenary Meetings, 105th meeting
(A/63/PV.105), and corrigendum.
46
A/63/881.
47
Decision 63/550, in section B.6 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/63/49), vol. II, becomes decision 63/550 A.
48
A/63/649/Add.1, para. 9.
45

148

IV. Decisions

Section A
Decided to defer until the second part of its resumed sixty-third session consideration of the
following agenda item and related document:
Item 117
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee on vacant posts in the Office of
Internal Oversight Services49
Section B
Decided to defer until its sixty-fourth session consideration of the following agenda items
and related documents:
Item 118
Programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on a
common payroll for United Nations system organizations50
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments and those of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination on the report of the Joint Inspection Unit
on a common payroll for United Nations system organizations51
Report of the Secretary-General on the conditions of service and compensation for officials,
other than Secretariat officials, serving the General Assembly: full-time members of the
International Civil Service Commission and the Chairman of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions52
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the
conditions of service and compensation for officials, other than Secretariat officials, serving
the General Assembly: full-time members of the International Civil Service Commission
and the Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions53
Item 122
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations
Reports of the Committee on Contributions54
Reports of the Secretary-General on multi-year payment plans55
Section C
Decided to defer until the first part of its resumed sixty-fourth session consideration of the
following agenda item and related documents:

_______________
49

A/63/737.
A/60/582.
51
A/60/582/Add.1.
52
A/63/354.
53
A/63/726.
54
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/62/11); and ibid., Sixty-third
Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/63/11).
55
A/62/70 and A/63/68.
50

149

IV. Decisions

Item 118
Programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009
Report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the core diplomatic training activities of
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research56
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the
financing of the core diplomatic training activities of the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research57
C
At its 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,58 decided to defer until its sixty-fourth session
consideration of the following agenda items and related documents:
Item 118
Programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009
Report of the Secretary-General on a strengthened and unified security management system
for the United Nations59
Report of the Secretary-General on measures taken to ensure the effective implementation of
the arrangements in place for the sharing of costs for safety and security across the United
Nations system60
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions61
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on a comprehensive management audit
of the Department of Safety and Security62
Item 132
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Report of the Secretary-General on the overview of the financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations: budget performance for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June
2008 and budget for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 201063
Report of the Secretary-General on the comprehensive review of the compensation of death
and disability benefits to military contingents, formed police units, military observers and
civilian police officers64
Report of the Secretary-General on the status of cases for death and disability for formed
police units, military contingents, civilian police officers and military observers processed
and currently in process and comprehensive review of the administrative and payment
arrangement for such cases65
_______________
56

A/63/592.
A/63/744.
58
A/63/649/Add.2, para. 5.
59
A/63/605.
60
A/62/641.
61
A/63/769.
62
A/63/379.
63
A/63/696.
64
A/63/550.
65
A/62/805 and Corr.1.
57

150

IV. Decisions

Report of the Secretary-General on the welfare and recreation needs of all categories of
personnel and detailed implications66
Report of the Secretary-General on the progress of training in peacekeeping67
Report of the Secretary-General on National Professional Officers68
Report of the Secretary-General on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation
and sexual abuse69
Note by the Secretary-General concerning a comprehensive report on training in
peacekeeping70
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions71
Report of the Secretary-General on the overview of the financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations: budget performance for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June
2007 and budget for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 200972
Report of the Secretary-General on peacekeeping best practices73
Comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on conduct and discipline, including full
justification of all posts74
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions75
Office of Internal Oversight Services
Report on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services for the period from
1 January to 31 December 200776
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments on the report on the activities of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services for the period from 1 January to 31 December
200777
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services: peacekeeping operations78
Closed peacekeeping missions
Report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of closed peacekeeping
missions as at 30 June 200879
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions80

_______________
66

A/63/675 and Corr.1.
A/63/680.
68
A/62/762.
69
A/63/720.
70
A/62/676.
71
A/63/746.
72
A/62/727.
73
A/62/593 and Corr.1.
74
A/62/758.
75
A/62/781.
76
A/62/281 (Part II).
77
A/62/281 (Part II)/Add.1.
78
A/63/302 (Part II).
79
A/63/581.
80
A/63/856.
67

151

IV. Decisions

63/554. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
At its 79th plenary meeting, on 7 April 2009, the General Assembly, on the recommendation
of the Fifth Committee,81 having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing
of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea82 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions:83
(a) Endorsed the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,83 and requested the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
(b) Approved the donation of assets of the Mission with an inventory value of 1,398,500
United States dollars and a corresponding residual value of 421,800 dollars to the Government of
Ethiopia;
(c) Also approved the donation of assets of the Mission with an inventory value of
6,911,400 dollars and corresponding residual value of 1,967,900 dollars to the African Union in
support of the African Union Mission in Somalia;
(d) Decided to keep under review during its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea”.
63/557. Closed peacekeeping missions
At its 93rd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2009, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee:84
(a) Decided to return two thirds of the credits available in the account of the United
Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission to the Government of Kuwait in the amount of 996,800
United States dollars;
(b) Also decided to continue to consider the updated financial position of closed
peacekeeping missions during its sixty-fourth session.

_______________
81

A/63/646/Add.1, para. 6.
A/63/728.
83
A/63/761.
84
A/63/894, para. 15.
82

152

Annex I
a

Allocation of agenda items

1. The following additional item was allocated to the Fifth Committee during the resumed
sixty-third session of the General Assembly, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and
other matters):b
157.

Financing of activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009).

2. The following item was considered directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixtythird session, under heading F (Promotion of justice and international law):c
158.

The scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction.

3. The following additional items were considered directly in plenary meeting during the
resumed sixty-third session, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters):d
159.

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.

160.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.

_________________
a

Organized under headings corresponding to the priorities of the Organization.
See A/63/252/Add.3.
c
See A/63/252/Add.4.
d
See A/63/252/Add.5.
b

153

Annex II
Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolutions
Resolution
No.

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

116

93rd

30 June 2009

49

139

93rd

30 June 2009

50

Resolution B

148

93rd

30 June 2009

51

63/267.

New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support

57 (a)

78th

31 March 2009

2

63/268.

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the
biennium 2008–2009

118

79th

7 April 2009

55

63/269.

Information and communications technology, disaster recovery
and business continuity for the United Nations: arrangements for
the secondary data centre at Headquarters

118

79th

7 April 2009

58

63/270.

Capital master plan

118

79th

7 April 2009

59

63/271.

Amendments to the Staff Regulations

123

79th

7 April 2009

66

63/272.

Report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2008 and programme of
work for 2009

124

79th

7 April 2009

68

63/273.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
Resolution A

146

79th

7 April 2009

70

Resolution B

146

93rd

30 June 2009

71

Resolution A

149

79th

7 April 2009

75

Resolution B

149

93rd

30 June 2009

76

Resolution A

157

79th

7 April 2009

79

Resolution B

157

93rd

30 June 2009

81

63/276.

Accountability framework, enterprise risk management and
internal control framework, and results-based management
framework

117

79th

7 April 2009

83

63/277.

Organization of a United Nations conference at the highest level
on the world financial and economic crisis and its impact on
development

48

79th

7 April 2009

2

63/246.

Title

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of
the Board of Auditors
Resolution B

63/257.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
Resolution B

63/258.

63/274.

63/275.

Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad

Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution
1863 (2009)

155

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolution
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

63/278.

International Mother Earth Day

49 (d)

80th

22 April 2009

4

63/279.

International cooperation and coordination for the human and
ecological rehabilitation and economic development of the
Semipalatinsk region of Kazakhstan

65 (b)

81st

24 April 2009

5

63/280.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping
operations in all their aspects

31

82nd

8 May 2009

46

63/281.

Climate change and its possible security implications

107

85th

3 June 2009

8

63/282.

The Peacebuilding Fund

101

90th

17 June 2009

9

63/283.

Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and
other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly
and/or the Security Council

118

93rd

30 June 2009

86

63/284.

Timely submission of documents

121

93rd

30 June 2009

86

63/285.

Rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries

132

93rd

30 June 2009

87

63/286.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy

132

93rd

30 June 2009

88

63/287.

Support account for peacekeeping operations

132

93rd

30 June 2009

89

63/288.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi

133

93rd

30 June 2009

97

63/289.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire

134

93rd

30 June 2009

98

63/290.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus

135

93rd

30 June 2009

101

63/291.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo

136

93rd

30 June 2009

104

63/292.

Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste

138

93rd

30 June 2009

107

63/293.

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia

140

93rd

30 June 2009

111

63/294.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti

141

93rd

30 June 2009

113

63/295.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo

142

93rd

30 June 2009

116

63/296.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia

143

93rd

30 June 2009

119

63/297.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force

144 (a)

93rd

30 June 2009

122

63/298.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon

144 (b)

93rd

30 June 2009

125

63/299.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone

145

93rd

30 June 2009

129

63/300.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara

147

93rd

30 June 2009

130

63/301.

Situation in Honduras: democracy breakdown

20

93rd

30 June 2009

10

63/302.

2010 high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly

44 and 107

95th

9 July 2009

11

63/303.

Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic
Crisis and Its Impact on Development

48

95th

9 July 2009

11

63/304.

Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa

57 (b)

97th

23 July 2009

23

156

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolution
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

63/305.

Establishment of an ad hoc open-ended working group of the
General Assembly to follow up on the issues contained in the
Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic
Crisis and Its Impact on Development

48

102nd

31 July 2009

27

63/306.

Multilingualism

113

104th

9 September 2009

28

63/307.

Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia,
Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia

13

104th

9 September 2009

32

63/308.

The responsibility to protect

44 and 107

105th

14 September 2009

33

63/309.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly

110

105th

14 September 2009

34

63/310.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union

114 (a)

105th

14 September 2009

35

63/311.

System-wide coherence

107

105th

14 September 2009

41

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

105 (g)

75th

20 February 2009

135

105 (b)

84th

26 May 2009

135

Decision B

104 (a)

87th

10 June 2009

136

63/416.

Appointment of a member of the Joint Inspection Unit

105 (h)

75th

20 February 2009

136

63/417.

Appointment of the judges of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal
Decision A

105 (k)

76th

2 March 2009

137

Decision B

105 (k)

78th

31 March 2009

137

63/418.

Appointment of the judges of the United Nations Appeals
Tribunal

105 (l)

77th

2 March 2009

137

63/419.

Confirmation of the appointment of the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme

105 (i)

78th

31 March 2009

138

63/420.

Election of eighteen members of the Human Rights Council

104 (c)

83rd

12 May 2009

138

63/421.

Election of the President of the General Assembly at its sixtyfourth session

4

86th

10 June 2009

138

63/422.

Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session

5

87th

10 June 2009

139

63/423.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session

6

87th

10 June 2009

139

Decisions
Decision
No.

63/405.

Title

Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences
Decision B

63/408.

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions
Decision B

63/414.

Election of twenty members of the Committee for Programme
and Coordination

157

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Decision
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

63/424.

Confirmation of the appointment of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

105 (j)

94th

6 July 2009

139

63/425.

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994

159

104th

9 September 2009

139

63/426.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

160

104th

9 September 2009

141

63/503.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
7

75th
80th
81st
84th
91st
100th
103rd
105th

20 February 2009
22 April 2009
24 April 2009
26 May 2009
29 June 2009
28 July 2009
11 August 2009
14 September 2009

143

Decision B

117

79th

7 April 2009

148

Decision C

117

93rd

30 June 2009

150

63/553.

General debate of the sixty-fourth regular session of the General
Assembly

7

75th

20 February 2009

144

63/554.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea

139

79th

7 April 2009

152

63/555.

Arrangements and organization of work of the Conference on the
World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on
Development (New York, 1 to 3 June 2009)

48

82nd

8 May 2009

144

63/556.

New dates of the Conference on the World Financial and
Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development

48

84th

26 May 2009

145

63/557.

Closed peacekeeping missions

132

93rd

30 June 2009

152

63/558.

Commemoration of the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

29

103rd

11 August 2009

145

63/559.

Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte

7

104th

9 September 2009

145

63/560

Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS
and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS

41

104th

9 September 2009

145

63/561.

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994

159

104th

9 September 2009

146

Decision B

63/550.

158

Questions deferred for future consideration

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Decision
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

63/562.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

160

104th

9 September 2009

146

63/563.

Prevention of armed conflict

12

105th

14 September 2009

146

63/564.

High-Level Dialogue of the General Assembly on Financing for
Development

48

105th

14 September 2009

146

63/565.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council and related matters
Decision A

111

105th

14 September 2009

146

Decision B

111

105th

14 September 2009

147

63/566.

Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative
management and internal oversight of the Independent Inquiry
Committee into the United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme

115

105th

14 September 2009

147

63/567.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor

137

105th

14 September 2009

148

63/568.

The scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction

158

105th

14 September 2009

148

63/569.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan

18

105th

14 September 2009

148

63/570.

Request for an advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on whether the unilateral declaration of independence of
Kosovo is in accordance with international law

71

105th

14 September 2009

148

63/571.

Report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict

107

105th

14 September 2009

148

159
