Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee
qualifications in the functional fields studied by the
Committee,
Considering that this is a practice which might be
extended with advantage to the work of the Committee,
in that the pooling and exchange of knowledge and
experience thus achieved will enable it more efficaciously
to assess the economic, social and educational problems
of Non-Self-Governing Territories in the light of the
solutions being found to those problems elsewhere in
the world,
1. Commends the action of those Members which
have included specialist advisers in their delegations
to the Committee;
2. Expresses the hope that those Members which
have not hitherto found it possible to do so, will find
it appropriate to associate with their delegations persons
specially qualified in the functional fields within the
Committee's purview.
459th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.

746 (VID). Employment of international staff
from Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
Considering that the paragraph 3 of Article 101 of the
Charter of the United Nations, regarding the employment of the staff of the United Nations, states that, in
addition to the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity in employment of Secretariat staff, due regard should be paid to
the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible,
Having regard to the objectives set forth in Chapters XI and XII of the Charter in respect of the advancement of the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
and Trust Territories,
Considering that the services of individuals from
Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories in the Secretariat of the United Nations will contribute to a
wider geographical coverage in the recruitment of staff,
Considering the statement 4 made by the SecretaryGeneral that he has already taken note of the wishe~
expressed in the Fourth Committee on this matter,
l. Recommends that the Secretary-General consider
the desirability of continuing and increasing the recruitment of suitably qualified inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories for the Secretariat of the
United Nations;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to draw the attention of the specialized agencies to the present resolution with a view to a similar policy being followed as far
as possible in the secretariats of those agencies.
459th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
7 4 7 (VIII). Cessation of the transmission of in•
formation under Article 73 e of the Charter
in respect of the Netherlands Antilles and
Surinam
The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resolution 650 (VII) of 20 December 1952 it invited the Committee set up to study

the factors which should be taken into account in deciding whether a Territory is or is not a Territory
whose people have not yet attained a full measure
of self-government to examine carefully the documents
submitted by the Netherlands Government relating to
the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam in the light of
resolution 648 (VII) of 10 December 1952,
Having received and considered the report 6 of the
Ad Hoe Committee on Factors (Non-Self-Governing
Territories) established by resolution 648 (VII),
Having taken note of the statement 6 of the representative of the Netherlands that the negotiations between representatives of the Nether lands, the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam, which were adjourned in
the year 1952, will shortly be resumed,
1. Notes urith satisfaction the progress made by
the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam towards selfgovernment ;
2. Considers that the new status of the Netherlands
Antilles and Surinam can only be rightly appraised after
the said negotiations have led to a final result and this
has been embodied in constitutional provisions;
3. Expresses to the Netherlands Government its
confidence that, as a result of the negotiations, a new
status will be attained by the Netherlands Antilles and
Surinam representing a full measure of self-government
in fulfilment of the objectives set forth in Chapter
XI of the Charter;
4. Invites the Government of the Netherlands to
communicate to the Secretary-General the result of these
negotiations as well as the provisions mentioned in
paragraph 2 above;
5. Invites the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories to examine these communications in connexion with the information already transmitted and to report thereon to the General Assembly ;
6. Requests the Government of the Netherlands
to transmit regularly to the Secretary-General the information specified in Article 73 e of the Charter in
regard to the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam until
such time as the General Assembly takes a decision
that the transmission of information in regard to these
Territories should be discontinued.
459th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.

748 (VIII). Cessation of the transmission of in•
formation under Article 73 e of the Charter
in respect of Puerto Rico
The General Assembly,
Considering that, in resolution 222 (III) of 3 No~ember 1948, the General Assembly, while welcommg any development of self-government in Non-SelfGoverning Territories, considers it essential that the
United Nations be informed of any change in the constitutional status of any such Territory as a result of
which the government responsible for the transmis~ion. under Article 73 e of the Charter, of information
!n respect_ of that T~rritory thinks it unnecessary or
mappropnate to contmue such a practice,
Having received the communications 7 dated 19 January and 20 March 1953 informing the United Nations
'' See document A/2428 .
See Official Reco,:ds of the General Assembly, Eighth Sess10,1, Fourth Co111mittec, 343rd meeting, para. 70.
7
See document A/ AC.35/L.121.
•

4
•
See Official RecC!rds of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Fourth Committee, 342nd meeting.

25

6

26

General AHembly-Eighth Session

of the establishment of the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico, as a result of the entry into force on 25 July
1952 of the Constitution of Puerto Rico, and stating
that, in consequence of these constitutional changes, the
Government of the United States of America would
cease to transmit information under Article 73 e of the
Charter,
Having studied the report 8 prepared by the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories, during its session of 1953, on the question of
the cessation of the transmission of information on
Puerto Rico, and presented to the General Assembly
in conformity with paragraph 2 of resolution 448 ( V)
of 12 December 1950,
H<Wing examined the communications of the Government of the United States of America in the light
of the basic principles embodied in Chapter XI of the
Charter and of all the other elements of judgment pertinent to the issue,
Considering that the agreement reached by the United
States of America and the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico, in forming a political association which respects
the individuality and the cultural characteristics of
Puerto Rico, maintains the spiritual bonds between
Puerto Rico and Latin America and constitutes a link
in continental solidarity,
Bearing in mind the competence of the General Assembly to decide whether a Non-Self-Governing Territory has or has not attained a full measure of selfgovernment as referred to in Chapter XI of the Charter,
l. Takes n'ote favourably of the conclusions set
forth by the Committee on Information from Non-SelfGoverning Territories in its resolution; 9
2. Recognizes that the people of the Commonwealth
of Puerto Rico, by expressing their will in a free and
democratic way, have achieved a new constitutional
status;
3. Expresses the opinion that it stems from the
documentation provided that the association of tht
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico with the United States
of America has been established as a mutually agreed
association ;
4. Recognizes that, when choosing their constitutional and international status, the people of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico have effectively exercised
their right to self-determination;
5. Recognizes that, in the framework of their Constitution and of the compact agreed upon with the
United States of America, the people of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico have been invested with attributes of political sovereignty which clearly identify
the status of self-government attained by the Puerto
Rican people as that of an autonomous political entity;
6. C~nsiders that, due to these circumstances, the
Declarat10n regarding Non-Self-Governing Territories
and the provisions established under it in Chapter XI
of the Charter can no longer be applied to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico ;
7. Takes note of the opinion of the Government of
the United States of America as to the cessation of
the transmission under Article 73 e of the Charter of
information on Puerto Rico;
8 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Supplement No. 15, part I, section VII.
9 Ibid., page 6.

8. Considers it appropriate that the transmission of
this information should cease;
9. Expresses its assurance that, in accordance with
the spirit of the present resolution, the ideals embodied in the Charter of the United Nations, the traditions of the people of the United States of America
and the political advancement attained by the people
of Puerto Rico, due regard will be paid to the will
of both the Puerto Rican and American peoples in
the conduct of their relations under their present legal
statute, and also in the eventuality that either of the
parties to the mutually agreed association may desire
any change in the terms of this association.
459th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.

749. (VIII).

Question of South West Mrica

A
The General Assembly,
H<Wing accepted, by resolution 449 A (V) of 13
December 1950 and by resolution 570 (VI) of 19
January 1952, the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice with respect to South West Africa,
Recalling that the advisory opinion 10 of the International Court of Justice with respect to the Territory
of South West Africa sets forth, inter alia, that :
(a) The Territory of South·West Africa is a Territory under the international Mandate assumed by the
Union of South Africa on 17 December 1920,
( b) The Union of South Africa acting alone has not
the competence to modify the international status of
the Territory of South West Africa, and that the competence to determine and modify the international status
of the Territory rests with the Union of South Africa
acting with the consent of the United Nations,
( c) The Union of South Africa continues to have
the international obligations stated in Article 22 of the
Covenant of the League of Nations and in the Mandate
for South West Africa as well as the obligation to
transmit petitions from the inhabitants of that Territory, the supervisory functions to be exercised by
the United Nations to which the annual reports and
the petitions are to be submitted,
Considering that, in accordance with the , opinion
of the International Court of Justice, the Union of
South Africa is under an obligation to accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court as provided by Article 37 of the Statute of the International Court of
Justice, by Article 80, paragraph 1, of the Charter of
the United Nations and by article 7 of the Mandate
for South West Africa,
Having reconstituted the Ad H oc Commii:tee on
South West Africa, consisting of the representatives
of Norway, Syria, Thailand, the United States of
America and Uruguay, by General Assembly resolution
570 A (VI) of 19 January 1952 and, by General Assembly resolution 651 (VII) of 20 December 1952.
having continued it on the same basis as before,
Having considered the reports of the aforesaid Ad
Hoe Committee, i.e., document A/2261 submitted on 21
November 1952 and documents A/2475 and Adds.I
and 2 submitted on 16 September, 8 October and 9
November 1953,
10 See International Status of S 011th i-v est Africa A d,·i.rnry
Oti11ion: I.CJ. Reports 1950, page 128.
'
