S/2020/1103

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 November 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 10 November 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of a briefing provided by His
Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium, China, the
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Germany, Indonesia — on behalf of itself and Viet
Nam — the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South
Africa, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America in connection with the video-teleconference on the “The
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina” convened on Thursday, 5 November 2020.
Statements were also delivered by the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia and Serbia, as well as by the Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, this
briefing and these statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Inga Rhonda King
President of the Security Council

20-14976 (E) 121120 141220

*2014976*

S/2020/1103

Annex I
Statement by the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Valentin Inzko
It is my honour to address this organ once again. I am only sorry that again
we must meet remotely due to the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic. I sincerely
hope everyone here is doing well, including all citizens in their respective countries.
With so many issues facing the Council, I am thankful that everyone here is still able
and willing to take the time to focus on a discussion on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which is an ongoing concern. It is my wish that we meet again in person next spring.
By now, Council members will have read my report to the Council (S/2020/1052,
annex), in which I have addressed the issues with which Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to grapple, and which I believe still require the continued attention and
even stronger support of this organ and the international community.
This month, we will celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dayton
Peace Agreement, which has provided 25 years of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Looking back, Dayton has been a huge success, as it indeed brought peace to the
country, and is even more impressive against the backdrop of various international
disputes that have remained unresolved for decades, like in the Middle East, the
Caucasus and elsewhere.
However, as it turns out, the Dayton Agreement, while also a solid framework
for future development of Bosnia and Herzegovina, has brought an imperfect peace.
After 100,000 people were killed in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the priority of the
Dayton fathers was — and rightly so — to stop the bloodshed and produce an
agreement enabling future State-building reforms.
It is an undeniable fact that significant progress has been achieved in Bosnia
and Herzegovina in the first decade after Dayton, with the help of some politicians,
like Mr. Dodik. State symbols were adopted and a new common currency, passport,
flag, anthem, licence plates and even a national football league were created in order
to enable freedom of movement. In addition, the taxation system improved, judicial
reforms were implemented and joint armed forces were established in a country
where earlier, three armies fought against each other. These are a few among many
other changes.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to and thank my predecessors
for their dedicated work in Bosnia and Herzegovina: Carl Bildt, Carlos Westendorp y
Cabeza, Wolfgang Petritsch, the late Lord Ashdown, Miroslav Lajčák and Christian
Schwarz-Schilling, who will soon turn 90.
Regrettably, the international community made one grave conceptual mistake
during the implementation of the Dayton Agreement — we invested our trust in
some politicians too early and they used our goodwill to reinvigorate nationalistic,
divisive policies, especially from 2006 to date.
The lack of progress and real reforms is obvious. The blockage of state-level
and, lately, Federation-level institutions has become a new normal in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Also normal is the systemic discrimination against so-called others —
citizens who do not declare themselves to be members of any of the constituent
peoples as. I mention that because some politicians are very ill-prepared to remedy
this shameful discrimination that affects about 10 per cent of the citizens.
It is also very worrisome that, 25 years after the signing of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, some Bosnia and Herzegovina politicians still ignore core European
values. The International Military Tribunal in Nuremberg, established 75 years ago,
2/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

returned the sense of right and wrong to Europe and had a healing effect on some
countries, including my home country, Austria. The Nuremberg trials prosecuted
individual perpetrators of terrible crimes in the Second World War, including those
committed during the Holocaust as the most heinous, and condemned Nazi war
criminals forever to the wrong side of history.
The same has been attempted through the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), established by this very organ in 1993. Some Bosnia
and Herzegovina politicians have failed, however, to understand the historic lesson
of Nuremberg, and have completely missed the point of the ICTY and its work.
There is no collective guilt for war crimes; there are no bad nations, there is
only individual responsibility. But the biggest lesson is that those who choose to
ignore or rewrite history instead of accepting the truth, will not have a stable and
prosperous future. As the German Foreign Minister Heiko Maas said in a landmark
speech only a few days ago, on 28 October, “there is no place in the European Union
for those who glorify war criminals”.
The latest example of glorifying a war criminal is Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency Chair Milorad Dodik’s request, on 16 September, that the Presidency
honour and pay respect to the convicted war criminal Momčilo Krajišnik, who had
died the previous day, with a minute of silence. Some time ago, Mr. Dodik opened
a student dormitory in Pale, close to Sarajevo, in honour of convicted war criminal
Radovan Karadžić, who has been sentenced to life by the ICTY. Similarly, upon
his release, Dario Kordić, who served 12 years for war crimes, received a warm
welcome organized by a political party and a church honoured him with a Catholic
mass of gratitude.
I have previously reported to the Security Council on the glorification of war
criminals, but on 11 July I repeated my appeal with regard to Srebrenica, where
more than 8,000 boys and men were killed and buried. I urged Mr. Dodik to remove
the commemorative plaque and rename the student dormitory dedicated to Radovan
Karadžić. This is a dormitory where future generations will live and grow up. I repeat
that appeal today. If he will not act before the next Security Council meeting in May,
he should face a travel ban to all European Union (EU) countries and, eventually,
to all States Members of the United Nations. As the German Foreign Minister said,
there is no place in civilized Europe for those who glorify convicted war criminals.
There is no place for those who do not share European values. That is, why we need
a genocide denial law similar to the Holocaust denial law. The importance of shared
values was again confirmed recently during the Zagreb summit of the EU.
Twenty-five years after Dayton, the reconciliation process should be a nonissue, but the reality is that when it comes to some politicians, it has not even properly
started. In many respects, those who should lead that process are farther apart now
than at any point after the war. The result is a lack of joint vision for the county, as
well as insufficient trust and dialogue to move the country forward.
In that regard, I would like to note the adoption, in September, by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Council of Ministers, of the Revised National War Crimes Processing
Strategy, pursuant to which the most serious war crimes should be prioritized for
prosecution and completion by 2023. The previous National War Crimes Processing
Strategy, adopted in 2008, envisioned the processing of the most complex cases
by 2015, but was never fully implemented. The success of the new strategy will
ultimately depend on the level of coordination, cooperation and discipline of the
judicial institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I am hopeful of the outcome.
But, in all candour, we need action first and foremost. Words on paper must
translate into legal processes and decisions as soon as possible. I would like to be
20-149763/38

S/2020/1103

able to report today that all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina look to the future
and focus on important issues so as to improve the lives of the citizens, but I cannot
say that this is always the case. As the Council knows, the country will hold local
elections 10 days from now and, in some cases, instead of hopeful, forward-looking
campaigns, I am afraid that we are seeing the usual divisive rhetoric.
Most recently, Mr. Dodik, who is the Serb member of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the leader of the main Serb party, the Union of Independent
Social Democrats (SNSD), said that Bosnia and Herzegovina is the “wrong country”.
Well, of course it is the wrong country when one rejects everything, makes no
effort to come together to fix it and constantly talks about leaving it. Earlier, Mr.
Dodik threatened that Serbs and Croats would present their plan for how Bosnia
and Herzegovina should function and that, if not accepted, they would dissociate
themselves from the country.
To be clear, Mr. Dodik is talking about the secession of the Republika Srpska
from Bosnia and Herzegovina — again. Needless to say, there is already a plan for
how Bosnia and Herzegovina should function; it is called the General Framework
Agreement for Peace. There is no option in the agreement for secession, nor is it
possible to cherry-pick provisions from the Dayton Agreement. Such statements are
irresponsible, unfounded and show poor leadership. They also completely disregard
the well-being and prosperity of the citizens, as well as the peace and stability of
the region.
Given such rhetoric, I must acknowledge and express my thanks to the Council
for its reauthorization of the mandate of the EU-led Operation Althea (EUFOR
Althea) military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in fulfilment of its main peacestabilization role under the military aspects of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace. The continued presence of EUFOR Althea remains necessary.
As I have noted, Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the midst of campaigns for the
15 November local elections, and I want to express my gratitude and support to the
Central Election Commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which has endeavoured to
organize these elections under extraordinary circumstances, while facing constant
pressure and criticism, particularly by the Republika Srpska party led by Mr.
Dodik, SNSD, and the Federation-based Croat Democratic Union (HDZ Bosnia and
Herzegovina), led by Dragan Čović.
The members of the Central Election Commission have shown great resolve in
addressing hateful rhetoric and seriously tackling numerous allegations of electoral
fraud, particularly with regard to the seemingly fraudulent registrations of out-ofcountry voters. I urge the law enforcement agencies and judicial institutions in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to support the Central Election Commission in investigating and
prosecuting all such cases.
The Central Election Commission is also preparing for the 20 December
local elections in the city of Mostar — the first such elections in the city since
2008. That is owing to the 17 June agreement enabling the elections signed between
HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina President Dragan Čović and the Bosniak-majority
Party for Democratic Action President Bakir Izetbegović. That agreement would
not have been possible without the engagement of the international community,
particularly European Union Special Representative Johann Sattler and United
States Ambassador Eric Nelson.
However, as I have outlined in my report, Mr. Čović and Mr. Izetbegović have
since been at odds over a second agreement, signed on 17 June in Mostar, aimed
at reforming the Election Law of Bosnia and Herzegovina, due to their entirely
different interpretations of what they actually agreed. Most recently, they reached
4/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

a stalemate centred around the appointment of the new Federation Government,
which has yet to be appointed more than two years after the 2018 general elections,
and the appointments of judges to the Federation Constitutional Court, which have
been pending for more than a year, whose absence renders the Court’s vital national
interest panel non-functional. I have to note that on both issues, the HDZ Bosnia and
Herzegovina side is primarily responsible for the blockages.
Despite their disagreements, after 12 years without elections, the city of
Mostar must hold elections as scheduled, on 20 December.
I would further add that the long-overdue appointment of the new Federation
Government must be carried out as soon as possible. Holding elections are meaningless
if the results are not implemented. The same must be said for the appointments of
local Governments in the Federation cantons of Herzegovina-Neretva and Canton
10. Additional Federation deficiencies are exhaustively addressed in my report to
the Security Council.
Among other issues outlined in my report, I would like to underline the
need for Bosnia and Herzegovina to dramatically strengthen the rule of law and
bolster the fight against corruption. The rule of law remains a cornerstone of any
functional democracy.
I would remind everyone that Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to undergo
a massive brain drain as talented young people decide to leave the country and build
their futures elsewhere. Numerous polls show that people are not leaving primarily
due to a lack of economic opportunity, but rather due to weak rule of law. Binding
court decisions go unimplemented for years and blatant corruption goes unpunished.
Some public opinion polls suggest that 74 per cent of the citizens are unsatisfied
with the situation in the judiciary. Those figures attest to what we are saying on
a daily basis — that profound, radical and rapid judicial reforms are needed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In that regard, I would like to reiterate that the case of the young, murdered
student from Banja Luka, David Dragičević, the case of Dženan Memić and the case
of the two policemen killed in Sarajevo have not been solved. What those cases have
in common is that even after more than two years, investigations have stalled. What
should citizens think if even the murder of policemen cannot be solved?
It may be of interest to the Council that Austria’s Minister of Justice, Alma
Zadić, is a highly talented and hard-working refugee child from Bosnia and
Herzegovina, who studied at the Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore in Piacenza,
Columbia University and the University of Vienna.
I would also underline that, despite repeated calls from members of the Council
for the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement the 5+2 agenda — the
five objectives and two conditions to be fulfilled prior to the closure of the Office
of the High Representative and the end of my mandate — regrettably, there has
been little progress other than the adoption of the Revised National War Crimes
Processing Strategy.
I actually see very limited commitment to the implementation the 5+2
conditionality, particularly by those politicians who advocate the closure of the
Office of the High Representative. They should find an agreement to implement
the State and defence property registration, which are clearly defined. They must
also move towards, not away from the implementation of the second condition:
the “positive assessment of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, based on full
compliance with the Dayton Peace Agreement”.

20-149765/38

S/2020/1103

Even today, I can state that I will not base my assessment of the fulfilment of
the second condition on the use of the negative, anti-State rhetoric. Instead, I will
assess the commitment of the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to full and
real compliance with the Dayton Agreement and will consider, in that regard, the
concrete actions taken by some politicians to undermine the State and the Federation.
It is in our common interest to leave behind lasting and irreversible stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which can be achieved only through enduring and genuine
commitment to the Dayton Peace Agreement, including the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution.
Until that is secured, the international community must uphold all applicable
instruments in order to address potential threats to long-term stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including through the use of executive mandates, international judges
in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court and international mechanisms
in Brčko.
On 31 October, we reached the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), which the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina marked in November. I urge
the authorities to implement the third national action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), for the years 2018 to 2022, primarily in order to increase
the effectiveness of women’s roles in trust-building and political leadership. While
women are at the core of ensuring socioeconomic stability in the country, they are
nevertheless marginalized in political decision-making.
We need to explore every avenue that could assist the transformation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina into a stable, peaceful and prosperous State that functions
and provides for the needs and best interests of all of its peoples — one that is fully
integrated with the European Union and other Euro-Atlantic structures. I firmly
believe that this is what the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina want too. To achieve
that goal, the international community will have to become more ambitious, and the
country’s leaders more serious.
In the past, the international community has employed robust interventionism
and hands-off, local-ownership approaches. Given the reality on the ground, perhaps
it is time to rethink our current approach. Let us finish the job in front of us, let us
unite forces and let us turn a new page in our engagement and open a new chapter.
It is not about us being satisfied, but rather it is about the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, who deserve better and who still have trust in us.
For 500 years, Bosnia and Herzegovina has been a country with four basic
religions —Islam, Catholicism, Orthodox Christianity and Judaism. It was a preemptive small Europe of four religions and 16 minorities, living together for hundreds
of years. Living among ordinary people, there are numerous Nelson Mandelas in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Only recently, in Jajce, in Central Bosnia, an imam attended the first mass of a
newly ordained Catholic priest. It was also in Jajce that youngsters protested against
the division of their high school, which would lead to two schools under one roof —
a Croat and a Bosniak one. Those young people were successful and received the
prestigious Max van der Stoel Award for their courage and principled stand. It was
awarded by Stephanus Blok, the Foreign Minister of the Netherlands, in presence of
the First Vice President of the European Commission, Frans Timmermans.
This is why I firmly believe that, together with international community
as partners, this ancient Bosnia and Herzegovina, full of values, can be recreated
and reinvigorated.

6/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

Annex II
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations, Karen Van Vlierberge
[Original: French]
Belgium aligns itself with the declaration submitted on behalf of the European
Union (annex XVIII).
I thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for his briefing. We particularly appreciate his work on the ground in a
complex environment.
We welcome the unanimity within the Council that led to the renewal of the
European Union-led Operation Althea for another year. This mission contributes to
the viability of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single, united, sovereign and multicommunity country, and to the stabilization of the region. As a member of the
European Union, Belgium will continue to give the country its full support.
Twenty-five years after the signing of the Dayton Accords, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has emerged as an independent State on the road to Euro-Atlantic
integration. However, only by carrying out all the necessary reforms will it be able
to realize its aspiration of one day becoming a member of the European Union.
Strengthening the rule of law and the fight against corruption must be at the heart of
those efforts. We call on Bosnia and Herzegovina to adopt the necessary reforms to
strengthen the judiciary and ensure its independence, including in the High Judicial
and Prosecutorial Council.
In view of the local elections scheduled for 15 November, we call on all
political actors to refrain from provocative rhetoric during the election period. After
12 years without elections, we welcome the agreement to hold local elections in
Mostar on 20 December, thus enabling its inhabitants to finally exercise their right
to vote.
We stress that any electoral reform must be inclusive and in line with
European standards. In that respect, we also call for ensuring the equality and
non-discrimination of citizens and the full implementation of the judgments of the
European Court of Human Rights, including Sejdić and Finci and related judgments.
It is also essential to implement the recommendations of the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe.
Twenty-five years after the genocide in Srebrenica, the denial of genocide and
war crimes and the glorification of war criminals continues. Let me be clear: there
can be no room for the denial of genocide and war crimes. The International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals and the International Court of Justice have ruled that the atrocities
committed in Srebrenica 25 years ago constitute a crime of genocide. Continued
denial only undermines reconciliation efforts and needlessly increases the pain
of the survivors. That is unacceptable and must stop, in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and elsewhere.
We welcome the adoption of the Revised National War Crimes Processing
Strategy. It is important that it be effectively and promptly implemented. We also
encourage the adoption of an international law criminalizing the denial of genocide
and war crimes.

20-149767/38

S/2020/1103

Genuine reconciliation is possible only if concrete measures are taken to fight
impunity by ensuring the effective prosecution of war criminals and shedding light
on the fate of victims.
Victims and survivors must be at the centre of those efforts. Their rights
and their meaningful participation in reconciliation efforts must be guaranteed.
Survivors deserve truth, justice and reparations for crimes committed against their
family members. While the path to reconciliation is long, it is the only way to achieve
lasting peace.

8/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

Annex III
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: Chinese]
I thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing.
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the signing of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. Over the past 25 years, the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
has remained generally peaceful and stable. We hope that all parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will take the twenty-fifth anniversary as an opportunity to reiterate
their commitment to implement the Dayton Peace Agreement, increase mutual trust,
build consensus, maintain unity, strengthen cooperation and continue to advance the
process of national peace and reconciliation.
China respects the choice of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina with
regard to the future of their country, and supports the harmonious coexistence and
common development of all ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The country
will hold local elections on 15 November and, in December, Mostar will hold its first
elections since 2008. Those elections are of great significance for the consolidation
of the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We hope that all parties in Bosnia
and Herzegovina will meet each other halfway, persist in resolving pending issues
through dialogue and consultation and jointly advance election preparations.
In the light of the severe challenges posed by the coronavirus disease
epidemic, all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina should put national interests first,
strengthen unity and cooperation, promote the development of national mechanisms
and systems, improve decision-making efficiency and capacity, increase investment
in medical and health infrastructure and promote economic and social recovery
and development in order to create an environment conducive to the harmonious
coexistence of people of all ethnic groups.
Maintaining peace, stability and development in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
in the common interest of the international community and countries of the region.
The international community should adopt a fair, balanced and prudent attitude
on the issue of Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to help the country promote the
process of peace and reconciliation in accordance with the Constitution and improve
its ability to achieve development and ensure national security on its own. We
hope that the senior representatives will carry out their work strictly in accordance
with their mandates, maintain an objective and neutral stance, pursue constructive
dialogue and cooperation with all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina and promote
the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. China hopes that the European
Union’s multinational stabilization force in Bosnia and Herzegovina will strengthen
communication and coordination with all relevant parties and play a positive role in
maintaining security and stability.
For a long time, the peace and reconciliation process in Bosnia and Herzegovina
has consistently received the attention and support of the international community
and has benefited from tremendous help from other countries. We hope that Bosnia
and Herzegovina will strictly abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations in its foreign relations, handle relevant issues in a balanced
and prudent manner, respect the sovereignty of other countries and refrain from
interfering in other countries’ internal affairs.
China is willing to work with the international community to continue to
contribute to the realization of lasting peace, stability and development in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
20-149769/38

S/2020/1103

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We thank Mr. Valentin Inzko for his report (S/2020/1052, annex).
We would like to start by congratulating the Central Election Commission,
which, despite the constraints imposed by the pandemic, has been successful in
preparing for the upcoming elections. In that regard, we welcome the fact that, on 20
December, local elections will be allowed to take place in Mostar for the first time
in 12 years.
However, we are concerned that the results of the 2018 general elections have
not yet been fully implemented and that, due to a lack of political consensus, the
appointment of a new Government for the Federation and two other cantons is still
pending, while the appointment of the judges who will complete the Federation
Constitutional Court team continues to be blocked. We consider it necessary to
resume talks to finalize the outstanding issues and to make progress on the agenda
of five objectives and two conditions for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative.
As a gesture of political goodwill, the pending decisions to be implemented,
which were issued some time ago by the European Court of Human Rights and the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the recommendations
of the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Group of States against Corruption,
should be considered as a matter of urgency.
We welcome the information that Bosnia and Herzegovina may benefit
from the 2020 enlargement and investment package in the Western Balkans of the
European Union (EU). In that regard, we echo the High Representative’s call for
political leaders to promote the enactment of reforms that will pave the way for
progress towards EU accession.
The Dominican Republic takes this opportunity to join the commemoration
of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the signing of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace and we call on the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in both its
entities — the Republika Srpska and the Federation — and at all levels of society,
to reflect on the challenges, achievements and goals to be met after two and a half
decades of changing the bleak landscape of a conflict into the promising paths of
peace and coexistence as a nation.
It is time to leave behind the divisive rhetoric. These 25 years of transition
towards the consolidation of peace are being celebrated in an environment of a global
health crisis that demands flexibility and unity in political leadership and requires
the promotion of tolerance, institutionalism and respect for the Constitution.
In this, our last intervention on this important topic as members of the
Council, we invite the political leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina to seize this
opportunity to build together a strategic alliance in support of its public institutions
and in support of the consolidation of a strong rule of law. We propose that they
become one force and focus on overcoming the obstacles that prevent them from
achieving full stability and sustainable development. In order to do so, they must
be governed by inclusion, unity in ethnic and religious diversity, accountability,
access to justice, youth and women’s empowerment, citizen security and the fight
for poverty reduction.
10/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

We reiterate our recognition of the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Bosnia and Herzegovina while welcoming the unanimous adoption of resolution
2549 (2020), extending the mandate of the European Union-led peacekeeping force,
Operation Althea.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call for support to the Office of the High
Representative and to build a Bosnia and Herzegovina that is the product of consensus
and democratic maturity with the sole objective of meeting the expectations for
the well-being of a people who are celebrating 25 years of commitment to peace
with hope.

20-1497611/38

S/2020/1103

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for his twentyfourth regular report to the Secretary-General (S/2020/1052, annex) since assuming
his post in 2009. We commend his work, in particular, as the tasks that he tackles
remain closer to 100 per cent, although his team’s size and budget have considerably
decreased in recent years. Estonia would like to state its full support for a robust and
effective Office of the High Representative, which is necessary in order to fulfil its
mandated responsibilities.
In addition, we align ourselves with the statement submitted by the European
Union (EU) (annex XVIII). The European Union-led Operation Althea is a strong
contributor to the country’s work in maintaining a safe and secure environment, and
we fully support its continued executive mandate.
It is of concern that the authorities of the Republika Srpska have continued
divisive rhetoric and resorted to frequent actions targeting the country’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and even its Constitution. All political parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina should refrain from any actions or policies that could destabilize the
country. It is high time to put aside differences and focus on uniting to face the
common challenges.
As we learned from the High Representative’s last report (S/2020/1052,
annex), the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has disrupted the economy
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, with serious and potentially long-lasting consequences.
Estonia stands in strong support of the EU’s solidarity with the Western Balkans
and its mobilization of a substantial financial support package of €3.3 billion to help
the region to overcome the COVID-19 crisis. We commend the work and support
of all others who have provided assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina during the
pandemic, such as the United Nations Resident Coordinator and the United Nations
Development Programme.
This July, we commemorated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Srebrenica
genocide. The downplaying of that tragic historical event in any way is unacceptable.
Spreading nationalist and provocative rhetoric, denying war crimes or glorifying
convicted war criminals is not in line with the country’s Euro-Atlantic perspective.
We welcome the adoption of the Revised National War Crimes Processing
Strategy by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers and encourage the
authorities to implement it. A functioning Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court is of vital strategic importance for the country, and we fully support its
members, particularly its international judges. We call on all political parties in the
country to implement the important decisions of the aforementioned Constitutional
Court and the European Court of Human Rights. We strongly underline the need for
the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to work towards strengthening the rule of
law, fight against corruption and implement binding judicial decisions.
We hope that the municipal elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina on
15 November will be free and fair. We welcome the progress made during the past
few months, in particular the adoption of legislative amendments for the local
elections in Mostar, which must lead to their organization on 20 December, for the
first time since 2008. That is a major achievement.
Estonia is certain that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s future is adjoined with the
Euro-Atlantic path, in line with the legitimate aspiration of its citizens. We stress
the importance of continuing with the implementation of the 14 key priorities of
12/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

the European Commission’s opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s application for
membership of the European Union.
To move forward, all the country’s political leaders should deliver concrete
results and implement fundamental reforms. On the occasion of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the signing of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, we call on all levels of Government to work in solidarity and unity.

20-1497613/38

S/2020/1103

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
First, I align myself with the statement by Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union (EU) to the United Nations, (annex XVIII).
I thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for his briefing and dedication
to Bosnia and Herzegovina. Throughout his briefing, he showed the sympathy that
he has for the country. It was wonderful that he ended on a positive note, citing the
example of students that demonstrate and fight against the division. Unfortunately, in
many schools in Bosnia and Herzegovina the children are divided according to their
religious adherence and go to school in the morning or in the afternoon accordingly.
Overcoming that is something very positive. It also sends a message of hope.
At the same time, I echo the regret that High Representative Valentin Inzko
also expressed about the fact that many well-educated young people leave the
country frustrated. They look for better opportunities. I am very happy that there
is a good Minister of Justice from Bosnia and Herzegovina in Austria, but would
it not be wonderful to have had that young person stay in, or return to, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and be in the service of his home country? What are the reasons —
frustration, corruption, a lack of economic perspectives and deficits in judicial
reform? It is very sad to hear about the incapacity to investigate the murders that the
High Representative cited.
Coming back to the positive side, it is very good that we have the local
elections on 15 November, and those of us who have been in Mostar can assess the
symbolic importance of elections in this central, historic city of Mostar. It is good
that leaders agree on this, but we need to continue to build on that. In particular, we
have to ensure that irregularities with regard to the voter registration are corrected.
Cooperation among politicians needs to go beyond those elections. They
need to actually implement the reforms that were laid out in the EU Commission’s
opinion. The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina has committed itself to that
opinion. We must see that those commitments are implemented.
We welcome the work of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is a very important instrument. It was created in Dayton by international judges.
Germany was very happy to contribute a highly respected judge to the Constitutional
Court. On the other hand, we regret the verbal attacks on and defamation against the
Court and the judges. We are of the opinion that the authority of the Court cannot
be questioned.
Talking about defamation, I was really depressed by what the High
Representative and other speakers said about incendiary speeches. There continues
to be a divisive, negative rhetoric. The existing divisions are sometimes even
deepened and make reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina increasingly difficult.
The glorification of war criminals is something terrible. As High Representative
Valentin Inzko said, to name a dormitory after a convicted war criminal and to
organize a mass for a war criminal are simply abominable. I support what High
Representative Valentin Inzko suggested about having Bosnia and Herzegovina
adopt a genocide denial law. In that context, the clear indications of a value-based
foreign policy in Bosnia and Herzegovina are a positive development, as we have
witnessed in the Third Committee.
I echo what High Representative Valentin Inzko said on resolution 1325
(2000). It is very good that there is a national action plan in preparation. Again, the
proof of the pudding is in the eating. It cannot be that women are marginalized in
14/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

political decision-making. We are not anywhere close to the 40 per cent. So, in that
respect, more really has to be done. The question of whether it is better to have a
robust or a hands-off approach is not to be resolved today. But I think the answer has
also to be given in the light of the glorification of war criminals.
Let me end with one aspect that just came across my table this morning. On
the situation of human rights defenders, Ms. Mary Lawlor, United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders, called on the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to investigate a smear campaign and death threats against
women human rights defenders working for the rights of refugees and migrants.
She said,
“Instead of criminalizing migration and human rights defenders who
help migrants, the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina must guarantee
the human rights of all individuals without regard for their nationality or
immigration status.”
She spoke out after an online hate campaign intensified against Ms. Zehida
Bihorac, an elementary school teacher and woman human rights defender. She works
in the north-west of the country in Una-Sana canton, which borders EU member State
Croatia. Since 2018, she has been giving humanitarian help to refugees, migrants
and asylum seekers. I would like to end by echoing the appeal of the United Nations
Special Rapporteur with regard to the situation of human rights defenders.

20-1497615/38

S/2020/1103

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
I have the honour to deliver this joint statement on behalf of the two
Association of South-East Asian Nations members of the Security Council, Viet
Nam and Indonesia.
We would like to thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for his twentyfourth report (S/2020/1052, annex) and his insightful briefing.
Our two delegations commend the efforts made in Bosnia and Herzegovina
over the past six months, including the preparations for the upcoming 2020 local
elections, and the steps taken to respond to and recover from impacts of the
coronavirus disease pandemic with support from the international community.
With the approach of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the signing of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, sadly there are not
enough positive developments on the ground. The objectives and conditions to build
a resilient and united society for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and for the closure of the
Office of the High Representative, have not been fully implemented.
We note with concern the High Representative’s report about the unproductive
political climate in the country, the increase in economic dependence and the
vulnerabilities of the population. In that regard, we would like to highlight
three points.
First, we support the approach to strengthen local ownership of the political
process, economic development and regional cooperation, which truly serves the
long-term interests of the country and its people. We support the work of the High
Representative in that regard, and we call for continued international support to
Bosnia and Herzegovina, including in terms of capacity-building and human
capital development.
Secondly, we call on all concerned parties to make more efforts to strengthen
national unity for long-term stability and development. Both Viet Nam and Indonesia
are multi-ethnic and multireligious countries. As such, we fully understand the value
of national unity and harmony for the benefit of all our people.
National unity can benefit from trust-building measures, national
reconciliation, dialogue and the rule of law, all of which are aimed at the ultimate
interests of the country and all its people. In turn, such unity can help to achieve the
effective formulation and functioning of the Government at all levels and to address
all the current challenges.
Thirdly, we reiterate the importance of respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the implementation
of the relevant treaties and Security Council resolutions.
I would like to close by expressing Viet Nam and Indonesia’s long-standing
support for the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to find a lasting solution that can
accommodate the needs of all stakeholders. We have confidence that the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities and people, together with the international community, will
find the best solution for a stable and prosperous country.

16/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Niger to
the United Nations, Niandou Aougi
[Original: French]
At the outset, allow me to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the quality of his briefing.
The political climate in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains a major source
of concern, in part due to disagreements over the overall State budget and the
appointment of the members of the Central Election Commission, which led to
the postponement of the local elections, originally scheduled for October, to
15 November. In addition, the lack of funding has considerably undermined the
smooth functioning of the institutions and their capacity to cope with the urgent
needs arising from the coronavirus disease pandemic.
In that context, it is necessary that the relevant actors fulfil their obligations
under national and international legal instruments relating to elections, including the
17 June agreement on the holding of elections in the city of Mostar.
The rule of law is crucial to democratic stability and progress. To that end, we
urge the parties to work to strengthen the rule of law, including through adherence
to the constitutional and legal requirements and respect for the independence of the
judiciary. I would like to commend the efforts made by regional and international
actors to ensure that the rule of law takes root in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina
has made the return of refugees and displaced persons a crucial element of its
implementation. According to the agreement, it is the responsibility of all parties to
create the conditions for the voluntary return and reintegration of displaced persons
and refugees.
Despite the tireless efforts of the international community, the implementation
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace remains ineffective.
To that end, it is important to refrain from rhetoric and behaviour that
undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
challenge the powers of its main institutions.
The presence of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina Operation Althea remains an important factor for security and stability,
as demonstrated by its essential role in maintaining a safe and secure environment.
In conclusion, my delegation calls for the constructive political engagement
and ownership of the General Framework Agreement for Peace by the parties.

20-1497617/38

S/2020/1103

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, or the Dayton Agreement. As
one of the guarantors of the Dayton Agreement, Russia fully supports the basic
principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
equality of the three constituent peoples and the two entities with broad powers. In
the year of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dayton Agreement, we call on our
partners in the Security Council to make an unambiguous statement in support of
those provisions. The document, which is fundamental to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
has remained relevant ever since it was signed in 1995. It envisages administrative
arrangements and the balance of interests of the three peoples, which are perfectly
effective when properly observed. The desire to destroy such a system could have
dangerous consequences not only for the Balkans, but also for Europe as a whole.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is perfectly stable; it poses no threat
to international or regional peace and security. However, inter-ethnic relations
demonstrate a negative trend. The level of trust and the quality of the internal
political dialogue have deteriorated significantly. This is primarily due to the fact
that some Bosnian actors have aspired to reshape the Dayton architecture to make
the State more centralized and unified. Some international stakeholders support
that process. No external political statements can serve as the basis for undermining
the balance of ethnic interests in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is enshrined in the
peace agreement. The existing order can be changed only if the three peoples and the
two entities reach an agreement without any external interference.
The peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina determine their domestic and foreign
agenda by themselves. The local authorities are exclusively responsible for the
situation in the country, in accordance with the concept of local ownership, which we
assume the international community still shares. Therefore, any reform of election
law and the judicial system should take into account the interests of all of peoples
in the country.
We expect that the upcoming local elections, to be held on 15 November and
20 December, will take place peacefully in line with the existing rules. We call upon
all the participants, including the Central Election Commission, to act responsibly
and work in the interests of all peoples in the country.
The international community should carry out a sober assessment of the
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina on the basis of the real situation rather than
the individual policies of Member States with respect to the legitimate aspirations
of all peoples, and should refrain from exerting pressure on their legitimate
representatives. With regard to international law, the use of unilateral actions as a
political tool is unacceptable. We are counting on constructive international efforts
in order to promote national reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We regret that High Representative Inzko’s briefing yet again, for the
twenty-fourth time in a row, painted a subjective picture of the situation in Bosnia
Herzegovina that is far from reality. It is clear that the High Representative is trying
to assign all the responsibility for the failure of the inter-ethnic reconciliation to
the Bosnian Serbs and Croats. They are depicted as violators of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. The High Representative is trying to scare the international community
while ignoring the real situation in the country. We suggest that members of the
18/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

Security Council acquaint themselves with the alternative viewpoint presented in
the report of the Government of the Republic of Srpska.
Once again, we ask the High Representative to endeavour in the future to
make his reports more balanced and objective and to refrain from an overly broad
interpretation of his mandate, in particular with regard to the Euro-Atlantic agenda.
We recall that the issue of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s cooperation with NATO
is not within the remit of the Office of the High Representative, but is rather, in
accordance with the division of powers, a prerogative of the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and the opinions of the entities and constituent peoples should be
duly taken into account.
Mr. Inzko offered a tendentious and biased assessment of the situation in the
country. We are again convinced that there is no added value in maintaining this
mechanism of international protection in sovereign and independent Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The time is right to consider the conditions and criteria for closing
the Office. We propose exchanging opinions on this issue during the meeting of
the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board, which is scheduled for 1 and
2 December.
We believe that the complaints of the High Representative about the staff
reduction and budget cuts in the Office of the High Representative are unfounded.
The role of the international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina has changed
dramatically and the concept of local ownership does not imply external interference
in local affairs. Therefore, any kind of special tools for the Office of the High
Representative are out of question. The staff and financing of the Office of the High
Representative should continue to be downsized.
We intend to further promote the implementation of the peace agreement
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which retains its potential, and to strengthen bilateral
cooperation with all peoples in the country. Bosnian Herzegovina has every chance
of becoming an area of successful political, economic and cultural interaction among
a wide range of stake holders.
In view of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dayton Agreement, we are
planning to convene an Arria Formula meeting at which the legitimate representatives
of all three constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina will be given the floor.
We expect that this event will give us an opportunity to better understand the
significance of the peace agreement and how important it is to fully implement it
in the context of the current situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and assess the
political and historic relevance of Dayton for both Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Balkan region as a whole.

Second statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
To be frank, I do not quite understand what part of my statement surprised
my German colleague so much. Our position with regard to the Office of the High
Representative is consistent, and it is not the first time that we have expressed it.
Indeed, our statement today was mild as compared to previous statements. We
fully believe that the Office of the High Representative has outlived its usefulness
and is not contributing to the country’s development. On the contrary, it hinders
the country’s development in many respects. That is why we have long raised the
issue of the need to progressively move towards closure of the Office of the High
Representative. I think that the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board will
address this issue at its meeting on 1 and 2 December.
20-1497619/38

S/2020/1103

On the subject of bias and lack of balance, I would recommend that my German
colleague not only to listen to statements by the High Representative, but also read
the report that was drafted for today’s briefing (S/2020/1052, annex). Then it will be
clear what motivated us to speak of unbalanced assessments in the report of the High
Representative.
I am glad that my German colleague has pointed out that it is unacceptable to
glorify war criminals. I would be grateful if he were to be consistent with respect to
some of his colleagues in the European Union (EU) and of some countries wishing
to join the European Union that are home to blatant and flagrant glorification of
collaborators and war criminals. For some reason, neither our EU colleagues, nor, in
particular, my German colleague draw attention to that.

Third statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
I thank High Representative Inzko for his comments. I would like to make one
point clear — our criticism of the Office of the High Representative is not criticism
of the High Representative personally, but rather of the role which in our view the
Office plays in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
No one denies the fact that the country is encountering problems. We spoke
of this in our statement. The question is — what are the roots of those problems?
Of course, we can delve into history and recall how it all started and how it ended.
Of course, Dayton was a breakthrough that prevented the worst-case scenario. But
now it is time for Bosnia and Herzegovina to stand on its own feet and move towards
development. We only request the High Representative to make sure that his role
in this process does not create challenges, increase tensions and raise questions
among the representatives of the entities that are most often criticized — the Serbs
and Croats.
As for the reports, the reports themselves are not the problem. There have
been precedents in which certain entities that are not constituent States have shared
some assessments with the Security Council. That is a normal practice, especially
since Republika Srpska is a party to the Dayton Agreement and, as such, has a
right to express its viewpoint on developments in the Federation. These assessments
should be duly considered.
As Council members may note, it is no coincidence that we proposed the
convening of an Arria Formula meeting on the occasion of the anniversary of the
Dayton Agreement. The Security Council often discusses Bosnia and Herzegovina,
but those meetings mostly provide general assessments of the actual developments
in the country, many of which raise concerns for both sides. I think that it would
be wise to provide an opportunity for the representatives of the three constituent
peoples to present their assessments to members of the Security Council. That can be
done in an Arria Formula meeting, the date of which we will announce later.

20/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his briefing. We express our
appreciation for the work that his Office continues to provide to the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in maintaining a safe and secure environment.
The coronavirus disease pandemic continues to pose a challenge to the
economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the rest of the world. We acknowledge the
efforts that were taken to help contain widespread outbreaks, however, we regret that
the relevant political leaders were not able to establish a functional mechanism to
address the health crisis. In this regard, we urge all political parties to cooperate and
coordinate necessary measures to safeguard and support public health in ensuring an
effective response to curb the pandemic.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines urges all leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to uphold the rule of law, including the fight against corruption and organized crime.
We further underline our commitment to support the implementation of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as relevant
decisions of the Peace Implementation Council.
We continue to encourage collaboration among the parties in accordance with
international law and emphasize the need for diplomacy and the end of divisive
rhetoric. In this respect, we urge all political actors to refrain from using ethnic slurs
and stereotypes, and we call on the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to advance
reconciliation and mutual understanding.
We commend the agreements signed between the leaders of the Bosniakmajority Party for Democratic Action and the Federation-based Croat Democratic
Union regarding the election law. We urge all parties to cooperate with the Central
Election Commission in discharging its legal responsibilities and to pursue the
reforms required to ensure that all citizens can exercise their political rights. In
particular, we encourage the increased participation of women in the political sphere.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for overall peace and stability in the
region and for the extension for the mandate of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force Operation Althea.

20-1497621/38

S/2020/1103

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
We would like to thank you, Madam President, for convening this debate on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We would also like to express our appreciation for the informative and
comprehensive briefing by the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, on the most recent report of his Office (S/2020/1052, annex) on
the political, security and humanitarian situation in the country.
South Africa welcomes the progress relating to the holding of elections in the
city of Mostar in December after a long hiatus. In this context, it is necessary for the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to speedily appoint the Constitutional Court
judges and other entities necessary for the effective functioning of the State and to
also ensure that the agreement between the Croat Democratic Union and the Party
for Democratic Action holds.
We wish to take this opportunity to stress that the continued disagreements
between the political parties have negatively impacted the fulfilment of the five
objectives and two conditions that must be fulfilled prior to the closure of the
Office of the High Representative, established by the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board, which is disconcerting.
In addition, the provocative, divisive and nationalistic rhetoric undermines
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the State. Therefore, we call on all parties
to respect the rule of law and legal instruments that underpin the political structures
of the country, as well as to swiftly undertake steps to harmonize the constitutions
of some cantons with the national Constitution.
We further call for constructive dialogue among the different ethnic groups and
entities, as well as among the various Bosnian structures and the High Representative.
South Africa believes that it is only through constructive and inclusive political
dialogue that outstanding issues can be resolved and trust established between
the sides.
Therefore, South Africa encourages all the parties to recommit themselves
to the full implementation of their obligations under the existing peace accords,
agreements and Security Council resolutions. Political will and national ownership
remain essential in moving the process of long-term peace, stability and
reconciliation forward.
South Africa commends the High Representative for showing restraint
in instances where he could have applied his executive powers. We believe
that his conduct ensures local ownership of the processes in line with the Peace
Implementation Commission for Bosnia and Herzegovina and shows his appreciation
of the challenging task at hand.
Furthermore, we commend the Office of the High Representative for its
support to the District Supervisor in Brčko, where key milestones are being recorded,
including large-scale infrastructure projects. We also take this opportunity to
commend all the stakeholders in their efforts to ensure the adoption of the Revised
National War Crimes Processing Strategy as an important step towards healing
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This signals the aspiration of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to live in enduring peace and stability.

22/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

In conclusion, it is important that the support of the international community
to the people and Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina be sustained over the
long term. This is critical to moving the country forward in achieving security and
stability both internally and in the broader region.

20-1497623/38

S/2020/1103

Annex XII
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

At the outset, I would like to thank High Representative Mr. Valentin Inzko
for his comprehensive briefing on the implementation of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace, and welcome the participation of the representatives of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia, and the delegation of the European Union.
My delegation welcomes the political agreement, signed in June, which
will allow for local elections to be held in Mostar next December for the first time
since 2008. We commend the international community’s efforts to facilitate this
landmark development.
Nevertheless, we regret that the political campaign is already characterized by
divisive, negative rhetoric that deepens existing divisions and makes reconciliation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina increasingly difficult.
With the twenty-fifth anniversary of the signing of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace approaching, we sincerely hope that the political parties
campaigning for the 2020 local elections will use the opportunity to reflect not on
the past wartime, but on the ensuing 25 years of peace, and offer forward-looking
perspectives to all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We believe that all parties should focus on what binds them together, rather
than on misgivings and suspicions that separate them and raise tensions. We remain
particularly concerned by the rhetoric of hatred, glorification of war crimes and
denial of genocide.
We call on all parties to show the will necessary to do away with divisive
appeals that exacerbate ethnonationalism, put the whole process of consolidating
peace and stability under serious threat and undermine the very improvements and
progress that citizens wish to see.
We would like to express our support to the efforts of the Office of the High
Representative in line with the Dayton Peace Agreement and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, and we call on all parties to make concerted efforts to implement
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
With regard to the 5+2 agenda, we encourage all parties to fulfil their
commitments with a view to ensuring Bosnia and Herzegovina’s full autonomy.
A quarter century after the signing of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace, many issues are not yet resolved. In this regard, we call on all political leaders
to prioritize the national interest of all the citizens in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
pave the way for the younger generation to build a better future based on political
and cultural unity.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate Tunisia’s full support to all efforts
aiming at stabilizing Bosnia and Herzegovina, achieving reconciliation among
its various ethnic groups, and fostering lasting peace and security so that it can
concentrate on reforms, including the reinforcement of justice, the rule of law, human
rights and democracy, which are necessary to build a prosperous nation and better
life for its citizens, who deserve to see their country moving ahead in the direction
of real peace and not just lagging behind in a state of non-war.

24/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

Annex XIII
Statement by the Political Coordinator of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Sonia Farrey
I thank the High Representative and his team for his latest comprehensive
report (S/2020/1052, annex). This highlights that the international community still
has a role to play in supporting a secure, peaceful and sustainable future for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The Office of the High Representative continues to have an
important role to play in galvanizing action by local authorities to create this future.
It has the United Kingdom’s full support, including the use of executive powers,
should the situation require it.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, like nearly every other country, is now facing the
challenges of responding to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). This will require
continued focus and coordination by the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina at
all levels as the number of cases rises. Despite these challenges, we are glad that
preparation for the 2020 local elections has continued. Like High Representative
Inzko, we commend the work of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Central Election
Commission in the face of numerous political challenges, and support its endeavours
to reduce the risk of election fraud.
The United Kingdom would like, in particular, to welcome the agreement
reached by the leaders of the Party for Democratic Action and the Croat Democratic
Union, which enables local elections to be held in Mostar on 20 December, for the
first time since 2008. This breakthrough demonstrates the importance of cross-party
and cross-community cooperation in propelling the country forward. We hope that
all actors will support this important development and help the parties in Mostar to
allow citizens to exercise their democratic rights.
I would also like to congratulate the Office of the High Representative for its
work in Brčko district. Its strong coordinated effort with the international community
has continued to promote good governance, infrastructure development and privatesector growth there. Collaborative work of this kind offers a potential model for
reform elsewhere in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ensuring citizens’ ability to exercise their democratic right is vital. We
urge the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to redouble their efforts to address
outstanding judgments of the European Court of Human Rights, most notably the
Sejdić-Finci ruling, and to ensure that all of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s citizens
can exercise their fundamental democratic rights and participate equally in their
country’s future. While we look forward to a time when they will not be necessary,
international judges in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court continue to
be a vital safeguard in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s judiciary.
We continue to share the High Representative’s frustration at the persistent
threat of divisive nationalist rhetoric, even at a time when greatest solidarity is
needed in the face of a global pandemic. With local elections imminent, we urge
those responsible for these divisive statements to, instead, keep the citizens they were
elected to represent at the forefront of their minds. Challenges such as migration,
climate change and serious organized crime must be faced head on.
This year marks 25 years since the General Framework Agreement for Peace
was signed, bringing an end to the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is important
that Bosnia and Herzegovina and the international community find ways to mark the
anniversary collectively and look ahead to the positive and prosperous future that
Bosnia and Herzegovina deserves.
20-1497625/38

S/2020/1103

This follows the commemoration earlier this year of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the genocide at Srebrenica. I would like once again to remember the
many thousands of victims and the continued suffering of the families, too many
of whom are still missing their loved ones. We acknowledge the suffering on all
sides of the Balkans conflicts, and it is only through meaningful reconciliation
across communities that we can fully overcome the painful legacies of the past. We
once again call for an end to the glorification of convicted war criminals and the
denial of the Srebrenica genocide. This definition has been officially recognized by
two international tribunals as well as domestic judicial bodies, and denial merely
serves to reinforce the deep societal divisions that threaten to block Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s progress.
The United Kingdom continues to support reconciliation efforts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Western Balkans more widely, including through our project
programming and our role in the Berlin process and Peace Implementation Council.
We encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina to fully respect the rule of law, democracy,
media freedom and human rights. We support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s continued
commitment to Euro-Atlantic integration, and look forward to the submission of the
next NATO programme of reforms.

26/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

Annex XIV
Statement by the Political Coordinator of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Rodney Hunter
I thank High Representative Inzko for his continued dedication and
representation of the international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The United States of America commends Bosnia and Herzegovina for reaching
an important milestone — 25 years of peace following the signing of the Dayton
Peace Accords. Thar historic agreement provided an opportunity to end the ravages
of war so that future generations could live in peace and security. But, as we all
know, challenges still remain.
To fully realize Dayton’s promise, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders must
abandon the zero-sum ethnic politics of the past. By improving governance,
combatting corruption and increasing accountability, today’s leaders have an
opportunity to fulfil their people’s aspirations for a future that is integrated with
Euro-Atlantic institutions.
We also mark a tragic milestone this year. We remember those who lost their
lives 25 years ago in the Srebrenica genocide. In July 1995, more than 8,000 men
and boys were executed in Srebrenica. We stand with loved ones and friends who
continue to seek justice and support efforts to honour the dignity of all the victims,
including those who still await a final resting place. This painful event must never
be denied or forgotten, and we must all ensure that a tragedy like Srebrenica is
never repeated.
Looking forward, the local elections planned for 15 November and in Mostar
on 20 December will be opportunities for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders to
demonstrate their commitment to free and fair elections. The Mostar elections —
the first in that city since 2008 — will be an opportunity for the people to hold their
leaders accountable and exercise their rights as citizens. We urge Council members
to oppose any efforts by external actors to sow discord during the local elections, on
the Dayton anniversary, and beyond.
We also encourage all levels of Government in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to better coordinate in addressing the needs of refugees and migrants. We urge
authorities to take all appropriate measures to address their needs, especially with
respect to the provision of shelter. This is increasingly urgent, as we all know, as
winter approaches.
Furthermore, the United States supports the European Union military mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, EUFOR Althea, a military deployment responsible for
overseeing the military implementation of the Dayton accords. We commend the
work of EUFOR Althea and its role in preserving a safe and secure environment.
In this regard, we also thank the United Kingdom for its enduring contributions
to security in the Western Balkans, including 16 years of deployed service as part
of EUFOR Althea. The first EUFOR Commander was British Major General David
Leakey in 2004, and he set a high bar in excellence leading the force that carries
through to today. We appreciate the United Kingdom’s continued role in the region
through NATO.
The Trump Administration is committed to assisting the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in their pursuit for peace, and the pursuit for a more free, just
and democratic society. We also believe that Bosnia and Herzegovina must continue
to stay the course towards European integration and transatlantic cooperation.
Towards this end, we look forward to fully meeting previously agreed objectives and
20-1497627/38

S/2020/1103

conditions for the closure of the Office of the High Representative. In meeting these
objectives, the security, stability and prosperity of Bosnia and Herzegovina will be
greatly enhanced.
As we mark the milestone of 25 years since Dayton, we call on all friends of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to lend their support as the country looks ahead to the next
25 years and beyond. The United States envisions a modern, multi-ethnic, stable and
prosperous democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina, one that is responsible for its own
destiny. For Bosnia and Herzegovina to succeed, the next generation must be able to
obtain the opportunities they seek within a diverse, united and integrated republic
in the heart of Europe.

28/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the United Nations, Sven Alkalaj
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of November, and to wish
you and your delegation every success. We also welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and have taken note of his report on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, covering the period from 16 April through
15 October 2020 (S/2020/1052, annex).
We welcome the Security Council’s unanimous adoption of the resolution
extending the mandate of the European Union-led military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, EUFOR Althea, which has been present in Bosnia and Herzegovina
for many years. It is important to emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina as a host
country has enjoyed respectable and fruitful cooperation with EUFOR Althea,
particularly in the areas of capacity-building and the training of its armed forces.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been peaceful and calm for a
long period of time, which has been regularly reflected in the reports of EUFOR
Althea as well as in the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. The EUFOR
Althea mission is mandated to support the implementation of military aspects of
Peace Agreement and to ensure compliance with annexes 1-A and 2 of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace. Over recent years, in order to correspond to the
situation on the ground, EUFOR Althea has been reconfigured, while the primary
focus of the mission has shifted from deterrence and activities for providing a safe
and secure environment, to capacity-building and training.
Let me address the most urgent issues concerning the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities have responded very
swiftly to the outbreak and various urgent and necessary measures have been put in
place to contain spread of virus. All resources at our disposal have been mobilized.
Our hospitals, medical and other relevant institutions have done a tremendous job to
fight an unseen enemy. During the COVID-19 outbreak, health services have been
provided to all persons in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including migrants and asylum
seekers, irrespective of citizenship or health insurance status. Doctors, nurses, first
responders and many others have been risking their lives in fighting this ferocious
and highly contagious disease. We take this opportunity to thank all of them for their
indispensable efforts and dedication. We would also like to thank our international
partners for the valuable assistance and support they have rendered in these difficult
times for humankind.
In addition to its impact on our health system, this pandemic hits our vulnerable
economy very hard. According to an estimate by the International Monetary Fund,
the gross domestic product of Bosnia and Herzegovina will decrease by 5 per cent
in 2020. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities have introduced some necessary
measures to mitigate those negative effects. Some urgent financial packages have
been created in order to help those suffering most. These efforts will take time and
significant resources to recover from the unforeseen situation caused by the virus,
which has claimed so many human lives worldwide.
We would like to thank the European Union for rendering the immediate
support to our health-care sector in tackling the coronavirus, as well as the assistance
to Bosnia and Herzegovina to address long-term social and economic recovery needs.
Also, the assistance of the international financial institutions would be
welcome, especially from the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, to
20-1497629/38

S/2020/1103

overcome the negative economic and social effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. In
that regard, the role of the United Nations will be indispensable through the United
Nations country team and, of course, the United Nations Development Programme,
the World Health Organization, UNICEF and others.
Let me now turn to some points relating to other aspects of the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Local elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina are scheduled to take place
on 15 November. Also, overcoming the 12-year stalemate, the Central Election
Commission has adopted a decision whereby local elections in the town of Mostar will
be held on 20 December. The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have finalized
all necessary measures in order to enable that the elections be held smoothly, and in
a democratic and credible manner. Citizens throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina will
be able to exercise their rights and cast their votes to elect members of municipal
councils, members of city assemblies and mayors.
The Council of Ministers has continued the cooperation with the entity
Governments on issues concerning the European integration and reform processes,
targeting the stabilization of the economy, increased effectiveness of public
administration, and attraction of domestic and foreign investments enabling
job creation.
The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina are fully committed to overcoming
the challenges facing them and to implementing the reforms required for the
country’s full-fledged integration into the European Union. In that regard, we are
grateful to the EU for its active support for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European
path and would like to urge both the EU and its member States to continue to
intensify that support. For our part, we have made increased efforts in a number
of areas relevant to achieving that goal, including the implementation of the reform
agenda and socioeconomic reforms as a matter of priority, as well as our continuing
determination to strengthen the rule of law and good governance in order to fulfil
the requirements of the European Union to obtain candidacy status in 2021.
Most important, the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have taken resolute
steps towards candidacy status and prospective negotiations with the European Union
with regard to the plan for implementation of the recommendations contained in the
opinion of the European Commission. The Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has adopted the rules of procedure of the Stabilization and Association
Parliamentary Committee between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Union
as an important step forward in European integration.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has continued to participate actively in regional
cooperation and to maintain good-neighbourly relations. The fostering of friendly
and constructive cooperation among the countries of the region on issues of mutual
interest remains a top priority of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s foreign policy. The
cooperation of the Western Balkan States within the framework of the Berlin process
remains a key driver of their integration into the European Union and of stability in
the region.
Bosnia and Herzegovina plays an active role in regional initiatives through
the South-East European Cooperation Process, the Western Balkans Fund and the
Central European Initiative, inter alia. Let me mention as a good example of regional
cooperation the Sarajevo-Belgrade highway construction project, in the framework
of cooperation among three partner countries, namely, Serbia, Turkey and Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

30/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

During the reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to fulfil its
international obligations with regard to countering terrorism and violent extremism.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, with extensive support from the EU, has taken significant
steps forward in strengthening the rule of law and the fight against organized
crime. EU experts have been working together with the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the implementation of the 2018-2022 action plan for the prevention
of money-laundering and financing of terrorist activities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The judicial institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to process
individuals involved in fighting on behalf of terrorist organizations, as well as those
who facilitate the recruitment of terrorist fighters. With regard to processing war
crimes in domestic courts, we would like to reiterate that fighting impunity is vital
for Bosnia and Herzegovina as a complex, multinational State.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is continuing with a very important planning,
monitoring and evaluation process in the field of social and economic development
that is fully in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In that
regard, let me express our gratitude to the United Nations country team in Bosnia
and Herzegovina for its outstanding contribution to, and tireless efforts in, assisting
our institutions on the development agenda.
I would like to draw your attention, Madam President, to one of the main
concerns of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities, namely, the issue of illegal
migrants. The international migrant crisis continues to pose a substantial challenge
to the States of the region and their economies. During the reporting period Bosnia
and Herzegovina experienced a significant increase in refugees and migrants on its
territory, most of whom crossed the border illegally.
It is important to emphasize that the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
do not have enough capacity to implement and undertake all the measures necessary
to curb the migrant crisis. Bearing in mind the lack of capacity and the fact that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is not a final destination for migrants, our Government is
in need of stronger international support.
We are grateful to the European Commission’s financial support for Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s authorities in handling migration and strengthening its capacity
for border management. However, for a comprehensive response, the institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina need much more support from the European Union as well
as from United Nations agencies.
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues in these challenging times to contribute
actively to international peace and security by deploying its military and police
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping missions. Currently, we have approximately
45 personnel serving in United Nations peacekeeping missions worldwide.
I would like to reiterate that Bosnia and Herzegovina has fully endorsed the
call of the Secretary-General, António Guterres, for a global ceasefire in all conflicts
worldwide in order to silence the guns, stop the violence and raise voices for peace.
There is nothing more important than an immediate ceasefire in all corners of
the globe to reinforce diplomatic action, help create conditions for the delivery of
life-saving aid and bring hope to places that are among the most vulnerable to the
coronavirus disease pandemic. Bosnia and Herzegovina stands ready to cooperate
with the States Members of the United Nations and the United Nations broader
family on this critical and most pressing issue that the world is facing today.
Finally, we would like to express the readiness of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
authorities to continue their work in securing a better and prosperous future for its
citizens, as well as our gratitude to our international partners for supporting Bosnia
and Herzegovina on that path.
20-1497631/38

S/2020/1103

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Croatia to the United Nations
The Republic of Croatia is fully aligned with the statement submitted by the
representative of the European Union (EU) (annex XVIII). I would like to take this
opportunity to address several points in my national capacity.
It is my pleasure to welcome High Representative Valentin Inzko and thank
him for comprehensive report (S/2020/1052, annex) and briefing today.
A stable, functional, prosperous and secure Bosnia and Herzegovina has a
key role to play in the stability not only of South-Eastern Europe, but of Europe
in a wider sense. Croatia has been and will remain a strong supporter of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s efforts in making decisive strides towards its EU integration.
Integration within the EU offers not only the best reform framework for the country,
but also a comprehensive transformation of the whole of its society. We will spare
no effort in supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina in continuing to be anchored in
European values and standards, with constitutional equality among its three
constituent peoples and with the rights of all its citizens guaranteed.
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to invest significant efforts and undertake
political, institutional and economic reforms in order to progress on its desired path.
Over the last year, and, more importantly, in this year’s enlargement package, the
European Commission expressed its views with regard to these reforms.
We firmly believe that reform processes must come from within and can be
accomplished only through an inclusive, internal, consensus-based process that
will take place in an environment of dialogue and compromise. Today’s Bosnia and
Herzegovina is based on the Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement, as well as the country’s
Constitution, which is an integral part of that Agreement, which is 25 years old
this year.
Through its entire history and under its current constitutional framework, a
fundamental feature of Bosnia and Herzegovina remains its multinational setup as
a State composed of three constituent peoples equal in their rights and in the rights
of others. In that respect, it is important to stress that, in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
while Serbs can rely on their own entity and Bosniaks on their numbers as the largest
of the constituent peoples, Croats can rely only on constitutional guaranties and the
legal and institutional system for their equality to be ensured.
The existing electoral system in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where a constituent
people smaller in numbers — the Croats — is being given greater weight than a
larger constituent people — the Bosniaks— is not in line with its Constitution. This
fact is contributing to political tensions and slowing down reforms. It is therefore of
key importance to embark on election-law reform with urgency. This is becoming an
even more pressing issue with the next general elections approaching in 2022.
In that regard, we deem it necessary to underline the importance of the
political agreement on amendments to the electoral law signed by the two political
leaders, Mr. Izetbegović and Mr. Čović, in June of this year. It is worth noting that
in the agreement, political leaders expressed their full commitment to EU principles
and values and to the implementation of all judgments of the European Court of
Human Rights, all decisions of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and all relevant recommendations of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and its Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, and of the
Venice Commission. The agreement clearly shows signs of a political will to reach
a compromise. It also enables Bosnia and Herzegovina to take ownership of this
crucial process and to show that it is capable of tailoring its own destiny.
32/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

The taking of ownership in this manner has been requested by the international
community many times, and now that it has occurred it should be welcomed and
acknowledged. We should all now follow up on that and encourage further efforts
aimed at reaching a consensus on this important issue and call for an inclusive reform
process and its implementation, which would eliminate all forms of inequality and
discrimination in the electoral process, well in advance the 2022 general elections.
We also deem it necessary to draw attention to the problem of migration, and
not just the burning problem of illegal migration, particularly in Una-Sana canton,
the severity of which is also stressed in the report of the High Representative, and
which throughout the past two years has been burdening the country and needs our
urgent attention. Combating smuggling networks, improving return and readmission
procedures, enhancing border control and migration management system are of key
importance, not only as a security, but also as a humanitarian issue. We therefore
need to focus our efforts towards enhancing border protection capacities of the
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, through education and direct technical
assistance as well as expert participation on the ground, strengthening the security
and stability of the country and the whole region. This is particularly important in
the present context, owing to the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic on
vulnerable groups, refugees and migrants.
The recently adopted Economic and Investment Plan for the Western Balkans
demonstrates once again the EU’s strong commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina
and all Western Balkans partners. It is the most concrete example how the European
Union is supporting the region.
In order to support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European path, Croatia has
been implementing technical assistance projects that transfer the experience we
gained from our EU pre-accession process through the framework of the European
Partnership Agreement. Croatia is also a leading trade partner with the country.
We are deeply engaged in the exchange of goods and in providing investment
capital. Many regions of Bosnia and Herzegovina are included in the plans and
strategies that underlie our interregional and cross-border cooperation programmes
and instruments.
Let me conclude by stressing once more that Bosnia and Herzegovina is
Croatia’s friend and important neighbour. We are going to continue to work diligently
to further develop close relations of partnership and cooperation, for the benefit of
our peoples and for the wider region.

20-1497633/38

S/2020/1103

Annex XVII
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of
Serbia to the United Nations, Marina Ivanovic
Regrettably, this meeting of the Security Council on Bosnia and Herzegovina
is taking place as the world continues to struggle with the coronavirus disease
pandemic. The pandemic has amplified the many serious challenges that need to be
addressed, which calls for cooperation among countries in every region worldwide.
These difficult times remind us that only through solidarity and mutual support
can we overcome the difficulties facing us; here, we believe, good-neighbourly
cooperation is but the first step in the right direction.
I wish to point out that the crisis has brought to the fore a high level of solidarity
and support between Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina and their citizens, as
reflected, inter alia, in the opening of the “green corridor” at the border crossing
at Sremska Raca, in line with the Central European Free Trade Agreement decision
to establish a system meant to facilitate trade in goods among the countries of the
region, particularly in products of humanitarian importance.
Serbia has taken every step to provide the necessary assistance to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including in particular medical and personal protection equipment.
Bosnia and Herzegovina reciprocated by extending help and assistance to my
country, and we are very grateful for that.
Serbia continues to be firmly committed to promoting good-neighbourly
relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina, aimed at overcoming the negative legacy
of the past and forging a common future based on the principles of mutual respect.
We are convinced that the two countries should continue to develop cooperation
in priority areas, both within bilateral and multilateral frameworks and through
regional initiatives and mechanisms. Fostering common values can help us on our
road towards achieving the same goals that bring us closer to European Union (EU)
membership, which figures high on the agendas of our two countries. Serbia strongly
supports the integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into the EU and welcomes the
progress achieved by that country in this regard.
Serbia is lastingly committed to strengthening regional cooperation through
numerous activities and by strictly abiding by its commitments. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a key regional partner of Serbia, and the region’s economic and
other progress is paramount to its overall prosperity. To that end, the progress being
achieved at the bilateral level between the two countries in the field of infrastructure
projects is particularly important. Equally important in that context was the signing
during the reporting period of the agreement on the maintenance and reconstruction
of road inter-State bridges and the agreement on the construction and maintenance
of a new common border crossing at the Bratunac/Ljubovija location, as well as the
interest of our side in financing the construction of a new airport at Trebinje.
Serbia took note of the call for regular local elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina on 15 November and is fully supportive of their holding in accordance
with the highest democratic standards. We commend in particular the fact that an
agreement has been reached among the key actors according to which local elections
will be also held on 20 December in Mostar, where no elections have been held in
the past 12 years because of the absence of agreement between Bosniak and Croatian
representatives. We are pleased that representatives of the Serbian community in
that town may win municipal assembly seats as well.
Serbia has invested significant efforts in the stabilization of the situation in
the region and considers that, in that context, respect for the principle of territorial
34/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

integrity and sovereignty is of paramount importance. My country’s position on the
sovereignty and integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Dayton Agreement,
of which Serbia is a guarantor, is crystal-clear: we support Bosnia and Herzegovina
as one State with two entities, the Republika Srpska and the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as all decisions taken by that country in accordance with
the relevant competencies and agreements reached among its three constituent
peoples: Serbs, Croats and Bosniaks. We shall continue to cooperate actively and
constructively with the central and entity authorities. We fully respect the right of
each and every country to conduct independent foreign policies, including possibly
joining military-political alliances, while paying heed, however, to specific individual
activities that may or may not be conducive to membership in those alliances. Serbia
will respect the agreements and arrangements reached by the two entities, that is, the
three constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in a legal and legitimate way.
Soon it will have been 25 years since the signing of the Dayton Agreement.
My country would like to emphasize the need to reaffirm its importance not only in
respect of its significance for ending the civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also
in the context of the stabilization of that country and the region as a whole. I would
like to recall that the mechanism for a possible change in the Agreement is known
and that it implies the reaching of an agreement by the two entities and the three
constituent peoples; any insistence on, or imposition of, a solution by anyone inside
or outside of Bosnia and Herzegovina is therefore unacceptable. We are convinced
that the country can function even without changing its fundamental constituent
principles by focusing on the reform package needed for Euro-integration, on which
consensus does exist.
Serbia shares the concern of the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina over the destabilizing rhetoric inherent in the statements of many
political leaders in that country. We reiterate our principled position against recourse
or the threat of recourse to unilateral acts contrary to the letter and spirit of the
Dayton Agreement. After all, the Agreement is the result of a compromise and
reflects a delicate balance, reached by hard work and dedication, between opposing
concepts of the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and subsequent attempts to
favour any of the models in existence 25 years ago would not help the stabilization
of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina at all.
We know that, regrettably, we cannot bring the victims back to life or undo the
destruction caused by war 25 years on. What we can do, though, and what is important
for the future is to condemn all crimes and bring their perpetrators to justice; have
empathy for all victims irrespective of their ethnic or religious background; and
embark upon the road to economic and political stability, lasting peace and common
prosperity. Serbia supports the efforts to establish the full truth of the conflicts in
the former Yugoslavia and to bring the perpetrators of crimes to justice, irrespective
of their ethnic origins. In that context, my country supports regional cooperation
in processing war crimes. It has concluded bilateral agreements with Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia regulating various aspects of the issue of legal assistance
and procedure in letters rogatory. The cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina
under those agreements is at a high level indeed.
Serbia calls on all actors included in political processes in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as those outside of it, to be more responsible and expects
international officials to bear in mind, as they assess the political actors of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in their reports, the fact that they are legitimately elected representatives
of the citizens of that country. My country considers that dialogue within Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s institutions is the only way forward in furthering the level of trust and
confidence and reaching compromise solutions to questions relevant to its future
20-1497635/38

S/2020/1103

development and, by extension, to the stability of the entire region. As in the past,
Serbia will continue to make a maximum constructive contribution in that regard.
In conclusion, let me point out that my country will not veer away from the
road to peace, stability and reconciliation. The solidarity that we have demonstrated
in this crisis should serve as a model for our future activities, since there is no
alternative to the policy of dialogue and cooperation.

36/38

20-14976

S/2020/1103

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Head of Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, Olof Skoog
[Original: English and French]
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
27 member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North Macedonia,
Montenegro and Albania align themselves with this statement.
I want first to join others in thanking High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina Valentin Inzko and reiterating the European Union’s continued support
for his mission, and I wish to add my greetings to Valentin and my appreciation for
his dedication, energy, independence and integrity, which have remained constant
over the years.
In December 2019, the Council of the European Union reiterated its
unequivocal commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s EU perspective as a single,
united and sovereign country. We urged executive and legislative bodies at all
levels of Government to start addressing the 14 key priorities identified in the EU
Commission opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s application for membership in
the European Union, in line with the interests of all citizens to advance towards
integration into the European Union.
In the past months, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities have taken some
steps to address those priorities. We welcome the fact that, for the first time since
2008, local elections will also take place in the city of Mostar, on 20 December.
Political leaders also reached an agreement on 17 June on further electoral reform.
We call for an inclusive process of electoral reform, through genuine dialogue and
in line with European standards, which would eliminate all forms of inequality and
discrimination in the electoral process. In this regard, we underline that no legislative
or political step should be taken that would make the implementation of the ruling
in the Sejdić and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina case and related rulings of the
European Court of Human Rights more challenging.
We welcome the recent adoption of the revised national war-crimes strategy,
and we call for its swift implementation, which will contribute to the wider goal of
promoting an environment conducive to reconciliation. We call on the authorities of
the country to build on this momentum and continue to engage in reforms, thereby
giving tangible proof that Bosnia and Herzegovina is willing to do what it takes to
become a member of the EU.
Only by delivering on reforms will Bosnia and Herzegovina advance towards
the EU. The European Union strongly underlines the need for the authorities to work
towards strengthening the rule of law, in particular the independence and integrity of
the judiciary, fighting corruption and organized crime, countering radicalization and
guaranteeing the independence of the media and the safety of journalists, promoting
youth employment and education and gender equality, and renewing their efforts
towards socioeconomic reforms.
This year marks both the twenty-fifth annual commemoration of the
Srebrenica genocide and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dayton Peace Accords.
We expect to see strong and concrete political acts from the political elites that show
their deep commitment to promoting reconciliation in the country. Revisionism, in
particular minimization or negationism in relation to the Srebrenica genocide, and
the glorification of war criminals contradict EU values and are incompatible with
the prospect of integration into the European Union.
20-1497637/38

S/2020/1103

With local elections to be held on 15 November throughout the country and on
20 December in Mostar, we would like to remind all political actors of the importance
of refraining from any provocative and divisive statements. We also expect the
authorities to fully assume their responsibilities with regard to the migration
situation, and in particular, to urgently create, with our support, the conditions
for addressing humanitarian needs, including the accommodation of refugees and
migrants, while working to strengthen the country’s border-management capacities.
Like the rest of Europe, Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to be affected
by the global coronavirus disease pandemic, a point that has been raised by many
today. In these difficult times, the EU remains firmly engaged in assisting Bosnia
and Herzegovina in addressing the immediate health needs as well as with the longterm social and economic impacts resulting from the pandemic. The European
Commission’s recent Economic and Investment Plan for the Western Balkans
demonstrates once again the EU’s strong commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina
and all Western Balkans partners.
Lastly, with regard to the political and security situation on the ground and
the importance of maintaining a safe and secure environment, the European Union
reiterates its firm support for the EU-led Operation Althea and to the mandate
entrusted to it by the Security Council.

38/38

20-14976
