UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/555
17 July 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 16 JULY 1997 FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

As you are aware, the tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly was resumed on Tuesday, 15 July 1997, pursuant to paragraph 13 of
Assembly resolution ES-10/2 of 25 April 1997. It would be recalled that the
emergency special session was convened as a result of the failure of the
Security Council to adopt a position on the matter of illegal Israeli actions in
occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Thirty-seven Member States and one observer participated in the debate on
the "Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the
Occupied Palestinian Territory". On Tuesday, 15 July 1997, by a recorded vote
of 131 in favour to 3 against, with 14 abstentions, the General Assembly adopted
resolution ES-10/3.
In that connection,I have the honour to draw your attention, in particular,
to paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11 and 13 of the resolution, in which the
General Assembly:
"1. Condemns the failure of the Government of Israel to comply with
the demands made by the General Assembly at its tenth emergency special
session in resolution ES-10/2;
"2. Strongly deplores the lack of cooperation of the Government of
Israel and its attempts to impose restrictions upon the intended mission of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to Israel and the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem;
"3. Reaffirms that all illegal Israeli actions in occupied East
Jerusalem and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, especially
settlement activity, and the practical results thereof cannot be recognized
irrespective of the passage of time;
"6. Recommends to Member States that they actively discourage
activities which directly contribute to any construction or development of
Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including
Jerusalem, as these activities contravene international law;

97-19829 (E)

170797
/...

S/1997/555
English
Page 2

"7. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, make available to
Member States the necessary information about goods produced or
manufactured in the illegal settlements in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including Jerusalem;
"8. Stresses that all Member States, in order to ensure their rights
and benefits resulting from membership, should fulfil in good faith the
obligations assumed by them in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations;
"10. Recommends that the High Contracting Parties to the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War
convene a conference on measures to enforce the Convention in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and to ensure its respect, in
accordance with common article 1, and requests the Secretary-General to
present a report on the matter within three months;
"11. Calls for the reinjection of momentum into the stalled Middle
East peace process and for the implementation of the agreements reached
between the Government of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization,
as well as for the upholding of the principles of the process, including
the exchange of land for peace, and calls upon the two sides to refrain
from actions that impede the peace process by pre-empting permanent status
negotiations;
"13. Decides to adjourn the tenth emergency special session of the
General Assembly temporarily and to authorize the President of the most
recent General Assembly to resume its meetings upon request from Member
States."
I would like to request your assistance in bringing the contents of the
resolution to the attention of the members of the Security Council and would
also request that you circulate the text of the present letter as a document of
the Security Council.

(Signed)

-----

RAZALI Ismail
