United Nations

S/PV.6303

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6303rd meeting
Wednesday, 28 April 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Takasu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Puente
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2010/200)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-33326 (E)

*1033326*

S/PV.6303

I invite Mr. Mulet to take a seat at the Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
table.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2010/200)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Canada, the Dominican
Republic, Colombia, Guatemala, Haiti, Norway, Peru,
Spain and Uruguay, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime Minister of
the Republic of Haiti, to a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime Minister of the
Republic of Haiti, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish
to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. JeanMax Bellerive, Prime Minister of the Republic of Haiti.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Edmond Mulet,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH).
It is so decided.

2

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Albert
Ramdin, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as Assistant Secretary-General of the
Organization of American States, to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. If I
hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Albert Ramdin.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/200, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Edmond Mulet, to whom I now give
the floor.
Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): Today, I come to
the Council to deliver a message of hope. Last week
marked the hundredth day since the earthquake of
12 January. These days have been among the darkest
that Haiti has experienced in its tempestuous history. In
less than 60 seconds, on 12 January, Port-au-Prince and
neighbouring regions suffered greater damage than if an
atomic bomb had been dropped. The losses are in the
order of between 50 and 100 per cent of the country’s
gross domestic product. More than a quarter of all civil
servants — 18,000 public sector employees — died

10-33326

S/PV.6303

during the disaster. One person out of 10 in the capital
was killed. Survivors, Haitians and citizens of other
countries alike, found themselves unprepared, plunged
into mourning, without shelter. Successive waves of
announcements of horrible losses struck. At a personal
level, those were among the darkest days of my life. I
know that that was also the case for my friend, Prime
Minister Jean-Max Bellerive.

and a few hundred more have found refuge at the
nearby Tabarre Issa.

Today, however, I am more optimistic, and I
believe that the Prime Minister shares that feeling.
Although the humanitarian crisis is far from over, I
believe that Haiti, in cooperation with friendly and
neighbouring countries, has made significant progress
in assisting the most vulnerable.

Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): At the same time,
MINUSTAH engineers are working to rebuild the main
roads between Port-au-Prince and the Dominican
border and between the cities of Léogâne and Jacmel
that were damaged by the earthquake. Those two roads
are and will be important conduits for humanitarian
assistance in the coming months.

The Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/200)
describes the various ways in which the United Nations
has responded to the crisis, and the role played by the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), which, despite its losses, continued to
work in the hours following the earthquake to save
lives and facilitate humanitarian assistance. I shall
dwell on only a few of the Mission’s activities in order
to give Council members an overview of the scale of
the challenges we face today and of what has been
achieved thus far.
MINUSTAH troops and police provide security
throughout the country and logistical support to
facilitate the distribution of humanitarian assistance to
over 1 million individuals. The provision of temporary
shelter and sanitation facilities are the main priorities
at a time when the rains are falling ever harder and the
hurricane season is fast approaching.
Over the past few weeks, our priority has been to
assist the thousands of displaced persons in Port-auPrince living at dangerous sites at risk of flooding and
mudslides.
Alongside
the
Government
and
humanitarian partners, we are helping those people
urgently to find alternatives, either by returning to their
homes, when these are certified as structurally sound,
or by moving temporarily to new sites that are
considered to be safer. In the past months, MINUSTAH
military engineers have built two such sites, the largest
of which can host over 25,000 people, in zones
identified by the Government as secure. We provide
transport and security support to assist our
humanitarian partners to relocate those individuals. To
date, some 3,500 persons have been moved to the
Corail Cesselesse site in metropolitan Port-au-Prince,

10-33326

I shall now pause to screen a brief video
illustrating the work of the MINUSTAH military
engineers at Tabarre Issa.
The members of the Security Council viewed a
video presentation.

MINUSTAH police units, including those newly
constituted and deployed, are patrolling 24 hours a day,
seven days a week, to provide a visible presence,
strengthen security and gain the trust of the population.
We do not possess sufficient forces to deploy them in
adequate numbers throughout the country, but in the
regions where they work with the Haitian National
Police (HNP) we have received positive feedback from
the population.
It is absolutely essential to ensure the recovery of
the economy. Over 250,000 persons have participated
to date in the cash-for-work programmes implemented
by the United Nations and other partners. MINUSTAH
has considerably stepped up its community violence
reduction programme, which employs thousands of
young people threatened by the violence of armed
gangs. For example, we are implementing watershed
management projects that will protect communities
against new natural disasters.
Three months after the earthquake, hundreds of
thousands of Haitian continue to live in conditions of
great vulnerability. However, the international
community’s humanitarian efforts, alongside those of
the Haitian Government and people, are beginning to
make a difference.
(spoke in English)
I believe the next 12 to 18 months will be a
period of great challenge and risk in Haiti, but one that
we can help the Government to weather. Haiti’s path to
stability depends above all on adherence to the political
and electoral timetable to enable a constitutional
handover of power in February 2011. This will require

3

S/PV.6303

great effort, both in consensus-building across the
political spectrum and in a massive technical and
logistical endeavour to prepare for timely and inclusive
elections. Falling behind on that track would seriously
undermine the stability we have been working towards
in Haiti for many years.
At the same time, in the coming year we will
continue to see new security pressures. Many
dangerous criminals, whose capture helped stabilize
Haiti over the past few years, are now again at large.
Criminal networks will be looking for opportunities to
take advantage of the weakened police and rule of law
institutions. And people’s concerns about whether aid
is adequate and being distributed fairly may be
manipulated for political advantage. There are many
economic risks with millions living in very vulnerable
conditions. And of course there is the risk of new
natural disasters: rains, hurricanes or even future
earthquakes.
However, I believe that there is good reason to
think that Haiti and its international partners can
manage and mitigate those risks. If we do so, I hope
that within two years we may again be in the position
we had reached in 2009 — a Haiti that is relatively
stable and growing economically. We could then start
planning again for the consolidation and drawdown of
MINUSTAH. The need to manage this critical period
of risk is why we have recommended the surge of
effort, described by the Secretary-General in his report,
based on an integrated United Nations approach across
five areas of work.
First, we will intensify the good offices role of
the Mission to provide as much assistance as we can to
Haiti in keeping to its political critical path. As I speak,
a United Nations technical mission is in Haiti
discussing with the Government feasible options to
ensure that elections can be held on time.
Secondly, the Mission will continue to support
the lead role of the Government and humanitarian
partners in meeting needs and reducing vulnerability to
new disasters. Services and opportunities need not only
to be delivered to the capital, but also to communities
outside Port-au-Prince, to avoid a large-scale return of
internally displaced persons (IDPs).
Thirdly, MINUSTAH must step up its efforts to
support security and the rule of law. While the Haitian
National Police has responded admirably to the
earthquake, its capacity has been reduced by the deaths

4

of officers, the destruction of police stations and the loss
of already scarce equipment. At the same time, it is
facing a vast increase in policing needs. The training of
the HNP, which had been progressing well for several
years, has stopped since the earthquake. The force,
which stands at just under 10,000 officers, must now
restore the plan that was in place before January to build
up to the target level of 14,000. We have requested a
surge in the MINUSTAH police presence to help bridge
the gap between the HNP’s current capacity and the
minimum levels needed to ensure a visible presence on
the streets and in IDPs camps. The additional officers
we have requested will enable a presence in the seven
largest camps 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The
increase will also allow some United Nations police
involved in emergency tasks after the earthquake to
resume training of the new HNP officers.
Fourthly, we recommend that MINUSTAH,
working closely with the United Nations country team,
provide some critical short-term assistance in the form
of embedded advisors and logistical and operational
help to some of our key Haitian partner institutions.
That includes police stations and courts in the
earthquake-affected area, and local officials at the
departmental level who are hosting IDPs but lack basic
facilities and capacity.
Long-term assistance to and capacity-building for
these institutions will come, but it will take time. By
providing some additional advisors under our existing
programmes of support, and in some cases offering
United Nations assets to establish temporary office
locations and equipment, we can provide an essential
stop-gap solution to enable these institutions to deliver.
I emphasize that these will be exceptional measures,
which we believe will not add significantly to the
overall cost of the Mission but will have a
disproportionate effect in bolstering the capacity of our
Haitian partners and reducing both political and
humanitarian risks.
Finally, in all these activities, MINUSTAH will
continue to work in support of the broader United
Nations effort to promote a balanced social agenda and
to build the human capital that will make Haiti a more
stable and equitable society. That is the progress we all
want to see and that will lead to a stable environment
in which MINUSTAH can safely withdraw.
I have in my front office in Port-au-Prince a
Haitian painting which depicts Haiti as a patient in a

10-33326

S/PV.6303

hospital. This patient is surrounded by international
doctors and United Nations Blue Helmets, and by the
bedside a row of friends and supporters are praying for
recovery.
The message of hope I want to communicate
today is that, after three months back in Haiti, where I
last served in 2007, I believe that the patient is stronger
and more resilient than we might have thought. After
two centuries of deep political and social division, and
despite the tragedy that befell it in January, Haiti has a
vision for State renewal that is clear, simple and
broadly shared. That vision, which the Government has
articulated in its national Action Plan, offers an
approach to tackling the historical challenges of
governance,
to
encouraging
investment
and
confronting long-standing inequalities. Although much
work remains to be done, there is remarkable
consensus across the political spectrum, and between
the public and private sectors in Haiti, on the broad
lines of what must now be achieved.
So I believe that, in the face of tragedy, this is a
moment of historic opportunity for Haiti. If we can get
through the next year of risks, there is a good prospect
that 2010 could also mark the start of new era of
stability. What Haiti needs now is the supporting arm
of a companion on which it can lean as it gets back on
its feet. That is the role which we, the international
community, can play. Since 12 January, offers of
assistance to the Haitian people have come from all
continents. The challenge for the United Nations is to
help create an environment in which this goodwill and
generosity can be translated immediately into muchneeded practical support. Its impact must be visible to
give the psychological boost needed to face the tasks
ahead.
I believe that, with just a little more of the
support that we are already providing, Haiti will make
its own way forward. That would be the best end to the
terrible story of 12 January and a necessary and fitting
tribute to the lives of those we have lost. It is in that
spirit that I ask for the Council’s support of the
Secretary-General’s recommendations.
Finally, I want to thank United Nations Member
States and the Council for all the extraordinary support
they have provided to MINUSTAH and to Haiti in the
past few months. I would like to leave the Council with
a promise of my own commitment to continuing to

10-33326

work with all my energy in the coming months to meet
the challenges that are still before us.
The President: I thank Mr. Mulet for his briefing.
On this occasion, I would also like to express our
gratitude for his leadership and exceptional dedication
and to thank him for his service to the United Nations.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. JeanMax Bellerive, Prime Minister of Haiti.
Mr. Bellerive (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would
like to express my gratitude to the members of the
Security Council for having agreed to listen, through
me, to the voice of Haiti during their deliberations.
My statement will be short, given the fact that it
is in line with the views expressed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2010/200) and the statement made
by his Special Representative in Haiti.
The Government of Haiti wishes to thank the
members of the Security Council for the outpouring of
solidarity towards the people of Haiti following the
earthquake. We especially thank the Security Council
for having authorized the deployment of additional
military and police contingents within the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Among other initiatives, we welcome the deployment
of engineers from Japan and the Republic of Korea in
February to bolster the operational capacities of the
Mission and to assist humanitarian actions.
Given the major challenges posed by the
management and establishment of displaced person
camps in Port-au-Prince, as well as the rehabilitation of
infrastructure destroyed by the earthquake, we urge
Member States, as far as possible, to deploy further
engineers, especially as MINUSTAH possesses the
necessary space for the deployment of additional
engineering equipment.
We understand that the dispatch of additional
trained police units is under discussion. In this
connection, the Government of Haiti would welcome
the foreseen strengthening of the Mission’s police
component.
The earthquake profoundly changed the context
in which MINUSTAH supports the Haitian State. For
the Government, the next 18 months will present new
risks and heightened challenges to the management of
the post-disaster response and the recovery,
reconstruction and rebirth of the country.

5

S/PV.6303

The presence of MINUSTAH remains necessary
to consolidating the achievements of the stabilization
process and to creating conducive conditions to initiate
lasting sustainable socio-economic development. We
consider the current mandate of the Mission to be
adequate. However, it appears that a temporary
adjustment of the mandate would be desirable to ensure
that support for the Government should, in the short
term, more efficiently and directly meet the needs of
the post-disaster situation. All of this has been
discussed broadly in Port-au-Prince with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
We endorse the approach proposed by the
Secretary-General and the minor adjustments to the
mandate, as spelled out in his most recent report
(S/2010/200), in the field of security, assistance to rule
of law institutions and Government initiatives in favour
of decentralization.
On the topic of public security, the Haitian
National Police (HNP) force suffered great losses in
human life and equipment in the earthquake of
12 January. A strengthening of MINUSTAH’s police
presence would promote the development of the
capacity of the HNP to ensure the security of
individuals, and especially of displaced populations,
and to prevent a resurgence of armed groups.
One of the Government’s priorities is to restore,
through the Ministry of Justice and Public Security, the
operational capacities of the judicial authorities and to
guarantee access to justice within affected communities.
We welcome the proposal to provide the Government
with MINUSTAH facilities and equipment to enable
rule of law institutions to better fulfil their duties. At the
same time, increased logistical and technical support for
the Ministry of the Interior and Territorial Collectivities
in the 10 departmental delegations over the brief course
of 18 months would enable the Government to progress
in the implementation of a decentralization and regional
development policy, which is one of the best possible
responses to the causes and consequences of the scale of
the disaster that resulted from the earthquake of
12 January.
The consolidation of the democratic process and
of political stability is crucial for the success of the
reconstruction process as well as for efforts to attract
investment and promote job creation. In this respect,
the President has clearly reaffirmed his desire to
organize general elections before the end of his term of

6

office, on the basis of the conclusions of the electoral
feasibility mission that the Secretary-General was
gracious enough to send to Haiti.
Given the current conditions, technical, logistic
and security support by MINUSTAH will be necessary
to ensure the holding of free and transparent elections
according to timetable to be drawn up by the
competent authorities. In the same vein, MINUSTAH
should play a significant role in coordinating
international electoral assistance to guarantee its
effectiveness.
The challenges on the road to the stabilization of
Haiti were enormous before 12 January 2010. They are
even greater today. However, the solidarity so clearly
demonstrated by the international community, in
particular by the United Nations, provides the people
and Government of Haiti with the hope — indeed, the
certainty — that a brighter future is possible.
I would like to conclude by thanking the United
Nations for having appointed this wonderful friend of
Haiti, Mr. Edmond Mulet, to replace the late Hédi
Annabi. I would like to pay tribute to the thousands of
men and women who, within the framework of the
Organization or in cooperation with it, struggle every
day for the reconstruction of my country. We continue
to require their assistance, and we will do everything to
deserve it.
The President: I thank Prime Minister Bellerive
for his very important statement on behalf of his
Government. We are very grateful to him.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing this
timely debate. I extend a warm welcome to Prime
Minister Jean-Max Bellerive. His leadership is and will
continue to be central to Haitian reconstruction efforts.
My delegation is also grateful to Mr. Edmond Mulet,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing and, more important, for his dedication and
for the excellent work that the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has been
doing in rather difficult conditions.
I reiterate Brazil’s unwavering support for Haiti.
We share Mr. Bellerive’s vision for a transformed
Haiti, as contained in the national Action Plan: one in
which stronger institutions, decentralization and

10-33326

S/PV.6303

regional development help lay the foundations for a
prosperous and stable country. We also share the clear
vision just expressed by Mr. Mulet on behalf of the
Secretary-General on how the United Nations can best
support such a process.
The 12 January earthquake struck at the political,
social, economic and cultural heart of Haiti. Whatever
figure one takes — the number of deceased people, the
percentage points of gross domestic product wiped out
in a few seconds, the institutional capacity lost for
many years to come, or any other — it is painfully
clear that the word “devastation” does not overstate
what happened in the country. As pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2010/200), the
statistics do not reveal the full human dimension of the
disaster or of the efforts that will be required to cope
with its consequences.
Yet tragedy also creates opportunities. The
successful conclusion of the Haiti reconstruction
conference, held in New York on 31 March, is very
promising, as billions of dollars were pledged to help
Haitians build back better. Our greatest challenge now
is to translate the world’s solidarity into reality. We
urge donors and partners to disburse their pledges
without delay and stress the need to expeditiously
adopt the governance structures of the Haiti
reconstruction fund. We welcome the recent adoption
by the Haitian parliament of the legislation that
establishes the Interim Haitian Reconstruction
Commission.
Political stability is of paramount importance for
the country’s reconstruction. We call upon all actors in
Haiti to work together to promote the long-term
national interests of the country. We support the
Government’s intention to hold general elections as
soon as possible in 2010, so as to allow for the full
reconstitution of both houses of parliament and the
timely transfer of power to a new elected President by
February 2011. Brazil supports the coordinating role of
MINUSTAH in the organization of the future elections,
in cooperation with other stakeholders such as the
Organization of American States, whose assistance to
Haiti continues to be of great value.
MINUSTAH continues to be a central part of
international efforts and strategies towards the
reconstruction of Haiti. Its role in supporting stability,
security and the rule of law is unique. Also unique is
the environment in which it now operates, one that

10-33326

demands increased political, human and material
resources across the whole spectrum of the Mission’s
comprehensive mandate.
We support the approach outlined in the
Secretary-General’s
report,
including
the
recommendations contained in paragraphs 49 to 75
concerning the future role of MINUSTAH in support of
the Haitian Government. We concur with the
assessment that the earthquake has not destroyed the
gains towards stabilization made in the past few years,
but has created new obstacles. MINUSTAH will be
instrumental in helping the Government preserve those
gains and enabling a smooth transition to long-term
reconstruction.
In Brazil’s view, the role of MINUSTAH in the
coming months will be particularly important in the
following areas.
In terms of security, the Mission should continue
to support the Haitian National Police in maintaining
security and public order, including in the camps for
displaced persons, and to build the capacity of the
Haitian National Police. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation of an expansion of the
police contingent, which was also mentioned by Prime
Minister Jean-Max Bellerive.
In terms of humanitarian assistance and recovery
efforts, MINUSTAH should coordinate and, where
needed, provide logistical support to humanitarian
operations. We support the Secretary-General’s views
on the critical enabling role that the Mission can play
in the recovery efforts by making full use of its
resources, including its military engineers, where
required.
Concerning political stability and elections, the
Mission’s role in this regard will continue to be very
important in assisting the Government, through the
good offices of the Special Representative, and in
providing support for the preparation of the elections.
Concerning State capacity and transformation, we
support the Secretary-General’s views regarding the
need for a surge to restore and strengthen the
operational capacity of Haitian institutions and the
expanded assistance recommended in paragraph 71 of
the report.
If I had to single out one overarching priority
among the many needs the international community
must address in Haiti, I would mention State-building.

7

S/PV.6303

For far too long, we have tried to assist Haitians
without the direct involvement of the Government and
State institutions. We now have the opportunity to gear
our efforts towards supporting the vision of a renewed
State capable of delivering services and opportunities
for all its people, as presented by the Government of
Haiti during the conference of 31 March. That is by far
the most sustainable and cost-effective investment the
international community can make in Haiti.
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by welcoming Prime Minister Jean-Max
Bellerive and thanking him for his leadership and his
statement here today. I reaffirm my country’s solidarity
with his country and Government, following the
tragedy that occurred at the beginning of this year. I
would also like to thank Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, for
introducing
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2010/200) and for his wonderful work. We are all
aware of his commitment and professionalism in the
work that he is carrying out.
As Mr. Mulet has suggested, any challenge
involves opportunities. We therefore acknowledge that
the unparalleled tragedy that befell the people of Haiti
provides an historic opportunity for the United Nations
to review its comprehensive strategy to help the people
of Haiti not just to tackle their country’s reconstruction
making use of their own capacities and resources, but
also to overcome structural problems concerning
economic and social development and institutional
issues.
We should provide Haiti with a renewed and
decisive impetus for its long-term development. That
will be the great challenge that United Nations and the
international community will have to face in the
coming months. While the Haitian people and their
institutions have demonstrated an admirable capacity
to recover, it is nevertheless a fact that the earthquake
has given rise to new needs and affected the State’s
capacity to address them.
Fortunately, we are able to count on the support
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in assisting the Haitian Government and
people in creating political, security, protection and
recovery opportunities to allow the country to move
towards an environment conducive to its reconstruction
and development. MINUSTAH has a mandate that is
well balanced among its peacekeeping, peacebuilding

8

and development responsibilities. It also has the
necessary experience and capacity to meet the needs
associated with the humanitarian emergency,
maintaining public order and the current reconstruction
phase.
Immediately after the earthquake occurred, my
country pointed to the need to review MINUSTAH’s
mandate and made a proposal to that end, so as to
adapt the Mission to the needs on the ground in the
areas of humanitarian assistance and maintaining the
country’s stability and security, among others. We
therefore welcome the review carried out by the
Secretary-General, which the Security Council is now
considering. We support overall the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations for the Mission’s future
activities.
My delegation recognizes the need to maintain
social and political stability in order to make it possible
to rebuild and to ensure the democratic transition of
power in early 2011. My country reiterates its
readiness to work with Haiti on elections once the
Haitian Government has set out priorities, timelines
and areas in which it may need such assistance. We
support the Secretary-General’s proposal to strengthen
MINUSTAH’s electoral assistance so that it can take
on the main role in coordinating international electoral
assistance and in preventing the duplication of effort.
There is no doubt that the Mission’s assistance to
Haitian electoral officials in the areas of planning and
technical, logistical and security assistance — along
with the support of the United Nations Development
Programme, the Organization of American States and
other relevant stakeholders — will be crucial in
holding timely, free and fair elections.
We believe that providing ongoing emergency
assistance continues to have priority at this stage, given
the scope and complexity of the crisis on the ground
and the need to provide housing, food and basic
services to the more than 1 million displaced persons
who urgently need help in the face of the coming rainy
season. In that connection, we commend the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that the Mission act as
facilitator in closely coordinating and planning
humanitarian assistance with the Haitian Government
and the national and international humanitarian actors
on the ground.
It is a fact that there is today a need for an
effective and capable Haitian police to address the

10-33326

S/PV.6303

protection needs of displaced persons, women, children
and disabled people, and to serve as a preventive force
to deal with the potential emergence of disturbances to
public order and violence by gangs made up of
prisoners who escaped from jails following the
earthquake. We therefore also support the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to strengthen MINUSTAH with
additional police officers.
MINUSTAH has both the mandate and the
capacity to help the Haitian Government to achieve the
goals that have been set out in its new policy in the
areas of decentralization, the strengthening of
institutions and regional development. Nevertheless,
we recognize the need to strengthen the Mission’s
advisory function vis-à-vis the police, the Ministry of
Justice and Public Security and the main judicial and
penal institutions, as proposed by the SecretaryGeneral. Were the Haitian Government to request it, we
could consider the Secretary-General’s proposal to
temporarily provide Haitian institutions with technical
assistance from MINUSTAH experts.
In conclusion, I should like to refer to the issue of
social development, which we believe to be a priority,
as others have noted. My country believes that we
should consider the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral that the United Nations further focus its efforts
on social protection in order to help the Haitian people
themselves to overcome such historical problems as
poverty, unemployment and social and economic
inequality. Those are structural elements that are often
causes of violence and conflict, as well as obstacles to
achieving sustainable development.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me start
by warmly welcoming Prime Minister Bellerive. We
appreciate his excellent statement and are particularly
grateful for his Government’s views on the appropriate
role of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) going forward. I would also like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Edmond Mulet for his comprehensive briefing, and
above all for his extraordinary service in leading
United Nations efforts in Haiti since the tragic
earthquake of 12 January. We want to thank him and all
the personnel of MINUSTAH for their dedication and
selfless sacrifice.
First Lady Michelle Obama visited Haiti a few
weeks ago, three months following the earthquake.
There, she reiterated the United States deepest

10-33326

condolences to the Haitian people for the immense
losses they have suffered. She carried a clear message
from President Obama that the United States would
continue to stand shoulder to shoulder with the people
of Haiti. The First Lady also had the opportunity to
visit the United Nations compound during her trip, to
thank Mr. Mulet and the entire United Nations family
for their unwavering support to the people of Haiti, to
praise their heroism in the face of the greatest single
loss of life that the United Nations has ever suffered,
and to underscore the importance of a truly
international effort to help Haiti recover and rebuild.
America’s gratitude for the contributions of troops,
police and financial assistance made by the many
countries represented here today is deep and abiding.
We are proud to be working together as a unified
international community in support of the Government
and people of Haiti.
At the donors’ conference on 31 March, the
international community came together to pledge almost
$10 billion in support for Haiti, of which $5 billion was
pledged for 2010 and 2011. For our part, the United
States will contribute $1.15 billion to Haiti’s recovery
and reconstruction. That money will support the
Government of Haiti’s plans to strengthen the areas of
agriculture, energy, health, security and governance.
Today, the Security Council is meeting to forge
consensus on the future of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, which of course faces a
very different situation in the aftermath of the
earthquake’s devastation. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that the next 12 to 18 months will
be a period of high risk in which we will need to
pursue simultaneously political, security, protection
and recovery objectives. We also agree that, during that
period, the role of the United Nations and its Member
States should be to support Haiti’s Government and
institutions in delivering on their responsibilities, while
respecting
their
authority,
sovereignty
and
prerogatives.
We are largely in agreement with the future role
for MINUSTAH that the Secretary-General proposes in
his latest report (S/2010/200). I would like to highlight
our perspective on six recommendations in particular.
First, we support MINUSTAH’s taking a lead
role, specifically in technical assistance during the
electoral process, in order to ensure efficiency and
avoid duplication. We also encourage electoral support

9

S/PV.6303

from key regional organizations, such as the
Organization of American States, operating within the
coordination framework of MINUSTAH.
Secondly, we fully agree that the Special
Representative must continue to oversee the activities
of the whole United Nations system in Haiti and that
MINUSTAH’s
military,
police
and
logistics
components should provide, within their means and
capabilities, full support to humanitarian and recovery
efforts.
Thirdly, the internally displaced persons (IDPs)
continue to require assistance, in particular regarding
their relocation to safer, less flood-prone areas.
Although extraordinary work has been done to protect
IDPs and to maintain a safe environment for them,
MINUSTAH must now work with the Government of
Haiti and its other partners to reach a more permanent
solution and move towards a more community-based
approach.
Fourthly, we agree with the Secretary-General
that there is a need to enhance MINUSTAH’s support
for the Haitian National Police, especially to ensure a
more sustainable and visible police presence
throughout areas affected by the earthquake, including
protecting citizens in IDP camps. My Government is
prepared to support a further increase of 680 police
officers for MINUSTAH on the understanding that the
Secretariat will provide us with a detailed police-totask analysis of how this figure was reached. We would
also appreciate additional information on the revised
concept of operations for MINUSTAH’s police
component, including the underlying assumptions
about how long the increased police capacity will be
needed. We want to ensure that MINUSTAH has
enough police to take on critical tasks in its mandate,
but we also hope to ensure that all authorized police
personnel are being used as effectively as possible.
Of course, the Secretariat depends on Member
States to provide the additional police authorized by
this Council, including well-trained and well-equipped
formed police units. We commend the countries that
have already deployed such formed police units, and
we encourage others that can contribute them to
MINUSTAH to do so as soon as possible.
Fifthly, we applaud the instinct of the United
Nations to reject a business-as-usual approach in these
dire circumstances. We understand that it can put a
strain on MINUSTAH staff and put staff in an awkward

10

situation when they have functioning offices,
computers and vehicles that their local Haitian
counterparts may lack. We therefore entirely
understand the desire of the Mission leadership to
provide direct logistical support to the Haitian
institutions they are mandated to assist, and we
understand that special representatives in many other
missions have had similar impulses and faced similar
frustrations when not allowed to do so.
That said, we must ask how the Secretariat will
propose to handle maintenance costs and legal liability
in cases when United Nations equipment and vehicles
are loaned to Haitian officials. We wonder whether it
might be more cost-effective and sustainable for other
actors in the development community to purchase the
equipment
and
vehicles
through
voluntary
contributions and donate them directly. Since these
proposals are presumably stop-gap measures, pending
longer-term assistance coming on line, how would the
functionality of the Mission be affected if it depleted
its logistical capacity for this purpose, even in the short
term? We hope the Secretariat and MINUSTAH will
address such issues before proceeding down the
proposed path.
We
fully
share
the
Secretary-General’s
assessment of the need to invest in building State
capacity and human capital. In that context, we see the
value of imbedding MINUSTAH advisers in Haitian
institutions and offices where requested by the
Government of Haiti. Such a step certainly makes
sense where MINUSTAH is already provided
considerable advice and assistance, consistent with its
existing mandate, such as in the rule of law sector.
At the same time, as MINUSTAH considers
branching into other areas of governance support
where it has not been working to date, we would
welcome a better appreciation of the rationale for
doing so via MINUSTAH rather than turning to the
United Nations Development Programme, relevant
international financial institutions or other bilateral and
multilateral actors.
Finally, the Secretary-General has provided us
with a series of proposals to enable MINUSTAH to
provide the best possible support to the Government of
Haiti in this ongoing time of dire need. We will
continue to support the people and Government of
Haiti and work together with other partners in this
crucial cause. Accordingly, the United States remains

10-33326

S/PV.6303

open to considering appropriate adjustments
MINUSTAH’s mandated strength and approach.

to

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): France
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union. I acknowledge the
presence of the Prime Minister of Haiti, Mr. Jean-Max
Bellerive. As President of the French Republic Nicolas
Sarkozy said during his visit to Haiti in February, it is
up to the Haitian people and to the Haitian people
alone to determine the path their nation will take.
Mr. Bellerive has, together with President Préval,
worked vigorously and effectively to present this plan,
which received the support of the international
community at the conference in New York.
I should also like to pay tribute to the Special
Representative and, through him, to all the staff of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the United Nations system, who
work tirelessly in extremely difficult conditions.
Despite the terrible losses, MINUSTAH has faced the
situation with remarkable effectiveness. The security
situation remains under control. The political process
has not been interrupted. Humanitarian aid depends on
MINUSTAH’s operational mechanisms. Mr. Mulet has
played an indispensable role in ensuring the continuity
of United Nations action. He enjoys the respect and
trust of the Haitian people, as Prime Minister Bellerive
said, and should have the full support of the Security
Council.
The tragedy that befell Haiti has become an
opportunity to invent a new political, economic and
social model for Haiti based on a fairer redistribution
of resources through political, institutional and
economic decentralization. MINUSTAH has an
essential role to play in this context — aiding in the
establishment of a favourable political and security
environment. This role has not changed since the
earthquake, but the scale of the needs and challenges
has increased.
We underscore our support for the approach set
out in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/200). The political good offices, the
maintenance of order, the promotion of human rights
and the strengthening of the rule of law must, more
now than ever, be at the core of MINUSTAH’s
mandate.
We also believe, like the Special Representative,
that it is time to develop a new approach that makes

10-33326

strengthening the Haitian State the priority. We
therefore support the concept of strengthening
MINUSTAH involvement in providing support to
Haitian institutions. This is a pragmatic response to an
extraordinary situation. The priority is to strengthen
institutions related to the rule of law, in particular the
justice sector. This action should, of course, be carried
out in full respect for Haitian institutions and
sovereignty, with MINUSTAH acting as a matter of
last resort and on a temporary basis.
The New York conference was a financial and
political success. The reforms that were announced —
regular follow-up on the sums allocated and the status
of progress projects — will be indispensable. We
therefore welcome the adoption by the Haitian
Parliament of the law establishing the Interim Haitian
Reconstruction Commission, which will make it
possible to implement the Action Plan developed by
the Haitian Government. However, while ground needs
to be broken in reconstruction efforts, we must not
neglect the continuing urgency of assisting the
hundreds of thousands of displaced persons threatened
by the hurricane and rainy season.
For Haiti, there is a great deal at stake in the
upcoming legislative and presidential elections. France
commends the determination of the Government of
Haiti to hold these elections within the established time
frame so that the constitutional transfer of power can
take place on 7 February 2011 as planned. Creating the
practical and political conditions for the holding of
credible elections within the electoral calendar will be
another priority for MINUSTAH in the coming months.
That will require, inter alia, the active engagement of
the Special Representative on the issue of the reform of
the Conseil Electoral Provisoire. We also encourage
Mr. Mulet to use his good offices to promote consensus
within the Haitian political class and civil society on
the modalities of constitutional reform.
France is strongly committed to MINUSTAH; our
contingent of 200 police officers has made our country
one of the top police contributors to the Mission.
Additionally, in cooperation with our partners, we will
be supporting the deployment of French-speaking
African police. France will also provide 110 vehicles in
direct support to the Haitian National Police and fire
service. In coordination with MINUSTAH, France has
also deployed military engineers to assist in clearing
Port-au-Prince and other areas requiring urgent efforts.
France will continue its efforts and commitment

11

S/PV.6303

alongside the Haitian people and Government and in
close cooperation with the United Nations as part of
the global effort involving the State as well as local
groups, in particular the French Departments in the
Caribbean, non-governmental organizations and the
Haitian diaspora living in France.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting. I also
thank Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for his
briefing. I welcome Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime
Minister of Haiti, to the Council’s meeting.
The powerful earthquake that struck Haiti on
12 January caused unprecedented destruction and
damage and raised new difficulties and challenges to
the Council’s efforts to stabilize Haiti. My country was
saddened by the heavy losses suffered by MINUSTAH
staff during the earthquake. We pay tribute to Mr.
Mulet and all MINUSTAH personnel for their courage,
dedication and sacrifice. There is a Chinese saying
that, when trouble occurs in one place, help arrives
from all sides. The past three months have witnessed a
continuous outpouring of international support,
sympathy and generous aid for Haiti.
Following
the
earthquake,
the
Chinese
Government lost no time in providing various kinds of
assistance to Haiti and has continued its vigorous
efforts to help the Haitian Government and people
weather their difficulties. It is gratifying to note that
the post-disaster security situation in Haiti has
remained calm and that steady progress has been made
in the relief and recovery efforts. China is convinced
that, under the leadership of the Haitian Government
and with the international community’s support and
assistance, the Government and people of Haiti will
soon rebuild their homes, heal their wounds and create
a bright future of peace, stability and sustainable
development.
International attention is focused on the postdisaster situation in Haiti and its reconstruction. We
support ongoing assistance of the United Nations and
the international community to Haiti in its efforts to
achieve stability and rebuild as soon as possible. The
post-disaster recovery and reconstruction process in
Haiti will be long, arduous and challenging. All parties
must fully respect Haiti’s sovereignty and insure that
the Haitian Government and people play a leading role

12

in the stabilization and reconstruction process. The
United Nations should continue to play an important
coordinating role in the stabilization process and in
international efforts to assist Haiti in its post-disaster
reconstruction.
China appreciates the report recently submitted
by the Secretary-General (S/2010/200) and take note of
its recommendations on the future role of MINUSTAH.
China also understands that some parties concerned
hope that the United Nations will provide greater
assistance and support to promote political stability,
maintain security, support elections, strengthen the rule
of law and rebuild Haiti’s State capacities.
China’s view is that the major organs and
agencies of the United Nations, regional organizations
and major donors should perform their respective
duties pursuant to their mandates. At the same time,
there should be a clear division of labour and enhanced
coordination to avoid duplication and wasted
resources.
For more than five years, MINUSTAH has made
significant contributions to the security and stability of
Haiti. In the current circumstances, MINUSTAH’s
important role in Haiti’s stabilization process is selfevident. China favours strengthening MINUSTAH’s
capacity so that it may better fulfil its current mandate.
As a peacekeeping mission, MINUSTAH’s core
function is to maintain security and stability in Haiti.
With respect to promoting political stability in
Haiti, restoring State capacity, supporting elections and
strengthening the rule of law, the Mission may provide
appropriate support and assistance within its mandate
and capacity, but should refrain from taking on every
activity while at the same time deviating from its
central task of peacekeeping. As authorized by the
Council in its resolution 1908 (2010), the force level of
MINUSTAH has been increased by a total of 3,500
personnel. The full deployment of the additional forces
will take some time.
On the issue of increased police personnel and
the reconfiguration of MINUSTAH’s military
component, China deems it necessary for the Security
Council and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to carry out a comprehensive assessment
and take a prudent approach in decision-making. China
also hopes that the United Nations will soon rebuild
MINUSTAH’s facilities to ensure the safety and
security of its staff.

10-33326

S/PV.6303

Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset I welcome His Excellency Mr. Jean-Max
Bellerive, Prime Minister of Haiti, and thank him for
his statement. I thank Mr. Edmond Mulet for his
message of hope. Allow me to make the following
comments.
My delegation again expresses its solidarity with
the Haitian people following the humanitarian disaster
caused by the earthquake of 12 January, which left
220,000 people dead, 1.5 million without shelter, and
$11.5 billion in damage. It is unfortunate to note that
Haiti will require a great deal of time before it is in a
position to overcome this crisis. Faced with this
disaster, we can only reiterate the statement of the
Secretary-General in his report that “our best tribute to
[the people of Haiti] is to continue their work, to
transform Haiti and build anew out of tragedy
(S/2010/200, para. 80).
Lebanon welcomes the Action Plan for the
Reconstruction and the Development of Haiti presented
by the Government of Haiti at the pledging conference
held in New York on 31 March. We welcome the
positive results of the pledging conference, which
raised $9 billion. The donors’ generosity reflected the
international community’s solidarity with the Haitian
people and highlighted the importance of collective
efforts when facing the disasters that regularly confront
humankind.
The challenge now lies in continuing our work to
ensure that all of the assistance is transformed into
tangible services on the ground. We fully support the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), which lost 101 staff members,
including the head of Mission and his deputy.
We welcome the additional efforts of the Mission
in the areas of emergency assistance, assisting civilians
and reopening roads. My country understands the
difficult circumstances under which the Mission is
operating and therefore welcomes the response of
States to the United Nations appeal aimed at
strengthening troop levels pursuant to resolution 1908
(2010) of 19 January.
The people and Government of Haiti must play a
primary role in determining the future of their country.
Lebanon supports national and human capacitybuilding efforts in Haiti through its assistance in the
fields of education, information-sharing, equal
opportunity,
the
strengthening
of
equitable

10-33326

development, and respect for human rights. The report
refers to this as an “investment in human capital”. We
therefore express our satisfaction at the security and
political stability in the country.
We support MINUSTAH’s technical assistance
for the upcoming elections. In the light of the report of
the Secretary-General, upon the approval of the Haitian
Government and in line with Mr. Mulet’s proposal, we
express our readiness to work with the other members
of the Council to adapt MINUSTAH’s mandate to the
changes on the ground, including to provide technical,
operational and logistical assistance, in full respect for
the authority and competence of the Government of
Haiti.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of Prime Minister Bellerive of Haiti. We thank
Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing on
recent developments in Haiti and his introduction of
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/200).
Immediately after the natural disaster, Edmond
Mulet resumed leadership of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), skillfully
and professionally leading it in extraordinary
circumstances. We thank the Special Representative
and all United Nations personnel for their selfless
efforts to assist Haitians in difficult and tragic times.
We support the main conclusions and assessments
of the Secretary-General’s report. We agree that
international assistance to Haiti should primarily be
provided directly through the Government of that
country, since the primary responsibility for
reconstruction ultimately lies with the Haitians
themselves. The role of the United Nations should be
to coordinate international assistance and to strengthen
the capacities of the national authorities.
We support the decision of President Préval to
hold municipal, presidential and parliamentary
elections by the end of 2010. We agree with the
Secretary-General’s view that MINUSTAH must play a
leading role in coordinating international assistance to
the upcoming electoral campaign.
It was extremely important that the postearthquake security situation in Haiti was successfully
kept under control. The Security Council decision to
expand the Mission’s military and police components

13

S/PV.6303

by 3,500 troops was an effective and timely response.
The report quite rightly indicates that new challenges
to the maintenance of security have taken centre stage,
linked above all to the possibility of increased criminal
activity. Maximum efforts should be made to prevent
the resurgence of violence in Haiti. We cannot allow
the recent progress in stabilization achieved by the
Mission in recent years to be undermined. Public order
and human rights, in particular those of women and
children, must be upheld in the temporary housing sites
for internally displaced persons.
We have closely considered the SecretaryGeneral’s proposals for MINUSTAH’s future. We
support these recommendations and agree that, in view
of the situation, MINUSTAH’s tasks can be
accomplished within the framework of the Mission’s
existing mandate. Some of the recommendations in the
report — for example, the proposed increase in the size
of the Mission’s police force by 680 officers by the end
of this year — require further consideration in the
context of the comprehensive implementation of the
Security
Council’s
decision
to
strengthen
MINUSTAH’s military and police components by
3,500 troops.
There is also a need to further analyse the idea of
involving MINUSTAH in social issues. The
peacekeeping Mission, the main purpose of which is to
uphold stability and the rule of law, may not have the
necessary knowledge and experience in that field,
which lies within the competence of other specialized
bodies.
The elements have wrought unprecedented
destruction and loss of human life in Haiti. The United
Nations suffered the greatest loss of life in its history.
We honour the memories of former head of
MINUSTAH Hédi Annabi and the other United Nations
staff who died in the earthquake.
The assistance being provided to Haiti by the
international community, led by the United Nations, is
of vital importance. Alongside other countries, Russia
has contributed to assisting Haiti. From the very onset
of humanitarian operations, Russian emergency searchand-rescue detachments, canine rescue teams and
medico-psychological units have worked at the very
epicentre of the disaster. An aero-mobile hospital has
been deployed. The Russian Government further
decided to provide $8 million, through the various
channels offered by international organizations, in

14

particular the United Nations system, for Haiti’s
reconstruction.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank His Excellency Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive,
Prime Minister of Haiti, for his presence here today. I
would also like to thank Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who has acted
in that position from the very beginning of the crisis.
We wish him every success in further performing his
duties in Haiti. We also congratulate all those who have
worked to respond to the emergency after the
devastating earthquake in January.
Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement to be made by the observer of the European
Union.
Since the earthquake, the Government of Haiti
has made commendable efforts to address the
challenges faced by its nation. Nevertheless, the
continued attention and support of the international
community to the people of Haiti in their efforts to
rebuild the country are also indispensable. In that
context, we are encouraged by the results of the Haiti
donor conference held on 31 March, and we would like
to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to
all international donors for their generous pledges.
Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly supports the
Government of Haiti’s efforts to carry out its duties
effectively and in the best interests of Haiti’s people,
including its ambitious plan to proceed with elections
that will allow for a presidential transition in early
2011. We also consider it important that, in a very
sensitive atmosphere, the Government of Haiti and all
political actors come together to address the issue of
the transitional phase and find a way to bridge the
legislative gap from May to the elections. In that
regard, we welcome the dispatch of a United Nations
mission to evaluate requirements and assess options
with regard to a timetable for general elections.
Bearing in mind the importance of international
assistance in preparations for the elections, we support
the Secretary-General’s recommendations concerning
the lead role that the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) should play in
coordinating electoral assistance. We hope that these
efforts will enable timely, free and inclusive elections,
with the full participation of women in that important
process.

10-33326

S/PV.6303

Furthermore, we consider the rebuilding and
strengthening of the security sector and the judicial and
penal systems to be fundamental to recovery and
development. Assistance to the Haitian National Police
(HNP), which has played an important role in
providing security side by side with MINUSTAH, as
well as in developing a strategic framework for
assistance in line with its reform plan, is of utmost
importance. Cooperation between MINUSTAH and the
HNP in providing the widest possible coverage to the
camps and in addressing violence against women and
children will be essential. With regard to the judicial
and penal systems, we support MINUSTAH’s efforts to
provide assistance to the Government of Haiti in that
field, which was also severely affected by the
earthquake.
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
welcomes
the
Government of Haiti’s Action Plan and the
establishment of the Interim Haiti Reconstruction
Commission, which will coordinate financial aid until
a Haitian development authority and a Haiti
reconstruction fund are in place.
In the aftermath of a disaster of such proportions,
the main precondition for rebuilding and vigorous
economic recovery is the restoration of the fabric of
society, above all that of local communities in the
affected areas. Therefore, in anticipation of measures
to
rebuild
local
communities,
international
stakeholders and the Government of Haiti should keep
in mind that only programmes and projects that
correspond to the needs of the local community and are
supported by it will be beneficial and sustainable.
In addition to the long-term recovery efforts,
bearing in mind the humanitarian situation, it is
essential that humanitarian aid to the people of Haiti
continue to be delivered. Providing shelter and
sanitation during the rainy and hurricane season has to
be a priority. Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the
efforts of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, humanitarian
agencies and non-governmental organizations to
provide assistance to the population in need.
We urge the Government to make every effort to
further address the issue of the difficult conditions in
the camps for internally displaced persons. We also
support the appeal of the Secretary-General addressed
to MINUSTAH to provide additional technical,
operational and logistical support that will assist the

10-33326

Government of Haiti in meeting its responsibilities in
this regard.
The United Nations continues to play a vital role
in Haiti, and, on behalf of my Government, I would
like to commend United Nations and MINUSTAH
personnel for the important work they have carried out
to date. Since the earthquake, MINUSTAH has
exercised its mandate in a changed environment.
During that exceptionally hard time, MINUSTAH,
itself severely hit by the earthquake, provided essential
support for rescue and relief operations. At this stage,
which marks a transition from relief to reconstruction,
MINUSTAH must continue to provide technical,
operational and logistical assistance to the Government
of Haiti.
Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina commends the
Haitian people for their admirable dignity and
resilience, and the Government of Haiti and political
and civil society actors for their constructive efforts to
build consensus and ensure political stability, despite
the scale of loss and suffering. We are convinced that,
with the support of the international community, the
Government and people of Haiti will overcome all
challenges and build a stronger and viable Haiti.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I am grateful to you, Mr. President, for having
organized this important debate on the situation in
Haiti. Like previous speakers, I welcome the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime
Minister of Haiti.
My delegation is pleased to participate in this
important debate on the situation in Haiti, specifically
on the work of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), described in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2010/200). A key point
about the report is that it was written at a time when
the international community’s solidarity with respect to
the reconstruction of Haiti is at its apex.
The day 12 January 2010 will live in our
collective memory as a day on which humankind faced
one of the most devastating tragedies in its history.
Many dreadful and poignant images remain etched in
our minds and remind us of the unimaginable scale of
the human and material losses caused by the terrible
earthquake. This unspeakable disaster reduced to
nought all the country’s development efforts.

15

S/PV.6303

My delegation wishes to focus on three main
points: the international community’s response to the
tragedy; the reconstruction of Haiti; and the role of
MINUSTAH in this new, evolving political,
institutional and security environment.
On the first point, my delegation wishes first and
foremost to pay tribute to the memory of the 101
United Nations staff members who died when the
Mission’s headquarters collapsed. We think in
particular of Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Luiz Carlos da
Costa, his Deputy. Their heroism in death obliges us to
continue their mission: to work for the transformation
and development of a new Haiti, a Haiti looking
towards the future.
The international community’s response to the
tragedy was swift and proactive. In particular, my
delegation welcomes the leadership shown by the
United Nations on the ground in the immediate
aftermath of the earthquake. Here, we hail the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations team in Haiti, in
particular
by
Mr.
Edmond
Mulet,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who is
working tireless in sometimes extremely difficult
conditions.
We also appreciate the role of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in having so
diligently deployed a team to identify priorities and
coordinate logistical support for humanitarian efforts.
Hundreds of humanitarian aid agencies and national
and international non-governmental organizations,
along with a great many individuals, have worked
tirelessly with the United Nations to meet the needs of
victims, especially of vulnerable individuals such as
children, women, the elderly and the disabled. Those
efforts have been complemented by the financial and
in-kind contributions that a great many countries,
including my country, Gabon, have made to Haiti. This
generosity, expressed on a global scale towards the
Government and the people of Haiti, demonstrates not
only the solidarity of the whole world, but also the
determination of the international community to bring
Haiti into a process of political, economic, institutional
and security reconstruction.
My country welcomes the Action Plan for the
Reconstruction and the Development of Haiti,
developed by the Government with the assistance of
international institutions such as the World Bank, the

16

Inter-American Development Bank and the European
Union. The Action Plan, which will require an
estimated $11.5 billion, was presented to international
donors on 31 March in New York. As part of an
unprecedented wave of solidarity, donors have pledged
some $9 billion for the comprehensive Haitian
reconstruction effort, including $5 billion for the
period 2010-2011. This international commitment, to
which Gabon fully subscribes, augurs a better future
for that country, which continues to face a very fragile
political, security and humanitarian situation.
The political environment was marked by
President Préval’s 27 January decision to postpone the
legislative elections that had been scheduled for
February 2010. Even though this is temporary, my
delegation welcomes the Senate’s adoption on 15 April
of a law extending the state of emergency for a period
of 18 months and creating the Interim Haiti
Reconstruction Commission. My delegation considers
that, to create a climate conducive to free, fair and
transparent elections in Haiti, different conditions must
exist. In that regard, we await the return from Haiti of
the assessment mission led by the Department of
Political Affairs, jointly with the United Nations
Development Programme and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
Overall, the security situation remains stable, in
spite of some incidents that have had an impact on
humanitarian efforts in the field. The report of the
Secretary-General refers to an increase in crime,
including kidnappings, sexual violence and drug
trafficking and in new threats by armed gangs, whose
members escaped from Haitian prisons following the
earthquake. Here, we welcome the decisive role that
MINUSTAH has played in efforts to reduce security
threats in that country.
The Security Council’s increase of military and
police personnel, by its resolution 1908 (2010) of
19 January 2010, responds to these concerns. Indeed,
MINUSTAH has thus far fulfilled its mandate by
providing security support for humanitarian operations;
conducting a preliminary damage assessment;
providing support for State institutions such as the
judicial system; ensuring respect for human rights,
especially the protection of women and children; and
integrating the HIV/AIDS dimension into the
emergency response. But the role of MINUSTAH must
be redefined in the light of new challenges in the way
of the reconstruction of Haiti.

10-33326

S/PV.6303

Security, protection and reconstruction issues are
likely to have an impact on the future of Haiti in
coming months. The international community should
support the Government and Haitian institutions as
they fully shoulder their responsibility as part of the
development process. The efforts of the United Nations
and other major international actors must focus on
strengthening political stability, continuing the
coordination of humanitarian efforts and supporting the
rule of law, respect for human rights and justice.
MINUSTAH has a central role to play in realizing
that vision. Indeed, as recommended in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, MINUSTAH must lend greater
technical, operational and logistical assistance to the
Government and institutions of Haiti. It must
especially work on the country’s preparations for
presidential, legislative and municipal elections. The
organization of these elections will determine the
future political stability of Haiti and the reconstruction
process in a country that was so cruelly affected by the
tragedy of 12 January.
I would be remiss to conclude without expressing
our profound admiration for the dignity and stoicism
with which the people of Haiti have dealt with this
terrible tragedy. That people has demonstrated to all
humankind its fighting spirit and inextinguishable faith
in the future.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to join my colleagues in welcoming Prime
Minister Bellerive to the Security Council today and to
extend again the United Kingdom’s sincere
condolences to the people of Haiti for the loss of over
200,000 lives in January’s devastating earthquake.
I also welcome Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, to this
meeting and thank him for his briefing today. I would
like to express our ongoing support for the United
Nations efforts in assisting the Haitian people.
Mr. Mulet and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) are making an
invaluable contribution to the post-earthquake recovery
effort, which is particularly commendable given the
very challenging circumstances that the Mission is
working under, including dealing with the loss of so
many United Nations lives, including among
MINUSTAH’s leadership. Mr. Mulet and his team have
worked tirelessly to rebuild the lives and hopes of the
Haitian people.

10-33326

A productive partnership between the Haitian
authorities and the international community is vital to
achieving progress. We underline the significant
contribution that international donors continue to make
to improving Haiti’s economy, and stress the
importance of well-organized donor coordination. In
this regard, we welcome the pivotal role that former
President Clinton is playing as United Nations Special
Envoy for Haiti in overseeing this work, including in
preparing the March conference, which showed the
international community rallying in support of the
people of Haiti.
Before January’s devastating earthquake, the
Security Council discussed the need to establish a clear
strategy for international engagement in Haiti, setting
the country on the path to lasting stability so that its
economy could grow and broader development needs
could be met. It is even more important now that we
pursue this strategy. That includes ensuring that those
donors, international organizations or parts of the
United Nations family that are best placed to provide
support are engaged and able to help Haiti to deliver.
We are confident that MINUSTAH’s current mandate
enables it to play an important role in supporting the
wider reconstruction efforts, while ensuring that its
core duties are maintained.
In our view, MINUSTAH’s primary focus should
remain the provision and maintenance of a peaceful
and secure environment. The aftermath of January’s
earthquake has seen the emergence of new security
challenges, such as the need to protect the vulnerable
inhabitants of displacement camps, recapture escaped
criminals and combat an increase in drug trafficking.
Haiti remains dependent on MINUSTAH to
maintain law and order. We agree that MINUSTAH
should continue to play this role for the immediate
future, and we shall look carefully at the SecretaryGeneral’s proposals for further enhancements in this
light. MINUSTAH should also continue to aid the
rehabilitation and development of local policing
capabilities, which will be key to MINUSTAH’s
meeting its goal of establishing a secure environment.
We are committed to the long-term engagement
of the United Nations in Haiti. We must ensure that, if
we are to help Haiti through this challenging period,
we have the right people with the right skills for the
tasks at hand. We support the efforts of MINUSTAH
troops to maintain a secure environment. We also wish

17

S/PV.6303

to ensure that the longer-term reconstruction effort is
performed by those best qualified in the wider United
Nations family and beyond.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would like to thank His
Excellency Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime Minister of
Haiti, for his participation in this meeting. In welcoming
Mr. Edmond Mulet, we congratulate him on his new
position as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Haiti and thank him for his comprehensive
briefing. The contribution he has made since assuming
his new position is highly commendable.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/200) indicates that remarkable progress has
been made in the provision of emergency aid with the
identification of such priority needs as water, food,
health care, sanitation and relief shelters. Nevertheless,
a great deal remains to be done, as initial relief is only
a first step in the long reconstruction efforts to rebuild
lives in Haiti and the infrastructure of the country’s
institutions.
We commend the international community and
non-governmental organizations for their swift reaction
to the earthquake in providing emergency relief
support, including technical operations. The exemplary
role played by the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in providing initial
specialized assistance to alleviate immediate
humanitarian needs and address the effects of the
disaster deserves the utmost commendation.
MINUSTAH continues to provide technical
support and advice to State institutions, focusing its
priorities on the Government Action Plan for the
Reconstruction and the Development Of Haiti. The
Action Plan encompasses the long-term reconstruction
of Haiti through economic stimulation, social reform,
and the strengthening of State and local institutions
that will ensure better lives for all. In this regard, we
commend the outcome of the international donor
conference held in New York, which raised more than
$5 billion to assist in financing the expenses of the
various reconstruction efforts. Nigeria will continue to
give its full support to the aspirations of the
Government and the people of Haiti. It is in this regard
that Nigeria made an initial donation of $1.5 million
and pledged the sum of $5 million for reconstruction
efforts in Haiti.
At this crucial stage in the country’s
reconstruction, the international community should

18

assist Haiti in taking full ownership of its governance
and State institutions in order to promote balanced
overall development and stability in the country in all
their aspects. We agree with the Secretary-General’s
proposal to review the role of MINUSTAH, including
adjustments to its mandates, in the light of postearthquake
circumstances.
We
support
the
recommendation, which has the approval of the
Government of Haiti. It offers a unique opportunity to
the Haitian Government to transform the demographic
structure of the country, strengthen institutions and
accelerate the economic development of the people.
Most importantly, these efforts will help Haiti to
deliver on its promises, as contained in the Action
Plan.
We call for concerted efforts by the international
community to enable the Government of Haiti to
provide an integrated approach in the areas of
constitutional reform, human rights, the fostering of
political stability, the strengthening of the rule of law,
electoral institutions, the judiciary and law
enforcement agencies.
MINUSTAH has a crucial role to play in the
electoral process in order to ensure the advent of a new
democracy come February 2011. It is in this regard that
Nigeria
supports
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation that there be an increase in the
number of police personnel above the force levels
authorized in resolution 1908 (2010) in order to
enhance security in Haiti during the presidential,
parliamentary and municipal elections to be held in
September 2010.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I should like to thank Prime Minister
Bellerive of Haiti for having addressed the Council
today.
We welcome the efforts of the Government of
Haiti to address the many challenges posed by the
earthquake, despite the very difficult circumstances.
The Action Plan for the Reconstruction and the
Development of Haiti presented by the Government is
the basis for the country’s reconstruction and a guide
for the international community’s efforts.
I should also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti,
Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his introduction to the Security
Council today of the semi-annual report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/200) on the implementation

10-33326

S/PV.6303

of the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and for having agreed
to continue his work as head of MINUSTAH, which he
has so conscientiously pursued since the tragic events
of 12 January.
I wish to thank all United Nations personnel in
Haiti for their excellent work in difficult conditions.
We owe them every possible support.
We also express our administration for the
exceptional tenacity of the people of Haiti in the face
of the terrible catastrophe of 12 January, and assure
them that we will continue to help them to overcome
this challenge.
We further thank Mr. Bill Clinton, United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti, for the dynamic and proactive
way in which he has discharged his mandate to
coordinate reconstruction activities in that country.
Austria associates itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union later in
this debate. Allow me to make the following comments
on behalf of my delegation.
MINUSTAH’s role in response to the tragic
events of 12 January has been exemplary. Even as it
suffered its own losses in the earthquake, it was able to
fulfil its mandate and to make a decisive contribution
to managing the crisis, ensuring security and stability,
and facilitating humanitarian assistance, in support of
the Haitian authorities. Austria recognizes in particular
the Mission’s efforts in the promotion of human rights
and the rule of law and the protection of civilians,
especially women and children. Austria shares the
Secretary-General’s assessment that the coming 12 to
18 months will be a period of high risk for Haiti,
during which security and protection objectives will
need to be pursued as vigorously as the organization of
the presidential, municipal and legislative elections and
the reconstruction and development of the country.
In the coming months, the coordination of
humanitarian assistance will be of primary importance.
Austria believes that the United Nations must continue
to play a key role in that regard, in close cooperation
with the Haitian authorities. Issues requiring
MINUSTAH’s special attention in this critical phase
will include the rule of law, good governance and the
protection of internally displaced persons (IDPs). In
that context, we welcome the various proposals made
by the Secretary-General in his semi-annual report on

10-33326

the future role of MINUSTAH. It will be essential to
preserve the United Nations integrated approach in the
five fields identified as critical.
Austria supports the recommendation that
MINUSTAH lead the international community’s efforts
in the area of electoral assistance. We also support the
role of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in coordinating and supervising the activities
of the United Nations system as a whole. We note the
Secretary-General’s request for an increase of 680 in
the ceiling of police personnel, which would ensure a
visible police presence in IDP camps. That measure
will help to protect the civilian population and to
maintain a safe and stable environment conducive to
the conduct of free and fair elections. Austria therefore
supports that request.
The police component of MINUSTAH plays a
key role in the protection of civilians and the
promotion of human rights. It is Austria’s view that
special attention will have to be paid to the needs of
the most vulnerable, including women and children,
and to measures to prevent sexual violence. With
respect to the promotion of the rule of law and the fight
against impunity, we back the Secretary-General’s
proposal to make MINUSTAH staff and seconded
experts available to assist the Government of Haiti in
its policing, judicial and correctional functions. It is
essential that we pursue our efforts in this critical area,
despite the losses and difficulties resulting from the
earthquake. The approach advocated by the SecretaryGeneral will allow us to strengthen the rule of law and
to guarantee the successful provision of State services,
despite the current challenges.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s
proposal to renew and step up MINUSTAH’s
commitment to mainstreaming. This will involve, inter
alia, the establishment of a social security network, the
protection of human rights, gender equality and the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009).
With respect to reconstruction efforts, I pay
tribute to the generosity of donor countries extended at
the conference held on 31 March to cover the financing
requirements of the Haitian Government’s Action Plan.
Austria has provided $8 million in financial and
humanitarian contributions, while Austrian citizens
have donated $45 million to Haiti.

19

S/PV.6303

I conclude by expressing my conviction that the
people and Government of Haiti will be able to
overcome the terrible tragedy that struck them on
12 January and to build the new Haiti for which we all
yearn. I assure them that the international community
will stand with them and help them in that very
important work.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would first like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2010/200) and
Special Representative Edmond Mulet for the
comprehensive briefing he has just provided. To
Mr. Mulet, let me also add our sincere gratitude for the
strong leadership he displays at the helm of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Indeed, Mr. Mulet assumed his duties at Haiti’s most
difficult hour, and he and his staff have done a most
commendable job in support of the Haitian people and
Government since then.
I would also like to extend a warm welcome to
Prime Minister Bellerive and to thank him for his
insightful presentation. His views and comments
provide most valuable guidance to our collective
efforts to help Haiti recover and rebuild.
It has been more than three months since Haiti
was struck by one of the worst natural disasters of its
history, but the enormous suffering there is still vividly
present in our minds and hearts. Indeed, the magnitude
of the earthquake, and the loss of human life and
infrastructural damage it has yielded, are neither
forgettable nor easily surmounted. The pictures we
have been shown today speak volumes about the
tragedy in a way that no words can better describe. In
fact, an earthquake of that magnitude would have
caused serious problems for any nation, but given
Haiti’s long-standing struggle for development and
stability, it had an even bigger impact.
As such, the resilience of the Haitian people in
the face of this terrible event is all the more
praiseworthy. As Mr. Mulet confirmed, Haitians have
proved to be much stronger and braver than anyone
could have imagined. In particular, it is quite admirable
that the security situation has remained relatively calm,
although most of the people have lost the little they had
in the way of savings and belongings. At this point, let
me praise once again the excellent job done by
MINUSTAH police and troops. In fact, the
international community in its broadest sense has
responded quickly and quite effectively to the

20

emergency situation in Haiti. Many countries
participated in the donors’ conference held last month
in New York and made generous offers for the
reconstruction of Haiti. On our part, Turkey has also
contributed to this process.
That said, draconian tasks remain in Haiti and the
international community should continue to assist the
Haitian people in the relief efforts and to support the
Haitian Government in the reconstruction phase. The
pledges made at the donors’ conference should be made
readily available whenever and wherever they are
needed, particularly in view of the upcoming hurricane
season and the critical importance of the next 12 to 18
months to relief and reconstruction efforts.
It is equally important to be able to translate the
generosity of the international community into
concrete peace and projects that will make the most
needed difference in the daily lives of Haitians and
return them to normalcy. In this context, the holding at
the earliest possible stage of the elections that were
scheduled for February is also of vital importance to
the future of Haiti and to the consolidation of the
institutions that are required for sustainable
development and the reconstruction effort.
The United Nations is at the heart of our
collective efforts in Haiti. We support the approach of
the Secretary-General, articulated around the five key
areas mentioned in his report. Within this vision,
MINUSTAH has a crucial role to play, as it has in Haiti
thus far. Indeed, despite the fact that the Mission itself
was badly impacted by the earthquake and lost many
valuable members, it continues to serve the Haitians
with
great
professionalism
and
dedication.
MINUSTAH should continue to implement its mandate
in all relevant areas, in particular in ensuring a secure
and safe environment, coordinating humanitarian
assistance and providing support to institutions. In this
regard, we endorse the recommendations of the
Secretary-General concerning the future role of
MINUSTAH and his call for a surge in its capabilities
and the scaling up of its activities within its mandate.
Crises often come with opportunities for new
beginnings. In Haiti, too, we have an opportunity to
emerge even stronger from the catastrophe that has
befallen the Haitians and to turn this dark moment into
a bright prospect. In this respect, we firmly support the
endeavours of the Haitian Government.

10-33326

S/PV.6303

In this respect, I have to say that the Action Plan
proposed by the Haitian Government is a valuable tool
in the long-term reconstruction efforts and has to be
thoroughly examined. After all, there is no doubt that
the Haitian people and Government are and should be
in the driving seat in this endeavour. Our responsibility
is to help them advance in the right direction without
any further setbacks.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for organizing this debate. I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his elaborate
briefing and outstanding leadership. I also thank JeanMax Bellerive, the Prime Minister of Haiti, for his
statement on behalf of the people of Haiti. We
commend the Special Envoy, President Clinton, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the staff of MINUSTAH for their efforts in assisting
the Government and the people of Haiti in delivering
basic services, disaster recovery and preparedness, and
mobilizing critically needed international support in
the aftermath of the devastating earthquake.
The Government and people of Haiti face
challenges in the task of reconstruction and recovery.
They have demonstrated remarkable resilience, and we
salute them for that. The international community has
given and pledged to significant support towards this
effort. It is critical that the pledges made be honoured
in order to help the Government of Haiti finance
critical expenses in the public sector. In this regard, we
welcome the formulation of the Action Plan for the
Reconstruction and the Development of Haiti worked
out by the Government of Haiti with the support of the
international community. We also welcome the $5
billion pledged during the international donors’
conference.
At this critical phase of recovery and
reconstruction, we would also like to emphasize the
importance of effective coordination among the United
Nations agencies and international actors. The role of
the Government will remain central, and it is important
that the United Nations and international actors work
closely with the Government. I was happy to hear the
Prime Minister give his compliments to the excellent
relationship between the Government and the people of
Haiti on the one hand, and the international
community, and especially the United Nations, on the
other.

10-33326

We commend the launching of cash-for-work
programmes shortly after the earthquake by the United
Nations Development Programme and its implementing
partners. This is a positive step towards creating shortterm employment for the unemployed, especially
young people. We welcome MINUSTAH’s community
labor-intensive watershed and canal rehabilitation
projects. We note that the most pressing need at this
time is for the provision of shelter and housing for over
1 million people, especially during the rainy season. It
is important to undertake adequate planning to
establish more durable shelter solutions and early
warning systems.
We note that, although the security situation in
the country remains generally calm, significant new
threats have arisen as a result of the earthquake,
including from former gang leaders who escaped from
prisons. There is a need for support for the
strengthening of the capacity of the Haitian security
forces to deal with these new emerging threats and
challenges. We salute MINUSTAH’s efforts, in
collaboration with UNICEF, in improving security and
protecting camps for internally displaced persons,
providing educational facilities and promoting
awareness of child trafficking.
We are grateful to the men and women of
MINUSTAH who, despite their difficulties and the
tragedy that befell them, have continued to play an
indispensable role in maintaining a secure and stable
environment.
Finally, we support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for the increase of 680 police
personnel, in addition to the force levels authorized in
resolution 1908 (2010).
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Japan.
I, too, would like to extend a warm welcome to
the presence of Prime Minister Bellerive of Haiti and
to convey the strong solidarity of my Government and
people to him.
I would also like to express my appreciation to
Mr. Mulet, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his informative briefing. We applaud his
courage and determination and that of his colleagues in
Haiti to stand and face the challenge of stabilizing and
reconstructing Haiti after the earthquake’s devastation.

21

S/PV.6303

The focus of the international support in Haiti is
now moving from the emergency stage to recovery and
reconstruction, but enormous challenges must be met
before full-scale reconstruction is launched. Such tasks
as removing debris, improving drainage, preparing
alternative sites for at-risk settlements and ensuring
access routes are prerequisites for reconstruction
activities and should be completed in an expeditious
manner.
There are high expectations of MINUSTAH in
terms of securing a safe and stable environment for
Haiti’s
reconstruction
efforts.
We
encourage
MINUSTAH to utilize its maximal capacity, within its
current mandate.
In response to the call to strengthen the
engineering capacity of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Japan
dispatched a Self-Defense Forces engineer squadron of
350 people. They have been engaged in such tasks as
building facilities in internally displaced persons
camps, repairing the road to the border with the
Dominican Republic, and removing debris from the
street. We are very pleased that the activities of the
Japanese engineering squadron are contributing to the
acceleration of the reconstruction process.
It is clear that we cannot reconstruct Haiti in the
absence of a safe security situation. We commend
MINUSTAH for its efforts in maintaining calm in the
country. We are grateful to troop- and policecontributing countries and financial contributors.
At the same time, we are concerned about
instances of sexual and gender-based violence in and
around internally displaced persons camps. The
presence in society of escaped inmates is also a source
of concern. We hope that MINUSTAH will make every
possible effort to improve the security environment and
support the capacity-building efforts of the Haitian
National Police.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/200). In view of the importance of maintaining
security, we support the recommendation of increasing
by 680 the number of police personnel. The SecretaryGeneral’s report emphasizes the need to scale up the
activities of MINUSTAH, including support to the
electoral process. We all support this effort.
Effective cooperation between the Government of
Haiti, the United Nations country team and the

22

international community is essential to implementing
the broader areas of the mandate of MINUSTAH. We
welcome the success of the donor’s conference held
one month ago, and we congratulate in particular the
Government of Haiti and the host Government and
organizations.
The sustained and long-term engagement of the
international community is essential to realizing Haiti’s
reconstruction. Japan will continue to support Haiti’s
own efforts for self-sustaining development. Our
support will place particular priority on the areas of
education, human resource development, health,
medical care and employment in rural areas.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): The
Uruguayan delegation, speaking on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Haiti, thanks Japan for its initiative to
organize this debate on the situation in Haiti and for
taking time to noting the progress carried out in the
area through the efforts of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The Group of Friends of Haiti welcomes the
presence of the Prime Minister of Haiti, Jean-Max
Bellerive, and reiterates the commitment of States
members of the Group to the reconstruction and
stabilization of the country. This debate highlights the
continued strong commitment of the Security Council
and the wider international community to the
stabilization process of Haiti.
The Group of Friends of Haiti wishes to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Edmond Mulet, for his leadership and
outstanding work, as well as for his comprehensive
briefing on MINUSTAH’s activities.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/200)
enables us to better understand the impact of the
devastating earthquake of 12 January, and underlines
the extraordinary efforts deployed by MINUSTAH and
the United Nations in Haiti. The Group of Friends of
Haiti recognizes that MINUSTAH will play a critical
role in creating the necessary conditions to provide
humanitarian assistance, stability and the infrastructure
needed for the total reconstruction of the country.

10-33326

S/PV.6303

The Group of Friends of Haiti shares the
Secretary-General’s assessment of the impact of the
12 January earthquake on the progress made in
previous years in the process of economic and political
stabilization. The earthquake not only destroyed the
infrastructure that had been built, but also generated
new obstacles to overcome. The Group recognizes that
the devastation has also presented opportunities in the
form of the support offered by the international
community and of the Government’s vision for a
decentralized and strengthened State, with improved
institutions and regional development.

collaboration that exists between the United Nations
and the Organization of American States, especially in
the areas in which we have exchanged views over the
past couple of weeks in terms of the mission that is
currently in Haiti and the mission I led there a couple
of days ago. In that sense, there is a lot of synergy
being built up, which can only bode well for the whole
process. We stand ready to play a role in this process.
We believe it is a role that is going to be
complementary to what the United Nations role has
been in the past, and I will come back to that in much
more detail.

The Group of Friends of Haiti welcomes the
Secretary-General’s report, which highlights the
ongoing contribution of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti to the stabilization and
peacebuilding in the country.

The role of the Organization of American States,
as agreed with the Government of Haiti, is basically in
three areas: governance, the strengthening and
modernization of State institutions, and capacitybuilding. In the first phase of this objective, there are
three very concrete areas in which we will provide
support on the basis of our own expertise. The first is
electoral support and assistance to the provisional
electoral council. The second is the continuation of the
project on civil registry, which is going to be critical in
that it will make available a voter list that will be
credible and acceptable to all political parties in Haiti.
The third is the modernization and establishment of the
cadastre. But as I said, I will speak today more on the
issue of the elections.

Finally, the Group wishes to reiterate its
commitment to the future of Haiti and to its
Government and people as they embark on the path of
reconstruction, peacebuilding, stabilization, recovery
and sustainable development.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Albert
Ramdin, Assistant Secretary General of the
Organization of American States.
Mr. Ramdin: I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for allowing the Organization of
American States (OAS) to take part in this debate. I
thank members of the Council and give special
recognition to the Prime Minister of Haiti, Mr. JeanMax Bellerive, who, together with President René
Préval, symbolizes the hope for the future of the
Haitian people. I thank, of course, our good friend
Ambassador Edmond Mulet for his statement.
The Organization of American States and the
Republic of Haiti, which was a founding member of
the Organization of American States, have had a very
long and meaningful relationship that has covered
many decades. Of course, in the current circumstances,
this relationship has taken on extra meaning, and we
are therefore very committed and ready to support
Haiti in overcoming some of the difficulties that it is
encountering at this point.
I want to share today more about the electoral
process and what the role of the Organization of
American States will be. Let me say from the
beginning that we very much appreciate the

10-33326

We welcome the statements made by President
Préval and Prime Minister Bellerive on many occasions
that, to avoid the establishment of a transitional
Government without the Parliament, there is a need for
the presidential, legislative and local elections to be
held in accordance with the Constitution. In our
mission from 8 to 10 April, we had the opportunity to
speak on this matter with many stakeholders in society,
and we have already shared these views with the
President.
I would like to share with the Council, if I may,
an element of the perspectives that we received and
that was shared by all the stakeholders. While there is
no discussion or debate on whether the elections
should be held, there is apparently a need for more
information and dialogue with regard to the process. I
think this is one of the factors in creating that platform,
so that challenges do not take place after the elections,
which could create instability. That is one of the things
that I wanted to convey to the Council following
discussions with civil society, the private sector and
political parties.

23

S/PV.6303

In terms of the role of the OAS specifically, given
that only seven months remain if elections are to take
place before the end of the year, it will be basically in
four areas. First, we will continue to monitor the
debate around the elections, including the issue raised
by Ambassador Mulet, namely, constitutional reform
and how it can take place. That would be very helpful
to the whole process in general.
Secondly, we will give high priority to producing
a voters’ list that is a more or less accurate reflection of
the electorate in Haiti. To that end, we will have to
reissue national identification cards to those who have
lost them. I think it is possible to do that. But we will
also have to at least start to clean up the system by
removing the names of those who have died.
Thirdly, we will have to identify a process for
re-registering those who have left their constituencies
and now live somewhere else, so that they can vote in
the appropriate constituencies. That is not such a great
difficulty for the presidential elections. But, certainly,
if that is not done correctly, it may pose a problem for
the senatorial elections.
Fourthly, we will also redouble our efforts to
support the National Identification Office. I have
already mentioned the efforts to be undertaken in that
regard in terms of the printing, distribution and
reissuance of national identification cards.
Lastly, we will support the Provisional Electoral
Council in training its staff to use software and in
establishing the tabulation centre for the day of the
elections. We will also assist it in the whole process of
reproducing the voters’ list, as we have done on
previous occasions.
Those are very concrete activities that we hope to
undertake in the coming six months. But for that to
happen, I think that it is important to recognize that
some political decisions need to be taken. I also think
that the sooner that those political decisions are taken,
the better. For, as the Prime Minister and the President
have announced, elections will be held. In the context
of the Haitian Constitution, the electoral law needs to
be amended if a different kind of electoral machinery is
going to be established. We are therefore awaiting
those decisions. From our perspective, the technical
preparations should start as soon as possible,
independent of the date that is going to be established.

24

As I announced earlier, I think there may be an
opportunity to engage with the broader society in terms
of understanding where the process is going to lead.
What I am basically saying is that, as much as possible,
we should try to mitigate challenges and tension after
the elections, so as to create a platform for social and
economic development and good governance, and to
deal with the issues that the Haitian people really want
to see addressed at this point in time.
As I have said already, our role is going to be
complementary to the role that the United Nations can
play. In that regard, we will cooperate very closely
with the United Nations under its leadership.
Let me also mention that the Organization of
American States works on the basis of three parameters
when it comes to Haiti. First of all, in all these
activities, we work on the basis of clear and visible
leadership from the Haitian authorities — the President
and the Prime Minister. In the context of the elections,
it is equally necessary to have very strong, clear and
visible leadership from the Haitian authorities and the
relevant institutions. The second is that we always
work in partnership with the international community
and the Haitian authorities. The third parameter on
which our activities are founded is that we only do
things that we can do, and therefore do not duplicate
what others may do much better.
In conclusion, I want to take this opportunity to
express our condolences to the United Nations for the
loss of so many of its staff during the earthquake. I
would especially like to recognize the enormously
valuable roles played in Haiti by Special
Representative Hédi Annabi, Deputy Special
Representative Luiz Carlos da Costa and the head of
the Elections Unit, Gerard Le Chevallier. For many
years, I had the pleasure and honour of working with
them personally on many occasions. We therefore also
share the sadness.
Tomorrow at the Organization of American
States, there will be a full day of meetings on Haiti. I
am pleased to say that, during a special session that we
have organized for tomorrow, the Foreign Minister of
Haiti will be present to speak. Also present will be the
Special Representative of the Caribbean Community,
former Prime Minister James Patterson, the United
Nations representative in Haiti, Ambassador Edmond
Mulet, and a high-level representative of the United
States. Following that, we will have several other

10-33326

S/PV.6303

activities. When tomorrow we commemorate the 100th
anniversary of the building of the Organization of
American States, we will do so in honour of Haiti and
to reaffirm the commitment of the OAS to Haiti now
and in the long term.
The President: I thank Mr. Ramdin for his
statement. We are very grateful for everything that the
Organization of American States is doing in Haiti.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, acting head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting the European Union (EU) to
participate in today’s debate on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and, in
particular, on its future role.
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
We have listened very carefully to the important
statements made by His Excellency Prime Minister
Bellerive and by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mulet.
Allow me first of all to pay solemn tribute to the
United Nations personnel in Haiti and, in particular, to
MINUSTAH staff, who unfortunately paid a all too
heavy price as a result of the earthquake of 12 January,
which devastated the country. I would like once again
to express my most sincere condolences to the families
of the victims and to the Government and the people of
Haiti.
Allow me also to congratulate Mr. Edmond Mulet
on his recent appointment as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Haiti. I also wish to very
warmly thank him for the essential work he is doing. I
should also like to thank United Nations Special Envoy
Bill Clinton and his team for their equally outstanding
work.
Whether through its military component, clearing
rubble and opening up primary roadways, or through
its police component, supporting the Haitian National
Police — or in other areas such as justice, prisons,

10-33326

human rights, protecting displaced persons, especially
women and children, in particular against sexual
violence, and awareness-raising campaigns —
MINUSTAH, working in close cooperation with the
Government of Haiti and other stakeholders on the
ground, has played a crucial role in ensuring stability,
security and social order under very difficult
circumstances.
At the New York donors conference on 31 March,
the Government of Haiti and the international
community committed themselves to the long-term
reconstruction of Haiti. We therefore meet today to
consider the role to be played by MINUSTAH in the
light of the recommendations made by the SecretaryGeneral in his report of 22 April (S/2010/200).
The EU welcomes the integrated approach
adopted by the United Nations, as set out in the report
of the Secretary-General, in the five areas proposed,
namely, political stability and elections; support for
humanitarian and reconstruction efforts; security,
human rights and the rule of law; State capacity and
decentralization; and human development. The
European Union also underscores the authority of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General over
all United Nations activities. Alongside United Nations
agencies, MINUSTAH has an essential role to play in
that approach. The EU hopes that MINUSTAH will be
provided with the means it needs to effectively
implement its mandate of responding to the country’s
immediate needs, in particular in the areas of elections
and security.
However, we must take a more expansive view.
The Action Plan presented to us by the Government of
Haiti at the 31 March conference covers a span of 10
years. Our challenge is therefore to find the best
balance between the immediate priorities identified in
the report of the Secretary-General and the mediumand long-term priorities set out in the Action Plan, so
as to build together a real future for the Haitian people.
In this way, and as the capacities of the Haitian
Government develop, we need to reexamine the tasks
of MINUSTAH so as to guarantee a gradual and
realistic transfer of responsibilities.
After the earthquake, the European Union
responded immediately to the appeals by the SecretaryGeneral and to the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 1908 (2010) aimed at strengthening
MINUSTAH by deploying troops and logistical

25

S/PV.6303

support, including helicopters, engineers and medical
supplies and personnel. At present, there are still many
troops from several European Union member States on
the ground, working in close cooperation with
MINUSTAH. Here, I wish to pay tribute to the four
Spanish soldiers who lost their lives in a helicopter
accident 12 days ago.
The EU, together with other actors, contributed to
the post-disaster needs assessment used in the
development of the Action Plan. On 31 March, during
the international conference in New York, the EU
announced one of the most significant contributions of
all of the donors present, totalling €1.235 billion.
Today, the EU is ready to continue working closely
with the Haitian Government, the United Nations
family and the main stakeholders to translate these
promises into a tangible reality.
In conclusion, the Haitian people need us, and we
need to be there by their side. But the Haitian people
are aware that it is up to them and to them alone to
chart and travel the path to their nation’s future. The
country belongs to them, and the role of the
international community is to support them in building
back better for the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Cuello Camilo (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): The Dominican Republic would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your commendable work as
President of the Security Council for the month of
April. In particular, we wish to thank you for the
highly valuable assistance your Government has
provided at this difficult time in Haiti.
The Dominican Republic welcomes the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime
Minister of Haiti, and expresses its gratitude for the
comprehensive briefing given by our friend,
Ambassador Edmund Mullet, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, who also introduced the highly
valuable report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2010/200).
The Dominican Republic commends the
Secretary-General for the leadership and commitment
to Haiti he has shown time and again, especially in the
aftermath of the devastating earthquake of 12 January,
whose resultant tragic human and material losses were

26

unprecedented for the United Nations system and for
the entire region. Through his efforts, the SecretaryGeneral has garnered the broadest support from the
international community.
The Dominican Republic agrees with the
recommendations the Secretary-General makes in
paragraph 52 of his report on MINUSTAH. Following
the earthquake that hit Haiti on 12 January,
MINUSTAH should broaden the scope of its existing
mandate to assist the Haitian authorities by fostering
political stability, coordinating and enabling emergency
aid efforts, maintaining a secure and stable
environment, assisting in the strengthening of Haitian
State capacity and in decentralization, and helping
Haiti build its human capital through the promotion of
a balanced social agenda.
As the representative of the United States said,
the cooperation of Organization of American States
(OAS) is essential for ensuring property rights and the
rights of individuals to elect and be elected. The
Dominican Republic therefore welcomes the statement
we have just heard from Ambassador Ramdin,
Assistant Secretary General of the OAS.
The
Dominican
Republic
believes
that
broadening the scope of the mandate of MINUSTAH as
proposed by the Secretary-General in paragraphs 49 to
75 of his report would be an appropriate tribute to the
thousands who lost their lives in a catastrophe whose
consequences could have been avoided had better
governance been in place. It is only with a functional
Government, a cohesive political system, a population
that enjoys employment and education and lives in
peace, and a civil society that complements rather
competes with the efforts of the Government that we
will be able move from emergency assistance to
reconstruction and from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
in Haiti.
In his report, the Secretary-General recognized
the logistical support provided by the Dominican
Republic to the international community’s emergency
assistance efforts for the people and the Government of
Haiti. While we are grateful for this recognition, the
Dominican Republic views the provision of such
support, following such a catastrophe, as nothing less
than our duty.
However, in the long term, a logistical support
centre should be established for the emergency
assistance needed to respond to the sorts of climatic

10-33326

S/PV.6303

and seismic natural disasters that will inevitably
continue to hit the Caribbean basin. As the SecretaryGeneral notes in paragraph 25 of his report, some 200
MINUSTAH staff are working temporarily in Santo
Domingo, carrying out functions that do not require
them to be physically present in Haiti. This presence is
the embryo of a possible initiative that would go
beyond the specific peacekeeping needs of Haiti, given
the challenge facing the whole region: to prevent,
mitigate and respond more quickly to the risk of
natural disasters in the future in Central America and
the Caribbean.
In view of the fact that the work being carried out
by the MINUSTAH staff in my country needs to be
placed within a legal framework, the Dominican
Republic urges the relevant departments of the United
Nations to finalize the details of the memorandum of
understanding by which this presence will be made
duly official, while an devising a significant
institutional mechanism for the management of
emergency operations from a country that has
demonstrated its willingness and commitment to do so.
The Dominican Republic welcomes the successful
and generous outcome of the Haiti donors conference
held at United Nations Headquarters on 31 March.
There is no doubt that the pledges made then will be
honoured in the near future given that the Interim
Haitian Reconstruction Commission is already in place,
under the joint direction of Prime Minister Bellerive
and President Clinton and with the World Bank as fiscal
agent.
The Dominican Republic has collaborated closely
with the Haitian authorities to draw up a new economic
development plan for Haiti. In this context, together we
held a preparatory technical conference in Santo
Domingo on 17 March to evaluate the needs
assessment, which was drawn up with the assistance of
the United Nations, as mentioned by the SecretaryGeneral in paragraph 16 of his report.
The Dominican Republic welcomes the emphasis
placed by the Secretary-General in paragraph 10 of his
report on the transition from the provision of
humanitarian aid to the creation of conditions to ensure
food security in Haiti. We urge changes in ancestral
slash-and-burn agricultural practices and efforts to
restore the fertility of the soil and resolve land
ownership issues through the adoption of a plan for
farming cooperatives. The Dominican Republic is also

10-33326

working on the installation of greenhouses in Haiti to
accelerate and ensure increased agricultural output and
productivity.
The Dominican Republic welcomes in particular
the priority given by the Secretary-General to building
human capital in Haiti. Only in that way will Haiti be
able to leave behind its status as a least developed
country — the only such country in the Western
Hemisphere.
Since 90 per cent of Haitian university
infrastructure collapsed during the earthquake, the
Dominican President, Leonel Fernández Reyna,
announced the construction of a new university in
Haiti, with capacity for 10,000 students and with the
latest equipment and information and communications
technology.
To conclude, the Dominican Republic will
continue in the long term to promote Haiti’s cause
internationally. Together with the Government of Haiti
and under the auspices of the European Union,
President Fernández Reyna will convene a world
summit on the future of Haiti, “Solidarity Beyond the
Crisis”, in Casa de Campo in the Dominican Republic
on 2 June. The Dominican Republic counts on the
representation of all United Nations Members there at
the highest levels. That would be the best way to
demonstrate that, in the wake of the crisis, we will
continue to work together to achieve the Haiti of our
dreams.
The President: I
representative of Canada.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. McNee (Canada) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank you, Sir, for having organized this
important meeting. I especially wish to thank Mr. JeanMax Bellerive, Prime Minister of Haiti, for his
presence here today. I also acknowledge the presence
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Edmond Mulet, and thank him for having agreed
once again to represent the United Nations in Haiti in
very difficult and challenging circumstances.
Haiti was a top priority of Canada’s foreign and
security policy even before the catastrophic
earthquake. Canada is the second-largest donor of
development assistance to Haiti and the largest per
capita donor. Our humanitarian efforts in the aftermath
of the earthquake were Canada’s greatest ever in
response to a natural disaster.

27

S/PV.6303

The events of 12 January took a heavy toll on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). Still, the Mission has carried on,
contributing invaluably to the relief effort and working
with the Government of Haiti and the international
community to mitigate the effects of the disaster on
Haiti’s people.
For
that
reason,
Canada
commends
MINUSTAH’s efforts and encourages it to continue to
work for the Haitian population alongside the
Government. Given the new reality in Haiti, Canada
believes that MINUSTAH will continue to play a
crucial role as we work collectively to put Haiti back
on track towards long-term prosperity. As the Canadian
Minister of Foreign Affairs stated at the 31 March
conference, our vision for Haiti is that of a country
built on solid foundations of security, sovereignty, the
rule of law, economic prosperity, equality, inclusion
and social well-being.
With the completion of the post-disaster needs
assessment, the donors’ conference and the release of
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/200), we
believe it is time to reiterate our support for the work
of MINUSTAH. Canada welcomes this opportunity to
examine how to best strengthen the Mission’s role in
support of the Government of Haiti in achieving this
common vision.
In the immediate aftermath of the 12 January
earthquake, the Council authorized in its resolution
1908 (2010) an increase of 2,000 troops and 1,500
police officers to support urgent recovery,
reconstruction and stability efforts. The SecretaryGeneral has now recommended an expanded surge
effort to support ongoing relief efforts, prevent the
deterioration of public order and reinforce the authority
of the Government of Haiti. Canada considers the
integrated approach proposed by the Secretary-General
to be an appropriate framework for the conduct of the
Mission over the next 18 to 24 months.
As the Council considers the Secretary-General’s
proposals, Canada would like to highlight two
particularly important elements. First, Canada
recognizes the need for interim support to Haitian
institutions and supports enhanced co-location and
decentralization programmes. The Secretary-General
has also recommended that MINUSTAH use its
resources to provide direct logistical support and
technical expertise to the Government of Haiti. Given

28

the extent of the difficulties inherent in the loss of a
third of the bureaucracy and a significant portion of
State infrastructure, a focused and deliberate approach
to capacity-building is essential.
(spoke in English)
Haitian institutions have suffered a serious blow
at a crucial phase in their development and require
exceptional efforts to maintain their ability to deliver
services for Haitians, particularly outside of Port-auPrince. Important work has been done in supporting
Haitian institutions and the progress achieved thus far
need not be lost.
Also, while acknowledging the need to assist the
Government of Haiti in restoring, sustaining and
decentralizing service delivery, the international
community must also recognize the continuing
importance of aligning its support with the priorities of
the Haitian Government. As social and political
stability are restored, Haitian institutions will gradually
reassert their ability to carry out their mandates. In the
interim, the onus is on MINUSTAH and other partners
to engage constructively and preserve the authority of
the host Government.
We must work to keep our activities aligned with
Haitian priorities with a view to transitioning all
governance functions back to Haitian authorities once
the immediate need has passed. We are collectively
committed to building the long-term institutional
capacity of Haiti, not simply the maintenance of shortterm public order. Again, in this way we are well
served by a strong mandate and a dedicated community
of partners.
Canada supports the request for more resources,
including additional police, to strengthen the Mission’s
work in Haiti. In this context, Canada would also like
to stress the need to regularly assess the composition of
surge resources to ensure that they remain appropriate
to evolving circumstances on the ground. We look
forward to the Secretary-General’s follow-up reports
on the progress achieved during the surge period.
In conclusion, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti is one of the most important
reflections of the collective commitment of the
international community to Haiti’s reconstruction. It is
for this reason that Canada has increased its total
commitment of police officers to MINUSTAH from
100 to 150. We are confident that the gains we saw in

10-33326

S/PV.6303

Haiti before the earthquake have not all been lost and
that Haiti is capable of building back better with the
help of the international community.
The President: I give
representative of Colombia.

the

floor

to

the

Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and your team
on your effective work in the presidency of the
Security Council during the month of April. My
delegation appreciates your initiative of convening this
debate, as well as the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/200) on the issue of Haiti in the
aftermath of the earthquake that took place in Port-auPrince on 12 January. We welcome the presence of
Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime Minister of Haiti, as
well as the Action Plan presented by the Haitian
Government.
My delegation wishes to convey a message of
solidarity and hope to the Government and people of
Haiti. By joining in the emergency assistance and
reconstruction work, we pay tribute to those who
perished in the tragedy, including the staff of the
United Nations peacekeeping mission.
The timely action of the Security Council in
adopting resolution 1908 (2010) following the natural
disaster, reaffirms the relevance and contribution of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) to the stability of Haiti. I wish to
acknowledge, in particular, the work, broad experience
and knowledge of Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations Edmond Mulet, who has now
been entrusted with the difficult responsibility of
leading MINUSTAH.
Colombia supports the recommendations made in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/200) concerning
support for the electoral process in Haiti, the
reconfiguration of the military component of
MINUSTAH, the expansion of its police component,
and action to strengthen border controls. We agree with
the emphasis placed on the lead role that MINUSTAH
should play in coordinating international electoral
assistance to the Government of Haiti in the holding of
municipal, legislative and presidential elections, which
must be held before 7 February 2011, the scheduled
date for the transfer of power. Colombia supports the
efforts to ensure that this democratic exercise is free,
impartial and inclusive.

10-33326

We also support the initiative of reconfiguring the
military component of MINUSTAH, with an emphasis
on deploying military engineers to support the
reconstruction of the country’s infrastructure.
Strengthening the institutional architecture of Haiti is
as important as contributing to its physical
reconstruction. In that regard, the Haitian National
Police have a crucial role to play in establishing a
climate of security and stability that helps to strengthen
State authority and institution-building.
The Secretary-General’s initiative to increase the
number of MINUSTAH police personnel is therefore
appropriate. The support that those additional troops
can provide to the Haitian National Police in its task of
providing security and organizing its work in line with
the needs of the local communities, in particular the
displaced communities, is very important.
The challenge of transnational organized crime is
particularly significant. Security Council resolution
1892 (2009) indicates that the capacity of the Haitian
National Police to address illegal activities in the
border area must be strengthened. Such work requires
particular attention in the context of the country’s
increased vulnerability to illicit drug trafficking as a
result of the earthquake. In that regard, Colombia
approves of the recommendations concerning
MINUSTAH’s provision of training and specialized
technical knowledge in support of the Haitian National
Police’s efforts to implement an integrated approach to
border management.
During the second half of 2009, the Haitian
authorities and the leadership of MINUSTAH received
recommendations from a high-level delegation of the
Colombian National Police, which carried out an
assessment of the institutional structure of the Haitian
National Police. That assessment proposes actions that
would have a positive impact on security conditions,
such as providing mobility resources to the Haitian
National Police, in particular air and ground transport,
that would enable it to conduct operations in a timely
way. The relevance of those conclusions is of greater
significance
in
the
current
circumstances.
Strengthening the Haitian National Police is a step in
the right direction and a response to the current
challenges, in particular the fight against crime, the
sophisticated organization of which requires a
comprehensive police response.

29

S/PV.6303

My country wishes to reiterate its commitment to
MINUSTAH, to which it currently contributes a total
of 34 police officers specialized in the fight against
transnational organized crime. We reiterate our support
for the work being done in response to the disaster and
the reconstruction challenges. The Government of
Colombia, aware of the magnitude of the tragedy, has
provided $4 million in assistance to be used in 2010 to
help in Haiti’s recovery. Contributing to overcoming
the consequences of the tragedy also helps foster
conditions favourable to MINUSTAH’s work and the
achievement of lasting stability in the brother country
of Haiti.
The President: I call on the representative of
Guatemala.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We are still stunned by the unprecedented situation in
Haiti in the face of the terrible catastrophe of
12 January, with its tragic material and, above all,
human cost to the Government and people of Haiti and
the United Nations. It was undoubtedly a watershed
moment that requires us to reflect on everything related
to Haiti, including the United Nations Mission, in
terms of the needs generated by the new situation.
One matter that remains abundantly clear is that
if a possible exit strategy for the Mission was starting
to be considered prior to 12 January, from that date we
have had to focus on how to strengthen it and to
consider making adjustments to its mandate. The
immediate background is characterized by a sudden
weakening of the national institutional structure and an
exponential increase in the demand for the civilian and
security services provided by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) since its
establishment.
Given that scenario, we thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the realities on the ground
(S/2010/200), as well as his proposals for addressing
the situation in the coming months. We also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Edmond Mulet, for his briefing and convey to him our
admiration and respect for having accepted the
enormous challenge that he and his colleagues are
confronting in helping the Haitian people and
Government to overcome the difficult situation they
are now facing. We are proud to have participated in
MINUSTAH since its establishment and, as the report
points out, Guatemala was one of the first countries to

30

respond to the request contained in resolution 1908
(2010) for additional troops.
I would like to make the following brief remarks
regarding the Secretary-General’s report.
First, identifying the key areas referred to in the
report is a significant starting point. However, we note
that those five key areas are not new, but recurring and
unique to the specific Haitian situation. Fulfilling them
will require intense coordination among the various
national and international actors and will be subject to
different development and implementation phases. In
that regard, we should also seek to ensure the
appropriate timing and sequencing among those
priorities within an integrated strategic framework.
Secondly, once priorities have been set, we also
need to ensure that there are resources to back them up.
In particular, the pledges made at the 31 March
international donors conference must be fulfilled, along
with those made in response to the Flash Appeal for
Haiti. We must not forget how important it is to follow
up on these commitments; the next summit of heads of
State or Government, to be held in Santo Domingo,
will be an opportunity to do so.
Thirdly, with regard to the future role of
MINUSTAH, we believe that, without losing sight of
its fundamental objectives, the Mission can undertake
additional reconstruction tasks and intensify its
complementary role in recovery activities. But the
Mission cannot and should not replace the State in its
primary role and responsibilities. We must recall that
without political will at the national level any United
Nations involvement will face major obstacles in
achieving success and in maintaining a safe and secure
environment. For that reason, political stability is
absolutely crucial. We believe that the country should
resume the national dialogue that was under way
before the earthquake, in order to build trust and
political consensus, including with respect to the
preparation of successful elections.
Fourthly, the report sets out interesting proposals
in the sphere of the rule of law and security
institutions. Possibly, the existing mandate might not
allow for the implementation of all of them. Hence, we
recognize that restoring the rule of law is a
precondition for the Government to guarantee full
enjoyment of the Haitian people’s human rights. But
we warn against yielding to the temptation to create
new mechanisms unless they are absolutely necessary.

10-33326

S/PV.6303

Rather, we should build on our experience of what
works and build our capacity to ensure a more
predictable, coherent and effective approach to support.
Finally, we are encouraged by the conclusion
reached by the United Nations Haiti Integrated
Strategic Planning Group, that the January earthquake
had not destroyed the gains made in the past few years,
but that it had damaged them and created new
obstacles. We are especially concerned about the
situation of internally displaced persons and about the
coming rainy season. But it is undeniable that the
United Nations presence in Haiti has once again made
a crucial difference to that country.
In conclusion, I wish to acknowledge the
outstanding performance of the outgoing Force
Commander, Major General Floriano Peixoto Vieira
Neto, and to welcome the new Force Commander,
Major General Luiz Guilherme Paul Cruz. We reaffirm
our full support for MINUSTAH and urge us all to stay
the course for the sake of Haiti and of the United
Nations itself.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Rodríguez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
endorses the statement made by the representative of
Uruguay on behalf of the group of Friends of Haiti.
My delegation congratulates you, Mr. President,
on your initiative to convene this debate on the
situation in Haiti, giving us an opportunity for an
exchange of views on the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2010/200). We welcome the
presence of Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime Minister of
Haiti.
We thank Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, for
his detailed briefing, and we congratulate him on his
recent appointment. We are convinced that under his
well-known leadership and thanks to his tireless efforts
the work of MINUSTAH will be strengthened in
helping meet the great challenges facing the Haitian
nation.
The Secretary-General’s lucid and powerful
account of the situation in Haiti following the
devastating earthquake of 12 January leads us to the
conclusion that there is a unquestionable need for
MINUSTAH to continue playing its important role in

10-33326

support of all recovery and reconstruction efforts in
Haiti. Let us recall that, last year, the mandate review
incorporated suggestions by the Secretary-General; in
the light of current circumstances, these are even more
timely for strengthening MINUSTAH’s presence. They
are being implemented: here, I confirm that Peru will
contribute an additional infantry company of 150
troops, which will help with security tasks related to
humanitarian relief efforts to meet the priority needs of
the Haitian people.
My delegation takes note of the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his recent report and
observes that they have been endorsed by the United
Nations Haiti Integrated Strategic Planning Group.
Clearly, one vital goal is to build the institutional
capacity of the Haitian Government, which has been
badly hit. We consider that, in the main, national actors
must be the true protagonists in developing and
implementing the reconstruction and recovery
programme. All activities and cooperation contributing
to the Haitian Government’s State-building process
must be aimed at closing the strategic gap involving
weak institutional capacity and a lack of human and
material resources, in order to effectively and speedily
meet the needs of the Haitian people.
In order to attain that goal, we need to address
three areas with a direct impact on the current Haitian
recovery and reconstruction process: governance,
security and development. Here, there must be a just
balance that does not give priority to one area over the
others.
Beyond all of the international community’s
initiatives in cooperation with the Government and the
people of Haiti to improve the grave economic and
social situation, my delegation believes that no effort
should be spared in encouraging close cooperation
between Haiti’s public and private sectors, in order to
bolster the implementation of needed institutional
reforms in many areas. It is they who should be the
main actors in the work of the Interim Haitian
Reconstruction Commission, which, as indicated in the
report of the Secretary-General, has already been
endorsed by the legislature and is being established. A
strategic alliance between Haiti’s public and private
sectors can create a virtuous circle that will help
strengthen State capacity and ultimately ensure the
stability and security of that sister Caribbean nation.

31

S/PV.6303

We are convinced that, with joint efforts by all
actors committed to the process of Haitian
reconstruction and State-building, the Government and
the people of Haiti — with their acknowledged ability
to overcome adversity — will decisively and with
optimism meet the challenges in order to guarantee
their country’s sustainable development. Here, I wish
once again to reaffirm Peru’s firm and steadfast
commitment to contributing to the recovery, stability
and development of Haiti.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Limeres (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
having given us the opportunity to participate in this
meeting to discuss the present situation and the
challenges facing the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in the light of the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/200).
Allow me also to thank Mr. Edmond Mulet,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti, for his statement and above all for his
praiseworthy work as head of the Mission. My
delegation would like to align itself with the statement
made by the representative of Uruguay on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti, to which we would just like
to add some brief additional comments.
As we have said on previous occasions, we
believe that the presence of MINUSTAH prevented the
tragedy of the earthquake from giving rise to incidents
that would have further worsened the situation of the
Haitian population, because it served as a fundamental
stabilizing element. We consider that MINUSTAH
should continue to be a factor for the permanent
consolidation of a climate of security and stability that
will help to build the institutional capacity of the
Haitian State, which is necessary to ensure the start of
a new phase of peacebuilding and economic and social
development in Haiti.
Consideration of the future role of MINUSTAH is
linked to the planning of assistance, reconstruction and
development in Haiti. In that regard, we believe that
two basic principles need to be respected. First of all,
we consider that it is the Government and the people of
Haiti that must decide their own future. Secondly, we
are convinced that the United Nations has a central role
to play in coordinating international assistance to Haiti.

32

Thus, while we are still analysing the details of
its content, we welcome the Secretary-General’s latest
report, especially the idea that MINUSTAH should
adopt a comprehensive approach in the five priority
areas indicated in the report. We believe that this
integrated approach will respect the principles I
mentioned, especially with regard to electoral and
humanitarian assistance, where we believe the
Organization’s coordinating role is essential.
In addition, we share the Secretary-General’s idea
of reconfiguring the military component of the Mission
so that as the situation evolves there will be a larger
number of military engineers to contribute to
reconstruction work.
Regarding the strengthening of the Mission’s
police component, I would like to recall that since
before the earthquake Argentina, together with other
countries of the Americas, was actively encouraging
regional police cooperation with Haiti in order to help
develop the institutional capacities of the Haitian State.
We also believe that this cooperation mechanism
should continue within MINUSTAH, because that
would enhance the Mission’s contribution to the
professional training of the Haitian National Police.
Argentina announced a significant contribution at
the recent donors conference for Haiti. That is in
addition to our efforts to help build human capital in
Haiti. For example, we are considering the possibility
of cooperation in education and in the recovery of
cultural assets. We are also working on strengthening
and expanding the triangular South-South cooperation
programme for the production of one’s own fresh
food — the Pro-Huerta project — which prior to the
earthquake consisted of a grass-roots social network
with more than 80,000 participants, 1,823 promoters
and a Haitian technical team of 23 agronomists. We
hope to reach a million participants in the programme
throughout Haiti within five years, giving the people of
Haiti the wherewithal to build their own future.
Let me conclude by saying that we are working in
Haiti in the hope that the day will come when the
Mission’s work will be finished and the presence of the
United Nations and the international community will
no longer be necessary because the people of Haiti will
be able to take full charge of their own destiny. There
is an urgent need to make progress in the postearthquake reconstruction of Haiti, at the same time
working to build the country’s institutional capacity

10-33326

S/PV.6303

and
improve
coordination
with
international
cooperation to bring it into line with the priorities of
the Government of Haiti and to increase its
effectiveness and visibility. We believe that the United
Nations has a fundamental role to play in that respect.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation is grateful for the opportunity to
participate in this debate, which enables me to reaffirm
Spain’s full commitment to the people and the
Government of Haiti, especially in the difficult current
circumstances following the tragic earthquake that
devastated the country on 12 January. We share the
pain of the whole nation and of the United Nations
family at the loss of so many human lives and the
suffering and privations of the entire population. We
are obliged to do everything possible to ensure that the
sacrifice and pain will not have been in vain.
Fortunately, we are responding. We took a great
step forward with, inter alia, the donors conference
held on 31 March in New York, at which the Haitian
Government presented its Action Plan for the
Reconstruction and the Development of Haiti. The
response of the international community was
extraordinarily generous. At that event, the Spanish
Government announced a significant contribution
which made us the third largest bilateral donor in Haiti.
The New York conference will be continued at the
Santo Domingo summit on 2 June.
Today’s debate in the Security Council, the first
since the earthquake, is another step in the right
direction, and we think that it is highly appropriate that
it is taking place in the presence of the Prime Minister
of Haiti, Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, and with his
participation.
My delegation fully supports — it cannot be said
any other way — the statement made by the
representative of the delegation of the European Union.
Allow me add several elements from our point of view.
We have closely studied the new report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2010/200), issued
on 22 April, and we support its main recommendations.
I would like to take the opportunity to give particular
thanks to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his briefing today. I

10-33326

would also like to acknowledge the extraordinary work
that he and his team are doing so diligently and in such
difficult conditions.
We support the adoption of a comprehensive
approach by the entire United Nations system in the
five priority areas mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. We believe that such an approach
should have MINUSTAH at its core and — as is the
case now — should be implemented in close
coordination with the United Nations country team and
with all the international community actors present in
Haiti. We think also that adopting a comprehensive
approach could make modifying the current
MINUSTAH mandate unnecessary, as it seems wide
and flexible enough to face the new challenges with
any adaptations to its concept of operations that might
be appropriate. We think that MINUSTAH’s activities
could be adjusted as suggested by the SecretaryGeneral, including an increase in its police component,
in order to enhance its activities in the short and
medium term at this very delicate time; Mr. Mulet
referred to this in his briefing.
As is well known, Spain contributed to
strengthening MINUSTAH immediately after the
12 January earthquake. We did that in two ways, first
through the Mission itself, by sending 23 Guardia Civil
officers to join the police contingent. This increases the
number of Spanish police personnel in that contingent
to 58. We have also dispatched the amphibious vessel
Castilla, with 450 military personnel on board, to
provide humanitarian assistance, in the areas of health
care and engineering, in constant coordination with the
Haitian Government and MINUSTAH.
I take this opportunity to express my gratitude for
the condolences offered with respect to the loss of four
Spanish soldiers on 16 April in a helicopter accident as
they worked to carry out their mission.
Spain will continue to support MINUSTAH in the
coming phase, on the basis of the comprehensive
approach proposed by the Secretary-General, which we
hope will be endorsed by the Security Council. We are
giving careful study to the possibility of strengthening
MINUSTAH in areas for priority action, in particular
those related to security, human rights and the rule of
law, within the broader purpose of helping Haiti to
fully and effectively build its institutional capacity.
Here, I reaffirm the importance that Spain
attaches to MINUSTAH’s role in supporting the process

33

S/PV.6303

of reforming the Haitian National Police with a view to
ensuring effective and sustained security in the country.
Maintaining stability is at the heart of MINUSTAH’s
mandate, and it is key to the reconstruction and
development efforts to which we committed ourselves
at the 31 March conference at United Nations
Headquarters. In the shorter term, stability is key also
in successfully implementing the demanding political
and electoral timetable, with major milestones for this
year, such as the conclusion of the constitutional reform
process and the holding of legislative and presidential
elections at the end of the year.
We are therefore pleased at the SecretaryGeneral’s dispatch of a technical mission to work with
the Haitian authorities on the preparation of the
electoral process, with due international assistance led
by the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mrs. Juul (Norway): Let me first thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting. My
special thanks go to Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime
Minister of Haiti, for being here and addressing the
Council today.
The earthquake in Haiti was a humanitarian
disaster striking a people living in extreme poverty and
distress. We are truly impressed by the extraordinary
strength of the Haitian people in overcoming the crisis
and looking forward. We commend the Haitian
Government for taking the lead in developing the
national Action Plan for the Reconstruction and the
Development of Haiti.
It is more important than ever that international
efforts for reconstruction be well coordinated, under
the leadership of the Haitian Government and the
United Nations. Despite terrible losses, the United
Nations has done a remarkable job under difficult
circumstances following the earthquake. We would like
to express our full support to the Special Envoy,
Mr. Bill Clinton, and to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr, Edmund Mulet, who are
leading the international efforts.
Immediately following the earthquake that struck
Haiti on 12 January, Norway provided $35 million in
emergency relief. At the international donors conference
on 31 March, Norway announced long-term assistance
to Haiti with an additional $100 million over the next

34

four years, in within three areas: disaster preparedness
and sustainable rural development; political dialogue
and confidence-building; and protection of women and
children from violence, sexual abuse and trafficking.
I would like to draw attention to a few important
aspects regarding the protection of civilians in Haiti.
The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the Haitian National Police suffered
great losses in the earthquake. Therefore it is
encouraging to see how well the Haitian National
Police, MINUSTAH and local actors have cooperated
in tackling concrete protection issues after the
earthquake. But the challenges ahead are massive.
Some 2 million internally displaced persons
(IDPs) are living in 1,300 IDP sites now, before the
rainy season and the hurricanes set in. Almost 80 per
cent of these people live in camps without proper camp
management. We have received reports about rape and
other forms of sexual abuse of women and children in
the camps. Simultaneously, large numbers of dangerous
criminals are still at large after the massive prison
escape following the earthquake — criminals who had
been captured following effective MINUSTAH action
before the earthquake. The situation is truly dramatic.
Haitian rule of law structures will have to be
strengthened in order to protect Haiti’s population,
including in the IDP camps and sites. The National
Police will continue to need our support in doing this,
and all possible measures should be taken to strengthen
its ability to protect women and children who are
vulnerable to sexual exploitation and violence and
trafficking.
Norway
therefore
fully
supports
the
recommendation by the Secretary-General to
strengthen the police elements of MINUSTAH to be
able to confront these massive challenges. As a
concrete measure of support, Norway will provide
substantial financial support to the MINUSTAHHaitian National Police programme to strengthen
National Police gender crimes units.
Furthermore, and as soon as positions and
personnel can be matched, we intend to nominate
highly qualified Norwegian police officers with
relevant expertise in the field of sexual and gender
based violence, as well as trafficking issues. A dialogue
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations will
be initiated immediately to match our capabilities with
MINUSTAH’s needs on the ground.

10-33326

S/PV.6303

As a final point, I would like to underline that all
the efforts the international community undertakes in
Haiti today — even those addressing immediate
concerns — should have an element of capacitybuilding in mind. To achieve longer-term sustainability
for the Haitian National Police and other Haitian rule
of law structures, continued and close cooperation
between MINUSTAH and Haiti’s authorities will be
needed at all times.

There should be no doubt that Haiti is in the lead,
from early on. It is their country, their future and
ultimately their responsibility that we as the
international community are here to support.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

10-33326

35
