UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR

211fh
NEW

MEETING:

15 JANUARY

@@@ LI;BRP

a\’

MAY 4 1982

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

11) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Telegram dated 3 January 1979 from the Deputy Prime Minister in charge of
Foreign Affairs of Democratic
Kampuchea
to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 13003) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..‘............................

1

Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/21

WPV.2 111

$'; !.! p;j

[,,f$

NOTE

.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures.:~Mention~of.such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.+
‘ fi (*~~ocuments of the Security .C.ouncil (symbol W...) are normally published in quarterly Subpiei&nis of the”Offi&aT&cordr of the Securi@ Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Eeckions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2111th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
Presidrm~:

Mr. Donald 0. MILLS

(Jamaica).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway,
Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

15 January 1979, at 10.30 a.m.
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
procedure.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Yankov (Bulgaria)
and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the places reservedfor
them at the side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2111)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. Telegram dated 3 January 1979 from the Deputy
Prime Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs of Democratic Kampuchea to the President of the Security
Council (S/13003)

The meeting was ca&d to order at 11.30 am
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Telegram dated 3 January 1979 from the Deputy Prime
Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs of Democratic
Kampuchea to the President of the Security Council
(S/13003)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the preceding meetings, I invite the delegation of
Democratic Kampuchea to be seated at the Council table. I
invite the representatives of Australia, Cuba, the German
Democratic Republic, Hungury, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Mongolia, New Zealand, The Philippines, Poland, Singapore, The Sudan, Thailand and Viet Nam to take the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

At the invitation of the President, the delegation of Deme
cratic:Kamkpuchea took a place at the Council tab/e: Mr.
Anderson (Australia), Mr. Roa Koun’(Cu.ba), Mr. Zachmann
(German Democratic Republic), Mr. Halrfasz (Hung~), Mr.
Anwar Sani (Indonesia), Mr Abe (Japan), Tan Sri Zaiton
lbrahim (Malaysia), Mr. Dashtseren (Mongolia), Mr. Francis
(New Zeahmd), Mr. Yang0 (Philippines), Mr. Jaroszek
(Poland), Mr. Koh (Singapore), Mr. SahIoul (Sudan), Mr.
Guna-Kasem (Thailand) and Mr. Ha Van L.au (Viet Nmn)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Bulgaria and Yugoslavia in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion. In accordance with

3. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/13027, which contains the text of a
draft resolution sponsored by Bangladesh, Bolivia, Gabon,
Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria and Zambia.
4. Mr. BISHARA
(Kuwait): At this juncture it is an
honour for me, on behalf of the sponsors of the draft
resolution in document S/13027, to introduce ‘that draft.
The original sponsors are Bangladesh, Bolivia, Gabon,.
Kuwait, Nigeria and Zambia, joined now by Jamaica, your
own country, Mr. President. This makes it a non-aligned
draft resolution. It is a draft resolution submitted by the
non-aligned members of the Council, which constitute 45
per cent of the membership. They come from three continents, and seven regions. In fact they represent the three
largest continents in the world - Asia, Africa and Latin
America. The sponsors have different cultures, languages
and political systems, but they are united in their unshakable adherence to the Charter of the United Nations and to
the policy of non-alignment. The draft resolution, therefore, reflects the conviction of the sponsors in the principles
set out therein. These principles are the basis of intemational law; they are, in fact, the essence of the Charter. The
foreign policies of the sponsors are guided and governed by
these principles. None of the sponsors is a member of a
military bloc. All depend in their foreign relations on the
established norms of international relations. This fact gives
the draft a sense of purpose and force.
5. In the draft there is no condemnation of any party.
There is no accusation against anybody. It is, in my view,
non-polemical. It is restrained, it is responsible and,it is
direct. It addresses itself to the fundamental principles of the
Charter.
6. The situation in Kampuchea is not normal. Confusion
and hostilities continue unabated. It is therefore logical to
have a reference in the draft resolution to the abnormal
situation in Kampuchea which gives rise to serious concern
about its consequences to international peace and security.
7. The third preambular paragraph refers to the obligation of Member States to resolve disputes by peaceful

means. This is the language of the Charter, which every
Member State has pledged to respect.
8. Operative paragraph 1 underscores the sponsors’ sup
port for the preservation of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of every State. The absence
of respect for the sovereignty of States generates chaos and
creates instability. This is a cardinal principle of the Charter. In fact, it is the heartbeat of international law.
9. Paragraph 2 calls upon foreign forces to stop hostilities
and to withdraw from Kampuchea. There is a call for a
cease-fm and withdrawal. The paragraph addressed itself
specifically to the situation inside Kampuchea. Without a
cease-fire, the war will continue with the unavoidable threat
to the independence of neighbouring States and the inescap
able emergence of power politics. Armed hostilities will
undoubtedly tempt many to fish in troubled waters in order
to obtain political gains. Without a cease-tire and withdrawal, there is no guarantee that the war will not spill over the
borders to engulf the whole area. To forestall this dreadful
possibility there must be a cease-fire and there must be
withdrawal of foreign forces.
10. The goal and aim is stability in the region. We cannot
bring about that long-awaited stability so long as there is
violation of the principle of non-interference in internal
affairs. That is why the reference to this cherished principle
of the Charter is reaffirmed in a separate paragraph. The
sponsors are of the opinion that if the parties concerned
adhere strictly to this principle they will contribute sign&
cantly to the stability of the region.

know well in the United Nations, ‘I am sure that you will
perform the duties of the presidency in an exemplary
manner.
15. We welcome the fact that the Council has swiftly
decided to take up the issue for consideration. That the issue
is of vital significance to the maintenance of international
peace and security has been amply demonstrated by the
deliberations so far conducted in this chamber. It has
become clear that the positions held by the parties directly
involved are sharply conflicting ones and that views among
member countries on how the Council should treat the
problem are markedly divided. With the sincerest hope that
our participation in the debate can make some contribution
to the work of the Council, my delegation is prompted to
state the following.
16. Japan is intensely concerned with the situation that
prevails in Kampuchea since the end of last year. The
escalation of the military conflicts between the two IndoChinese countries deep within Kampuchean territory has
caused immeasurable loss of human life and brought extensive devastation to the land of Kampuchea. That situation is
still going on. As one of the Asian countries which have long
cherished close relations with the countries of Indo-China,
we cannot but view the situation with great pain. Our bitter
disappointment is all the greater because it had so often
been stated that the countries in Indo-China, having been
relieved of the lengthy wars, would devote themselves to the
task of reconstruction and development, maintaining peaceful relations with all the neighbouring countries in SouthEast Asia.

11. Finally, there is a request to the Secretary-General to
submit a report on the implementation of the resolution
within two weeks. The sponsors believe that the complexity
and the grave nature of the situation in Kampuchea warrant
a time frame for the submission of the report. It underscores
the sense of urgency that is essential in order to make it
possible to contain the problem and prevent a sharp deterioration in the situation inside Kampuchea. It is up to the
Secretary-General to determine the manner in which he sees
fit to submit the report. He could send a special envoy. It
should be left to hi discretion.

17. A large number of Asian countries consider that the
current sit&ion constitutes a threat to peace, stability and
security not only in South-East Asia but in Asia as a whole.
Japan shares their profound misgivings over the situation.

12. It is the hope of the sponsors that the draft resolution
of the non-aligned will obtain the strongest support of as
many members as possible. The draft resolution has been
critic&d as being mild; it does not satisfy even some of its
sponsors, but what is important is that it retains fundamental principles, and therefore commends itself to the positive
consideration of the members of the Council.

19. The Foreign Ministers of the Association of South
East Asian Nations (ASEAN) issued a joint statement at
Bangkok on 13 January(S/13025]. According to the statement, the ASEAN foreign ministers “strongly deplored the
armed intervention against the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Kampuchea,‘* “affiied the right
of the Kampuchean people to determine their future by
themselves, free from interference or influence frombutside
Powers, in the exercise of their right of self-determination”
and “called for the immediate and total withdrawal of the
foreign forces from Kampuchean territory”. Japan fully
supports that statement.

13. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Japan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
14. Mr. ABE (Japan): Mr. President, I should like to
express my thanks to you and to the other members of the
Council for allowing me to speak on this vital issue which
the Council is now deliberating. I should like also to extend
my congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month. With your competence and experience, and the skill and wit which all of US

18. Given the circumstances in which the situation in
Kampuchea has developed, one has to conclude that it is
clearly one in which foreign forces are deeply involved.
Japan strongly deplores such foreign involvement and takes
the position that all foreign forces should be immediately
and totally withdrawn from Kampuchean territory.

20. We wish to appeal to all the countries concerned to
exercise the utmost restraint so that the situation shall not
further deteriorate. We wish to draw their particular attention to the Charter of the United Nations, to which we have
all solemnly subscribed and which makes it incumbent
upon all Members to resolve international disputes by

peaceful means, to forgo resort to military force and to
refrain from interference in the internal affairs of another
State. These are principles that all Members should strictly
observe, and whose violation by anyone, in whatever circumstances, should not be tolerated.

being, both from the current fighting and from the future
uncertainty.
.,
27. As previous speakers have noted, the present situation
in Kampuchea is complex and presents many obscurities. It
is, nevertheless, clear beyond all doubt that external forces
have entered Kampuchean territory on a massive scale and
that the country lies at present under foreign occupation.
Any such use of external force must be a matter of deep
concern to the United Nations, the more so when a small
and weak country is attacked by a powerful neighbour. The
use of force in the South-East Asian region, in which Australia enjoys close and co-operative relations with its neighbours, is of particular concern to my Government. Our
apprehensions are deepened still further by the danger that
the present crisis will serve the importation into this
region-which should be a haven of peace, freedom and
neutrality-of
external rivalries and conflicts which are
alien to it.

21. My delegation earnestly hopes that the Security Council will be able to take effective action so as to enable the
countries in the region concerned to restore peace, stability
and security as soon as possible. My delegation would like
to urge all Members of the United Nations to extend their
co-operation to the efforts of the Council to such purpose.
My delegation pledges Japan’s fullest support and cooperation towards that end.
22. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Australia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
23. Mr. ANDERSON
(Australia): Before proceeding,
Mr. President, I should like to express my appreciation to
you and to the members of the Council for giving me this
opportunity to address the Council today. I would also take
this opportunity of congratulating you on your assumption,
this month, of the presidency of the Council, an office for
which you are eminently fitted by your wisdom, diplomatic
skills and experience.

28. Australia has warmly welcomed the joint statement
issued at the special meeting of the ASEAN Foreign Ministers at Bangkok on 13 January as a clear and unambiguous
indication of the depth of concern of their Governments
over developments in Kampuchea. My Government strongly supports the sentiments expressed in that joint statement,
as well as the action it calls for. Countries of the South-East
Asian region are confronted with a human problem of
enormous dimensions and complexity through the exodus
from Viet Nam of thousands of refugees. The sheer weight
of numbers involved places severe strain on the countries
concerned and precludes any easy solution. Developments
in Kampuchea can only increase the uncertainties already
facing the region and generate yet more problems.

24. As my Prime Minister stated on 8 January, the Australian.Govemment
is deeply concerned by the resort to
armed force against Democratic Kampuchea by the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and by the grave dangers which
this action poses of widening and escalating conflict in the
region. Australia had earlier stressed to the Vietnamese
Government our hope that it would resolve its differences
with its neighbours through peaceful negotiations rather
than a .resort to arms.

29. My Government therefore considers it urgent that the
Security Council should reaflirm the right of Democratic
Kampuchea to independence, sovereignty and the integrity
of its territory, and the right of the Kampuchean people to
determine their future themselves, free from outside influence or interference. The Council should further seek a
peaceful solution of the present conflict, based, in the first
instance, on the establishment of a cease-fire and the withdrawal of all foreign forces. Only on that basis will it be
possible to envisage an end to the ordeal of the Kampuchean people and to restore peace, security, stability/and
confidence to South-East Asia at large.

25. .As to the Government of Democratic KamDuchea.
Australia extended recognition to it shortly after it’s establishment in 1975, but deferred entering into diplomatic
relations with that Government because of our disquiet
over its actions and policies in flagrant violation of human
rights. We have, nevertheless, given our full support to
Democratic Kampuchea’s right to independence, sovereignty.and territorial integrity. Like other Governments, we
cannot accept that the internal policies of any Government,
no matter how reprehensible, can justify a military attack
upon ,it by another Government.

30. Mr. BLANKSON (Nige&): Sir, while congratulating
you on your assumption of t& presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January, I would also welcome
your delegation and those of Bangladesh;Poxtugal, Norway and Zambia. The fraternal relations which exist
between Nigeria and Jamaica, even though we were separated by, in the words of your Prime Minister, “the Middle
Passage*‘, date back into history. These relations have been
strengthened anew by the visit of your Prime Minister to
Lagos at the close of last year and by the visit of my head of
State to Kingston a couple of days ago.

26. :ke listened with particular interest to the statement
ma+ on 11 January by Prince Norodom Sihanouk [2108th
meeting]. He spoke as the accredited representative of the
legal Government of Democratic Kampuchea. He spoke
also, I..believe, as the voice of the long-suffering people of
Kampuchea. Whatever differences our Governmen@ have
had in the past, Australians have never questiohed the
sincerity, the ardour, of Prince Sihanouk’s patriotism, or
the depth of his devotion to the independence of Kampuchea.,and to the well-being of its people. His words must
carry great weight with us all. The Australian Government
and people have been deeply moved by the suffering which
the @nary people of Kampuchea have had to endure. We
are seriously concerned over further threats to their well-

31. Recent developments in South-East Asia have been a
source of grave concem,to my delegation. Although we are
far from the scene of conflict, the manifold implications of
3

those developments for peaceful and cordial international
relations compel us to add a voice to those of the many who
have spoken in this forum and outside. There is no gainsaying the fact that the implications for peace and stability
in that region of the world are grave and that the extent to
which unfolding events may jeopardize the maintenance of
international peace and security cannot be over emphasized.

members of this august Council our appreciation of the
opportunity given to the Thai delegation to participate in
the current deliberations of the Council.
40. The Council has before it to&y an important question
which is one of particular interest and concern to us, as
Thailand is geographically nearest to the scene of conflict
and shares a long common border with Kampuchea. Thailand views with growing distress and concern the escalation
and enlargement of the armed conflict between our two
close neighbours, a conflict which my country feels has
become a threat to the peace, security and stability of Asia
and, in particular, of South-East Asia.

32. Even though the details of the fast-evolving develop
ments in Kampuchea are sketchy and difficult to come by,
my delegation, as a member of the non-aligned movement,
wishes to state the following.
33. First, our support for the convening of these meetings
of the Council stems from our conviction that any Member
of the Organisation has the right, if and when it feels
aggrieved, to bring the matter to the Council. And it is our
duty as Council to listen and to look for solutions.

41. This grave concern of ours is fully shared by our
partners in the Association of South-East Asian Nations.
ASEAN solidarity and unity in this matter have been amply
demonstrated in a statement issued at Jakarta by the Foreign Minister of Indonesia on behalf of the ASEAN Foreign
Ministers on 9 January and in a subsequent joint statement
issued by the Foreign Ministers of the ASEAN countries
after their special meeting held at Bangkok on 12 and 13
January. Those two statements have been circulated as
documents S/l3014 and S/13025.

34. Secondly, we believe in the equality of States, no
matter what their size, population, might and political or
economic clout. As a peace-loving people, we uphold the
principles of national independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity-principles
so clearly enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. These principles must, we believe,
be adhered to by all States, no matter what may be the
pressures or temptations to do otherwise in certain situations, as they have taken on the obligation to respect them
upon accession to membership in the United Nations.

42. The cardinal policy of Thailand is to cultivate friendly
relations with neighbouring countries and, indeed, with all
countries which desire to be friendly with us, regardless of
their political ideology or economic system, on the basis of
the Charter of the United Nations and the 10 principles of
the Bandung Conference. Thailand strictly adheres to the
principles of peaceful coexistence, respect for other’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, non-aggression, non-subversion and non-interference in the internal
affairs of another State. In accordance with the above policy
and principles, my Government has throughout remained
neutral in this unfortunate conflict between our two close
neighbours, Kampuchea and Viet Nam. We havemoreover
made it clear that we should like to see the two parties settle
their differences by peaceful means through negotiations
and refrain from the use of force.

35. Thirdly, it bears repeating that the principle of noninterference in the domestic affairs of States is one of the
most important tenets of international relations. The international community must, in my delegation’s view, never
allow this principle to be compromised.
36. Fourthly, we firmly believe that it is the sovereign right
of a State to choose whatever internal, political or economic
system it wishes to pursue. Therefore, domestic develop
ments in a country should not be used as justification for
foreign intervention in whatever form.
37. Having restated these principles, it is our expectation
that they will be brought to bear on the resolution of the
situation in Kampuchea. We ardently hope that this will
happen very soon so that an end can be put to the horrors
and the sufferings of the people of the area and peace and
stability can reign in South-East Asia. For too long conflicts
have made the existence of millions in that region a nightmare. My delegation is committed to lending its full support
to whatever equitable measure the Council will evolve to
ensure that peace shall cease to be a mirage for the inhabitants of Kampuchea and South-East Asia.

43. In this connexion I wish to recall the pledges exchanged with each of the ASEAN countries by the Vietnamese leader in mid-1978 scrupulously to respect each
other’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
to adhere strictly to non-subversion and non-interference in
each other’s internal affairs and to co-operate in the maintenance and the strengthening of peace and stability in the
region. In the light of what has recently happened in our
region, we in Thailand are today more than ever convinced
that, for the sake of peace, stability and development in
South-East Asia, the countries in the region must respect
more fully the principles and pledges enunciated above.

38. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Thailand. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

44. Thailand has consistently adhered to the principle of
peaceful settlement of international disputes in conformity
with the Charter of the United Nations. That is .why my
delegation fully supports the convening of the Council to
discuss the present item. My delegation joins with others
which spoke before me in welcoming the Council’s decision
to inscribe this item on its agenda and to convene without
delay in order to consider the present conflict prevailing in
southern Indo-China-a conflict which has seriously,escal-

39. Mr. GUNA-KASEM
(Thailand): Mr. President, I
wish first of all to extend to you my warm and sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and on your great
diplomatic skills in ably guiding the Council’s work. Permit
me also to express to you and, through you, to all the other
4

ated auring the past few weeks with grave consequences to
all.

52. Such brutal crimes on the part of the previous regime
in Kampuchea resulted in deep concern and condemnation
throughout the world. In this connexion, I should like to
quote from an article published in the magazine of 27zeNew
York 2Tme.von 19 November 1978. It reads:

45. It is our earnest hope that the Council will find it
possible to adopt a resolution affirming respect for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Kampuchea, calling for the total withdrawal of foreign forces
from Kampuchea’s territory and reaffirming the people of
Kampuchea’s right to self-determination and to decide their
own future by themselves, free from outside influence and
interference.

“me refugees’] accounts of the forced evacuation of
all Cambodian towns, of the herding of perhaps three
million of Cambodia’s seven million people into the
countryside, of mass slaying and starvation, of mindless
hatred and destruction, of orgies of book-burning, fires
fed by musical instruments, television sets, radios and
Buddha images, seemed incredible.“’

46. The eyes of the world are now focused on the Security
Council. The peoples in South-East Asia look to the Council, hoping that some constructive actions will emerge from
the present series of meetings. Thailand will support any
action which the Council may deem appropriate, so as to
enable the countries and the peoples of the region, which for
too long have been deprived of peace, to live in tranquillity
and in harmony and to direct their full energies towards the
pursuit of constructive goals for the benefit of all.

Also, according to certain &ta published in the press,
almost one third of the entire population of Kampuchea
was destroyed by the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique. According to
The New York Times, this information was confirmed by
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who, as members are aware,
has come here to represent that fallen tigime.
53. At the same time, no one is in a position to deny the
naked truth, namely, that the former Pol Pot-Ieng Sary
clique pursued their anti-people policies with the direct
support and sanction of the Chinese leaders, who were
attempting to make use of Kampuchea as an experimental
proving-ground for the implementation of their so-called
“cultural revolution.*’ It is also known that in the repression
against the people of Kampuchea a large part was played by
thousands of military experts and advisers from China, that
the repressive apparatus of the previous regime was acting
under the direct control of Chinese specialists, that its army
was fighting with Chinese weapons and that in its propaganda it spoke with the voice of Peking leaders.

47. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Mongolia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement.
48. Mr. DASHTSEREN
(Mongolia) (interpretationfrom
Russian): Mr. President, my delegation would like to express
its gratitude to you and to the other members of the Security
Council for the opportunity I have been given to speak here
and to set forth the position of our Government on the
question before the Security Council.
49. I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the responsible post of President of the
Council for the current month and to wish you every success
in the discharge of your mission.

54. In that way, with the direct participation of the Chinese authorities, the people and country of Kampuchea
were brought to the very brink of catastrophe. Moreover,
acting on the directives of Peking, the former Pol Pot regime
provoked a number of conflicts and committed acts of
aggression against neighbouring countries, including Viet
Nam, creating a serious threat to peace and security in that
part of Asia and in Asia as a whole.

50. First of all I should like to make it clear that the
question now being discussed by the Council is one that
relates purely to the internal affairs of an independent sovereign State, a full-fledged Member of the Organization,
whose people have risen up and overthrown an odious
r$ime and established their own genuinely democratic
authority in the country: the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea. Despite the fact that that is the actual
situation in Kampuchea, and despite the decisive protest
that was voiced by the new government of the country, the
Security Council has had imposed upon it an artificial
discussion whose purpose is to mislead world public
opinion.

55. There can be no shadow of doubt that it was precisely
the terrorist r&me implanted by Peking and the inhuman
policies it pursued which totally disrupted the life of the
country, naturally provoking profound agitation and dissatisfaction among the Kampuchean people. The bloody
repressions and the dictatorship were unable to put down
the resistance of the Kampuchean people, which has such a
heroic tradition of fighting for its rights and for freedom
and independence. In order to save their lives and their
homeland, millions of Kampucheans, including the overwhelming majority of the armed forces of the previous
regime, united under the leadership of the United Front for
the National Salvation of Kampuchea and rose up and
struggled for their freedom and to save their homeland. It is
gratifying to note that the legitimate struggle waged by the
Kampuchean people was crowned with complete victory
and led to the overthrow of the anti-people regime and to
the forming of a new, genuinely revolutionary government

51. As is well known, in the last three years there has
prevailed in Kampuchea an atmosphere of terror and arbitrariness imposed upon the Kampuchean people by the Pol
Pot-Ieng Sary clique in the service of the expansionist and
great-Power aspirations of the Peking leaders. In order to
maintain itself in power, the treacherous former clique of
Kampuchea resorted to the most cruel ways and means of
repression against the population of the country, and in
particular to mass annihilations of completely innocent
people, blatant violation and negation of the most elementary human rights, enforced evacuation of inhabitants, systematic destruction of a national minority, and so on.

’ Quoted

5

in Engiish

by the speaker.

which set as its aim the complete abolition of the Maoist
distortions of socialism and the creation of a popular democratic structure so as to turn Kampuchea into a genuinely
peaceful, democratic and non-aligned country striding
along the road to socialism. All progressive mankind,
including the Mongolian people and Government, were
gladdened at the remarkable victory scored by the Kampuchean people. We regard it as an important event that
opened a new stage in the history of Kampuchea, one of
genuine freedom and development.

tion to the cause of peace and security. The Mongolian
delegation considers that this type of slander is simply an
attempt on the part of international reaction and the imperialist forces, particularly the Peking authorities, to camouflage their own acts of aggression against Viet Nam and also
in order to undermine the ever-growing authority of that
valiant country.
60. As members know, the Chinese authorities are’conducting an overtly hostile and expansionist policy towards
the countries neighbouring China, especially towards the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. Particularly alarming is the
mass concentration of Chinese troops and arms in the Viet
Nam-Chinese border areas, which constitutes a serious
threat to the territorial integrity and independence of Viet
Nam and also to peace and security in Asia as a whole.

56. The fall of the terrorist r&rime of Pol Pot and the
formation of a genuinely popularldemocratic authority that
enjoys the full sympathies of the entire population of Kampuchea represent not only a realization of the aspirations
and desires of the long-suffering Kampuchean people but
also an important factor in the normalization of the situation in South-East Asia and the strengthening of peace and
security in that part of the world. As far as the programme
of the new government is concerned, contained in document S/13006, it envisages the restoration of fundamental
human rights and freedoms for the Kampuchean people
and the development of the country along socialist and
peaceful lines. In particular, it should be pointed out that
the foreign policy of the People’s Revolutionary Council of
Kampuchea is genuinely peace-loving. In its programme it
favours the establishment of good-neighbourly and friendly
relations with the peoples of Viet Nam, Laos, Thailand and
other countries in South-East Asia, and also the establishment and the development of normal relations with all
countries on the basis of the principles of peaceful coexistence.

61. As far as the representation of the Kampuchean peapie is concerned, it is quite obvious that it is only the
representative of the People’s Revolutionary Council, namely the legal and genuine spokesman for the will of the
Khmer people, who is entitled to represent Kampuchea in
international forums. Mr. Sihanouk is someone we regard
as a private person. It is quite well known that he came here
at the behest of his Peking boss to represent a non-existent
regime which has been overthrown; he not only has no
status but was even under arrest. In this connexion The New
York Times on 9 January stated: “he himself had been a
helpless prisoner who had nothing to do with the Govemmerit”.’
62. We consider that international bodies, including the
Security Council, have no right to take any decision on a
matter which pertains to Kampuchea without the participation of its genuine representative in the person of the representative of the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea and that such attempts are a violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and a violation of the principle of
non-intervention in the internal affairs of that country.

57. That cannot but be a source of satisfaction to all those
who really cherish peace in South-East Asia and throughout the world. That is why an ever-growing number of
countries, including a number of non-aligned countries,
have recognized the new government of Kampuchea. The
Government of the Mongolian People’s Republic recognized the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea as
the sole legitimate government, as the genuine spokesman
for the will and the aspirations of the Khmer people.

63. In conclusion, the Mongolian delegation would like to
express once again, on behalf of our people, its support for
and its solidarity with the freedom-loving Khmer people in
their struggle to remove the consequences of the ‘criminal
acts of the previous regime and speedily m-establish normal
life in their country.

58. What I have just said makes it abundantly clear that
the brilliant victory which was won by the revolutionary
patriotic forces under the leadership of the United Front for
the National Salvation of Kampuchea, whose ranks included very broad and diverse sectors of the population of
the country, represents the logical result of the just struggle
of the Kampuchean people itself which found support from
world public opinion. Consequently, the present develop
ment of events in Kampuchea is its own internal affair and is
both a just and natural one.

64. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Indonesia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
65. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): My delegation
would like to express its sincere appreciation to the Council
for allowing it to participate in its deliberations. I should
also like to associate myself with previous speakers in
extending to you, Sir, my delegation’s congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
current month. My delegation is convinced that under your
wise-and experienced guidance the Council will be able to
make a substantial contribution to the restoration of peaceful conditions to Kampuchea and the Indo-China region.

59. For that reason the Mongolian delegation opposes
any attempts to distort the truth and to try to depict this as
aggression on the part of one country against another,
which would in fact provide a pretext for interference in the
internal affairs of a sovereign State. In particular, my delegation would like to protest emphatically against and
express its repugnance at the slander which has been
directed towards socialist Viet Nam and its Government
and people, which, by their freedom and independence,
have made and continue to make a tremendous contribu-

66. The Indonesian delegation has asked to be allowed to
participate in the debate in order to express its grave con6

cem at the disturbing developments in Kampuchea. For
more than a generation Indo-China has witnessed bloodshed and suffering caused by war. It was the fervent hope of
everyone that once peace was achieved it would prove
possible for the countries of the region to devote all their
efforts to the task of reconstruction and development. It
was also hoped that the countries of South-East Asiawould
be able to co-operate in establishing a peaceful and stable
region so as to allow their peoples to progress together
towards common prosperity. It is in thii context that the
establishment of the Association of South-East Asian
Nations and its concept of a zone of peace, freedom and
neutrality in South-East Asia should be seen. The need for
such a zone has now been clearly demonstrated by the
developments in Indo-China.

The two leaders further stated

67. The outbreak of hostilities between Viet Nam and
Kampuchea was a severe setback to those hopes. Indonesia
deplores the fact that it has not been possible for the two
close neighbours which have made the heaviest sacrifices to
defend their sovereignty and independence to settle their
differences through peaceful negotiations. Though much
has been said about the involvement of outside Powers, it is
diflicult for my delegation to believe that countries like
Kampuchea and Viet Nam, which have sacrificed so much
defending their sovereignty, independence and national
identity, with the loss of so many lives and the shedding of
so much blood, would lend themselves to becoming a tool
for the political designs and ambitions of other countries.
They are too jealous of their independence and too proud of
their sovereignty and national identity.

71. Deputy Prime Minister Ieng Sary of Kampuchea
stated at Jakarta on 24 October 1978, that “no country
should interfere in the internal affairs of other countries and
each people has the right to determine its own destiny*‘. He
also declared “that differences should be solved by strictly
respecting these principles”.

. . . that they fully real&d that peace and stability were
essential for the national development of the respective
countries in the region of South-East Asia. To attain the
above objectives they expressed their determination to
strictly respect each -other’s independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political systems, to refrain from
using force or threatening to use force in their bilateral
relations, from interfering in each other’s internal affairs,
and from carrying out subversive activities, directly or
indirectly, against each other, and to settle all differences
between the two countries by peaceful means through
negotiations, in a spirit of equality, mutual understanding and respect.”
4‘

72. The turn that the relations between Kampuchea and
Viet Nam have taken is, therefore, particularly distressing
to Indonesia, as it is incompatible with the solemn declarations made by the leaders of those countries. We may not
like, we may even abhor, the political and social system in a
country, but that fact cannot justify an armed intervention
with the aim of changing that system.
73. I should like to draw the attention of the Council to
the statement issued at Jakarta on 9 January 1979 by the
Foreign Minister of Indonesia on behalf of the ASEAN
Foreign Ministers, contained in document S/13014, and to
the joint statement issued by the ASEAN Foreign Ministers
at the conclusion of their meeting held at Bangkok on 12
and 13 January, contained in document S/13025, in which
the position of my Government is duly reflected. In the joint
statement, the five ASEAN Foreign Ministers, inter alia,
strongly deplored the armed intervention against the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Kampuchea, afliied
the right of the Kampuchean people to
determine their future free from the interference of intluence of outsider Powers and called for the immediate and
total withdrawal of foreign forces from Kampuchean
territory.

68. Indonesia has enjoyed friendly relations with both
Kampuchea and Viet Nam. Immediately after the Geneva
Conference in 1954 the Indonesian Government sent a
delegation to the Indo-Chinese countries. I was part of that
delegation when it was received by Prince Sihanouk, at that
time King of Cambodia, at Phnom Penh and by Mr. Pham
Van Dong, Prime Minister of Viet Nam, at Hanoi. Missions
were established at Phnom Penh and Hanoi and at Jakarta
after the Bandung Conference in 1955. Our relations with
independent Cambodia and independent Viet Nam are
therefore not just of recent origin. These relations have
again been emphasized by the recent visits to Jakarta of
Prime Minister Pham Van Dong and of Deputy Prime
Minister Ieng Sary.
69. Indonesia has always been of the view that relations
between States should be based upon the strict observance
of the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and in the Bandung Declaration. Those principles
include, among others, respect for each other’s sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national identity and
non-interference in each other’s internal affairs. Every State
must have the right to lead its own national existence free
from external interference.

74. In conclusion, my delegation would like to express its
sincere hope that the Council will be able to agree on a
resolution along the lines of the joint statement of the
ASEAN Foreign Ministers and that it will be possible for
the Council to take the necessaryaction to restore peace and
stability to Kampuchea, and peaceful relations between the
States of Indo-China concerned.

70. Those principles were again stressed in the joint communiquC issued at Jakarta on 23 September 1978, at the end
of the visit of Prime Minister Pham Van Dong to Indonesia,
when President Suharto and Prime Minister Pham Van
Dong agreed that:

75. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Poland. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
76. Mr. JAROSZEK (Poland): The Polish delegation had
hoped that it would not have to ask to be invited to participate in the present discussion in the Council, but, since a
situation has arisen which warrants our intervention, I wish

“All differences between countries in South-East Asia
should be settled through peaceful means, in mutual
understanding and free from outside interferences.‘*
7

to thank you, Mr. President, and the other members of the
Council for giving me the opportunity to present Polands
position on the matter before us. In the first place, however,
allow me to extend to you our heartfelt felicitations on your
assumption on the presidency of the Council, accompanied
by the expression of our highest esteem for you personally,
both as an eminent diplomat and as a prominent representative of friendly Jamaica.

home and adventurous abroad-the policies that one big
Power with which the r&ime was allied wanted to use as a
tool for its hegemonic strivings. Now that its schemes have
proved to be a complete failure, that Power has resorted to a
boisterous campaign of slander against other countries-in
particular, against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and
its friends.
84. As was rightly stressed by the representative of Viet
Nam last Thursday [2108th meeting/ and again on Saturday
[2llOth meetingl. his country had manifested unusual moderation and patience in the face of repeated and flagrant
provocation by the Pol Pot clique which since its inception
had become the most destabilizing factor in Indo-China.
Where were the present protectors of Pol Pot and their
friends when he was murdering hundreds of thousands of
the best sons of Kampuchea, when his troops werecommitting most monstrous horrors and continuing repeated acts
of aggression against Viet Nam? Why did they not come at
that time to the Council to condemn the perpetrators of
such acts? No unbiased politician or diplomat would dare to
answer those questions-in such a way-as to justify the need
for the present debate in the Council.

77. Article 24 of the Charter stipulates that the Members
of the United Nations agree that, in carrying out its duties,
the Security Council acts on their behalf. Unfortunately,
with all due respect, I must say that the decisions hastily
adopted at the Council’s 2108th meeting, last Thursday,
were not in the spirit of nor in conformity with Article 24.
As a matter of fact, the Council has no competence to deal
with a question which is an internal problem of a State and,
thus, does not pertain to the maintenance of international
peace and security as provided for in the Charter. My
Government cannot therefore accept that in the present
case the Council is acting on its behalf.
78. Poland has for years been an active participant in the
search for peace in Indochina. At a time when events in the
region did represent an international problem-as they do
not today-as a long-time member of the International
Commission for Supervision and Control, we made a contribution of our own to the stabilization of the situation
there.

80. First and foremost, the developments in Kampuchea,
which resulted in the downfall of the compromised and
reactionary Pol Pot clique, are the internal affair of the
people of Kampuchea; that people alone is competent to
deal with them, as it in fact has already done by getting rid
of its oppressive rulers.

85. The motives behind this debate are only too clear to
us. It is an attempt on the part of Pol Pot’s few supporters to
take some kind of revenge against Viet Nam for its independent position in world affairs and for its resistance to
foreign domination and regional hegemony. We cannot but
most resolutely reject all the false and invented accusations
against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. We categorically reject any attempts at invoking comparison with
Hitler’s invasion of Poland. Let no one dare touch the
graves of the more than 6 million Poles ruthlessly murdered
by the Nazis in order to defend the killing by the corrupt
clique of at least 2 million innocent Kampucheans for the
sake of short-lived political schemes. Reasoning like this
can be attributed only to a state of mind, to confusion and,
indeed, to exhaustion produced by several years of solitary
confinement in the oasis of Pol Pot’s generosity.

81. Indeed, it suflices to read carefully the declaration of
2 December 1978 of the United Front for the National
Salvation of Kampuchea [S/13006, annex IJ to see clearly
why the Kampuchean people could not rise up in arms
against the tyrants who were gradually bringing the country
to the brink of the abyss of extinction. Few other regimes in
the history of mankind have proved as genocidal vis-r&is
their own people as that of Pol Pot and Ieng Sary. Therefore, what happened in Kampuchea was an inevitable development, the result of its people’s struggle to save itself from
extermination and to build a peaceful, independent, democratic, neutral, non-aligned and socialist Kampuchea.

86. Thirdly, the only genuine and legitimate representative of the Kampuchean people is the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea, this position of my Government has been fully reflected in the cable sent on 10 January
1979 by the President of the Council of State and the Prime
Minister of Poland to the President of the People’s Revolutionary Council, in which the highest authorities of the
Polish People’s Republic welcomed the historic victory of
the revolutionary and patriotic forces of Kampuchea and
expressed their profound conviction that that victory would
open a new chapter in the history of the construction of a
democratic and progressive Kampuchea.

82. Secondly, the overthrow by the people of Kampuchea
of the Pol Pot regime, which had drowned the country in
blood and tears, cannot be considered as a threat to intemational peace and security-be it in the region of Indo-China
or in South-Past Asia. Here then is one more reason for the
irrelevance of the consideration of the question by the
Security Council.

87. On grounds both of international law and of common
sense, it is a sad irony that the Security Council should be
trying to discuss matters vital to a Member State in the
absence of representatives of its government, which is exercising effective authority and control over the country. An
equal manifestation of the strongest proponent of a dismgard of realities, a permanent member of the Security Council which is apparently reluctant to remember that for a
number of years its seat in the United Nations, including its
seat in the Council, was occupied by representatives of the

79. Today, when the States of Indo-China have been able
to rid themselves of the evils of the past, we view the
question brought before the Council in a threedimension
manner.

83. What did constitute such a threat were the aggressive
policies of the overthrown regime-anti-nationalist
at
8

94. My delegation has followed very closely the statements that have already been made before the Council. The
debate has been enlightening, and we are now privy to
information on the background and the course of events
which led to the present confrontations in Kampuchea. For
this reason alone, my delegation is very appreciative of the
Council for its wisdom in considering the Kampuchean
situation formally and giving a chance to the parties
involved and others concerned to express their opinions,
their appraisals and their judgements.

regime of an island situated not too far away from its
mainland. In the case now before us, there is not even an
island that could serve as a pretext for continuing the fiction
of the recognition of the defunct regime.
88. Thus, any discussion in the Security Council-if
necessaryat all-will have no meaning whatsoever unless it
takes place with the participation of a delegation of the new
government of Kampuchea headed by President Heng Samrin. We share the view of all those delegations which termed
any formula short of such participation as being to the
detriment of the Council’s very reputation, if not its
credibility.

95. With the debate that has taken place and the statements we have heard, we should be more competent to view
the situation in Kampuchea with greater perspective and to
weigh the evidence carefully and objectively. It is in this light
that my delegation requests the members of the Council to
comprehend and understand the position taken by ASEAN
on the problem.

89. The people of Kampuchea have passed an irrevocable
judgement on their oppressors. There is no going back on
that verdict. We trust that collective wisdom and a senseof
justice will finally prevail in the Council.

96. The ASEAN Foreign Ministers, after duly taking note
of the escalation of the armed conflict between Viet Nam
and Kampuchea, strongly deplored the armed intervention
against the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Kampuchea. In other words, we of ASEAN are
convinced that there was entry or introduction of foreign
forces into Kampuchea which eventually led to the fall of
Phnom Penh.

90. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Philippines. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
9 1. Mr; YANG0 (Philippines): Mr. President, my delegation is deeply grateful to you and to all the other members of
the Council for according us the opportunity of participating in the deliberations of the Council concerning the situation-in Kampuchea. Let me express also our gratification at
the fact that you are presiding over these deliberations at a
time when your leadership, background and experience in
United Nations affairs will, indeed, be most appropriate
and helpful.

97. The entry or introduction of foreign forces into Kampuchea, in our view, is against the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, which enjoin all
Members to refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force against the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of any State.

92. The Philippines, like four other countries-Indonesia,
Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand-belongs
to the region
of South-East Asia where the present crisis is unfolding and
where the situation is drastically deteriorating before our
very eyes, so to speak. No doubt we have every cause to
entertain the deepest concern over the past events and the
ensuing consequences which immediately affect the peace,
security and stability of our region, that of Asia and, in the
long run, that of the world. The five countries I have already
named, and also others in South-East Asia, are all develop
ing countries whose primary goal and objective at the
moment, aside from national security, is the development
and expansion of their economic and social programmes in
order to promote the welfare and the peaceful social uplifting of their peoples.

98. In this sense,my delegation fully agrees with the representative of Kuwait, who said before the Council that his
delegation was against interference by any State in the
domestic affairs of any other State, for that was the quintessence of the Charter and the basis of international law, and
it was important to reaffirm the obligation of Member
States, in accordance with the Charter, to resolve disputes
by peaceful means.
99. The ASEAN Foreign Ministers, recognizing the sovereignty of the people of Kampuchea, affumed their right to
determine their future by themselves, free from interference
or influence from outside Powers.

93. It is precisely in this context that the five countries of
the Association of South-East Asian Nations acted immediately and voiced their gravest concern over the develop
ment of the situation in Kampuchea. On behalf of the
ASEAN Foreign Ministers, the Foreign Minister of Indonesia, as Chairman of the ASEAN Standing Committee,
issued a statement in advance of their special meeting
[S/13014]. After the special meeting at Bangkok of 12 and
13 January, the ASEAN Foreign Ministers issued a joint
statement [S/13025] which, together with their advance
statement, embodied their views on how the crisis might be
assessed and resolved, in the hope that there might be a
speedy restoration of peace, security and stability in SouthEast Asia.

100. In a separate statement which he issued at Manila on
10 January 1979 on the issue of non-interference in the
domestic affairs of any State, my Foreign Minister, General
Carlos P. Romulo, said the following:
“The Philippines adds its own fervent appeal for a
return to rational discourse among nations, in particular
a return to the first principles of peaceful coexistence.
These are respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all nations, the settlement of issuesthrough peaccful means, and the renunciation of the use of force or
threat of force in the solution of conflicts. And above all
these, the most fundamental principle of all, mutual
respect, equality and understanding.”
9

101. In this connexion, the Minister for Foreign Affairsof
Malaysia, in a statement issued at Kuala L<mpur on 8
January 1979, said:

the Bulgarian delegation to take uart in the discussions.
May I also take this occasion to congratulate the newly
elected members of the Council.

“It is our fervent hope that no outside Power in any
circumstances should justify itself to interfere in the internal affairs of Kampuchea.”

109. To begin with, I should like to say that my Gqvemment is deeply concerned at and dissatisfied with the fact
that the Security Council has been called upon to consider a
question relating to the internal situation of a sovereign
State Member of the United Nations. Moreover, the basis
for the discussions is being supplied by a speculative
demand by the clique of Kampuchea, which has been
totally rejected by its people.

102. Hence, the ASEAN Foreign Ministers, in their joint
statement,
“call upon all countries in the region strictly to respect
each other’s independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and political system; to refrain from using force or
threatening to use force in their bilateral relations, from
interfering in each other’s internal affairs and from carrying out subversive activities, directly or indirectly,
against each other; to settle all differences between the
countries by peaceful means through negotiations, in a
spirit of equality, mutual understanding and respect”
[S/13014. annex].

110. The communication of which the Council has been
seized provides ample proof of the attempts undertaken by
certain circles to conceal the true crimes committed by the
Pol Pot clique. For, actually, the whole world had been
witnessing the atrocities, massacres and repressions taking
place inside the country, as well as the numerous acts of
aggression against neighbouring countries carried out since
1975. Those acts had created a grave danger to peace and
security in the region. So, quite naturally, they provoke the
strong indignation of democratic and progressive forces a11
over the world.

103. In view of all that has transpired and the continued
great danger of more counter-action and reaction in Kampuchea, the only recourse appears obvious to my delegation. We believe that all hostilities must ceaseimmediately,
after which there should be immediate and total withdrawal
of foreign forces from Kampuchean territory. This withdrawal of foreign forces was specifically indicated in the
joint statement by the ASEAN Foreign Ministers after they
had strongly deplored the armed intervention in Kampuchea.

111. History teaches and convincingly proves that an
entire nation cannot be held under oppression and domination by sheer force of terror and in human violations of
basic rights. So, the outcome in Kampuchea is a logical one,
The odious puppet clique of Pol Pot and Ieng Sary, having
usurped power in Kampuchea, had reduced to naught the
hard-won popular victory of 1975. That clique has now
been overthrown. The popular forces, assembled in the
United Front for the National Salvation of Kampuchea,
which is the real and legitimate representative of the Kampuchean people, have retaken what is rightfully theirs. Having mobilized and closely united the efforts of the entire
population and brought the struggle to a victorious end, the
United Front is now in controlof the whole territory of
Kampuchea. A new government has been set up: the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea, headed by
Heng Samrin, and Mr. Hun Sen has been appointed the
new Minister for Foreign Atfairs. The new government has
already been recognized by several States, including the
People’s Republic of Bulgaria.

104. Needless to say, there may be other necessary and
appropriate measures which the Council may consider and
decide upon after the cessation of hostilities and the immediate and total withdrawal of forces have been accomp
lished. We firmly believe that these are the necessary
elements in the restoration of peace, security and stability in
our area.
105. In conclusion, let me just say that the ASEAN Foreign Ministers, in their statement, recalled the Vietnamese
pledge to the ASEAN member countries scrupulously to
respect each one’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity and to co-operate in the maintenance and strengthening of peace and stability in the region.

112. Hence, developments of late in Kampuchea truly
deserve sincere consideration and approval, as they have
brought about the removal of a seemingly endless nightmare and dangerous agressive provocations. It is fully
understandable that the popular revolution in Kampuchea
should not be to the liking of the former r&ime’s patrons.
that is, the hegemonists at Peking. However, this definitely
cannot be a case warranting the involvement of the world
Organization in a matter pertaining to the internal situation
of Kampuchea, nor should the United Nations be turned
into the watchdog of a repudiated regime which has been
violating the basic principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. A totally discredited regime whose real
actions have been laid bare before the world public opinion,
a regime which has subjected an entire nation to-massive
terror and oppression, to organized and systematic annihilation cannot enjoy the sympathies of any country which
has preserved its self-esteem. Those who serve the interests

106. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
107. Mr. YANKOV (Bulgaria): Sir, I would at the outset,
before making my short statement on the matter under
consideration, say how happy and privileged I feel to congratulate you, on behalf of the Bulgarian delegation, on
your accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. Your country, Jamaica, enjoys a well-deserved
prestige among the non-aligned movement and its friends,
the community of socialist countries. In your person,
Jamaica has an eminent representative whose diplomatic
skills and leadership abilities have always been appreciated
by all of us.
108. Permit me also to express our gratitude to you and to
the members of the Council for the opportunity accorded to
10

of Powers hostile to the true aspirations of the Kampuchean
people cannot hope to confuse the international community
for long.

States, should be aimed at the active assistance and consolidation of these democratic changes, so longed for by the
much-tried people of Kampuchea, who have been subjected
to unparrallellecl arbitrariness and barbaric repressions and
who have made countless sacrifices in the struggle for independence and freedom.

113. The events in South-East Asia have’ totally unmasked the external forces which have been inciting and
assisting the puppet Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique in its aggressive . actions towards neighbouring countries, particularly
against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. They are the
same forces which pursue a policy of hegemony, greatPower chauvinism and expansionism in Indo-China and in
the whole Asian continent. But the heroic and proud Vietnamese nation has already provided enough proof of its
determination not to brook any further encroachments on
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of its
State.

118. The sincere intentions of the new government and
the United Front for the National Salvation of Kampuchea
are manifested in its declaration of 2 December 1978
[S/13006, annex I/ as well as in the statements of the Central
Committee of the United Front of 26 December 1978[ibid,
annex Ig and 5 January 1979 [S/13010, annex]. The foremost task given in those documents stands out clearly. It is
the struggle for the salvation of the Kampuchean people
from destruction and the building of a peace-loving, independent, democratic and non-aligned Kampuchea. The
new leaders have also made it clear that new Kampuchea
will struggle for the strengthening of peace and stability in
South-East Asia and the world.

114. A campaign of vicious calumnies has been launched
against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. We most
emphatically reject these absolutely unfounded slanders
against the Viemamese people, whose dedication to the
cause of national independence, freedom, and peace long
ago gained the admiration of the world. The Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam has given most convincing evidence
of patience, goodwill and wisdom, including on the matter
under consideration. The allegations against Viet Nam cannot cover up the responsibilities of the sponsors and instigators of the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique, which betrayed the
interests of the people of Kampuchea and carried out an
aggressive policy of provocations against their neighbours.

119. To quote again from the manifesto of the People’s
Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea:
“The People’s Republic of Kampuchea ensures for the
people democratic liberties, freedom of belief, the right
to work, rest and study, and respect for the dignity and
private life of all citizens; it ensures equality between the
sexesand among different ethnic groups in the Kampuchean social community.

115. It is perfectly clear that Kampuchea is at present
undergoing a process which is both logical and legitimate
and is in line with the principles of self-determination and
independent political development. The victories of the
valiant people of Kampuchea are both justified and irreversible, for they are the result of a people’s revolutionary
struggle to determine its own destiny.

“The People’s Republic of Kampuchea advocates a
foreign policy of peace, friendship and non-alignment in
order to contribute to peace, stability and prosperity in
South-East Asia, and to the cause of peace and progress
in the world.”
120. The Bulgarian people and its Government sincerely
rejoice at and cordially welcome the victory of the Kampuchean people, which has a decisive importance for the establishment of peace, stability and fraternal co-operation in
Indo-China and the whole of Asia. We are convinced that
the recently created People’s Revolutionary Council, which
is the sole legitimate representative of the Kampuchean
people and the true spokesman for its wishesand interests,
will contribute to affirming and strengthening the achievements of the revolution as well as to strengthening peace
and security in that region of the world.

116. As stated in the manifesto issued at Phnom Penh on
11 January by the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea:
“This is a victory for the sacred right of nations to
self-determination, a right which is inscribed in the Charter of the United Nations and which constitutes one of
the fundamental principles of the non-aligned movement.
“This great victory has opened a new era in the history
of Kampuchea, an era of genuine independence and
freedom in which this country is not dependent on any
foreign country. It has put an end to an unjust war
started by the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique at foreign instigation and with foreign backing, a war which ran counter
to national interests and undermined the traditional
friendship between the Kampuchean and the Vietnamese peoples.

121. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
122. Mr. KOMATINA
Nugoslavial: At the outset I wish
to thank the Security Councirfor ha&g provided me with
this opportunity to explain my Government’s position with
regard to a very serious question of international relations.

“This victory has opened up great prospects for peace,
friendship and co-operation between Kampuchea and
neighbouring countries and has contributed to peace,
stability and prosperity in South-East Asia.”

123. To you personally, Mr. President, I address my congratulations on your assumption of the functions of President of the Council for the month of January and I wish you
much successin the accomplishment of your responsible
duties. I am convinced that your well-known dedication,
diplomatic skill and intellectual acumen will contribute

117. We’ are profoundly convinced that all the efforts of
the Organization, as well as those of individual Member
11

_.
Y

_
1

towards enabling the Council to fulfil its role with respect to
the maintenance of international peace and security.

in the non-aligned movement and in its bilateral relations
with all countries for their consistent application.

124. I wish also to address my greetings to His Excellency
Mr. Norodom Sihanouk, a distinguished statesman, one of
the founders of the non-aligned movement, a patriot and
consistent tighter for free and independent Kampuchea.
Mr. Sihanouk has again found himself, as in the most
difficult moments of the past, in the forefront of the struggle
for independence, freedom and non-alignment of his
country.

129. The aforementioned principles and positions of the
non-aligned movement are of universal significance for reiations among all States regardless of their size and irrespective of similarities or differences in their respective social
systems. What are actually involved are the fundamental
principles of active and peaceful coexistence based on the
Charter of the United Nations and international law, which
must be applied universally among all countries. The principles of non-alignment have asserted themselves as an irreplaceable basis for stable international relations and as a
progressive achievement in the struggle against all forms of
subjugation or domination. Respect for these principles on
the part of all in international relations constitutes the only
possible road leading to the strengthening of international
peace and security.

125. Like all other such conferences, the Ministerial
Conference of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Belgrade
recently, laid particular stress on the principles guiding
relations among sovereign States on which the movement of
non-aligned countries is founded, namely: national independence; sovereignty; territorial integrity; equality; the free
national and social development of all countries; selfdetermination; non-interference in the internal affairs of
other countries; non-intervention; the inviolability of legally
established international boundaries; the inadmissibility of
acquisition of territories by means of war of occupation; the
withdrawal of foreign military armed forces; the dismantling of all foreign military bases; the peaceful settlement of
disputes; the development of international co-operation on
the basis of equality; struggle against imperialism, colonialism, neocolonialism, racism and all forms of expansionism,
foreign domination and hegemony; and so on.

130. Yugoslavia has been following with grave concern
the development of the conflict between Viet Nam and
Kampuchea, two socialist and non-aligned countries with
which my country maintains friendly relations. For this
reason my country has endeavoured to contribute, in accordance with the objectives and principles of the policy of
non-alignment, to the peaceful solution of this conflict,
which, because of the proportions it has assumed and its
nature, threatens peace and stability in South-East Asia,
jeopardizes the unity and solidarity of the non-aligned
movement and is fraught with far-reaching consequences
for the over-all development of relations in the world.

126. The fifth Summit Conference on non-aligned countries, held at Colombo, devoted special attention to the
problem of interference in the internal affairs of States as
one of the most acute dangers threatening the independence
of countries, and it “resolutedly rejected any attempts to
justify foreign interference under any pretext whatsoever,
from any source*‘.z

131. Proceeding from such an appraisal, the President of
the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Josip Broz
Tito, sent messages to the Chief of State of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, Pham Van Dong, and the Chief of
State of Democratic Kampuchea, Khieu Samphan, appealing for a cessation of hostilities and for the settlement of
disputes by peaceful means through negotiations and agreement. As late as 28 December 1978, in the aide-mkmoire
handed to the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet
Nam, the Government of the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia expressed its deep concern over the conflict and
appealed for an immediate cessation of hostilities and the
start of negotiations. We acted in this manner because we
were deeply convinced that it was the only correct course of
action in the interest of the peoples of the two countries as
well as other peoples of the region.

127. At the Ministerial Conference at Belgrade, the nonaligned countries paid due attention to thedisputes between
some non-aligned countries giving rise to armed confhcts.
In this connexion it was emphasized that it was
“of enduring importance that in their mutual relations
all non-aligned countries should be consistently guided
by the principles of non-alignment and the Charter of the
United Nations*‘.3
At the same time the Conference emphasized

132. In this regard Yugoslavia has always proceeded-as
stated by the official spokesman of the Federal Secretariat
for Foreign Affairs of 11 January 1979-from

“the necessity of resolving all disputes exclusively by
peaceful means, through negotiations, mediation, good
offices and other measures embodied in the United
Nations Charter, in accordance with the legitimate rights
of peoples, bearing in view at the same time the interests
of the unity and solidarity of the movement as a wholewithout outside interference and without recourse to
pressure, or the threat or use of force”.3

“the necessitv of strict resnect for the nrincinles of independence, sovereignty, thk inviolabilgy of borders and
territorial integrity, non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States, the sovereign right of each country
to decide by itself on its internal system, and from the
inadmissibility of any form of foreign intervention or
aggression under the pretext of disagreement’with the
internal socio-political system of a country or under any
other pretext*‘.

128. The Yugoslav Government has always strictly adhered
to these principles and exerted efforts in the United Nations,

133. In the consistent defence of these principles, the nonaligned movement has, in our opinion, an irreplaceable role

* A/31/197. annex I, para. 145.
3 A/33/206, annex I, para. 41.

12

to play because the movement itself actually emerged from
the struggle for the defence of those principles and has
become an independent factor in efforts to establish a new
system of international political end economic relations
based on equality, which is the declared objective of all
non-aligned countries.

140. We recognize that the Security Council has a crucial
role to play in the establishment and maintenance of international peace and security, based on the principles of the
Charter-principles
which should guarantee the security of
all States, large and small, regardless of their military capao
ity. We will endeavour on a continuing basis to make our
contribution to the work of the Council with the responsible
attitude required by virtue of this vital role.

134. In this connexion it is necessary to underline the
difference between the character of an internal system,
which is strictly the domestic concern of every country, on
the one hand, and relations between sovereign countries on
the other. In this respect, it is also necessary to emphasize
the inadmissibility of all attempts aimed at changing internal social and political systems under any pretext or any
form of use of force, recourse to pressure, imposing foreign
models, or any other direct or indirect method of undermining the free development of a country or destabilizing its
legal Government. By saying this it is not our intention to
defend any Government or regime as responsibility for that
is borne by the people of every individual country. It is also
inadmissible to judge the regime of any country in the
context of conflicts between great Powers and blocs.

141. It is in this spirit that we supported the proposal that
the Council should consider the grave issue now before us,
for we believe that the Council, if it is to discharge its
responsibilities under the Charter, must display its readiness
to hear complaints such as that made in document S/13003.
If the ‘Council does not do so, it cannot make a determination on the merits of each case and it cannot fulfil its
responsibilities or meet the expectations of the international
community which has entrusted that function to it.
142. With respect to the particular issue before us, we for
our part feel very deeply for the people of Cambodia who
have been subjected in recent times to severe suffering and
hardship. They have been the victims of every kind of
oppression including colonialism, imperialist aggression
and foreign interference. That experience has left its mark
on the country, as it has indeed on the entire area of
South-East Asia, and is a major factor in the instability and
the tragedy of human suffering which seem to have become
commonplace in that part of the world.

135. Yugoslavia supports the decision of the Security
Council to consider the demand of the legitimate Government of Democratic Kampuchea and deems it indispensable for the Council to undertake, as soon as possible,
appropriate measures with a view to restoring peace in the
region of South-East Asia and protecting the independence,
sovereignty and free development of Kampuchea. That can
be achieved, first and foremost, through an immediate cessation of military operations, the withdrawal of foreign
troops from .that country, the discontinuance of any interference in its internal affairs and the settlement of controversial issues by means of negotiations within the framework of
the United Nations or by means of the good ofhces provided for in the documents of non-aligned countries. In
other words, this means the search for a solution that will
effectively and resolutely aflirrn the principles of the Charter and the non-aligned movement which are embodied in
all the documents of the non-aligned countries. It is indispensable to defend those principles in order to forestall
unforeseeable negative consequences for stability and peace
both in the region and more broadly.

143. We approach the present issue with that background
in mind. Jamaica, as a member of the world community of
nations, as a member of the non-aligned group of countries,
and now as a member of the Security Council itself, is
concerned for the maintenance of international peace and
stability, which is the first purpose of the United Nations.
We believe that in the circumstances of South-East Asia in
particular this demands a state of affairs which can be
created only by a strict and respectful observance by all
States, large and small, weak and powerful, of the principles
of the Charter.
144. The issue now before us has complex elements. It
involves a complaint of aggression against Cambodia: there
are possibly complicating elements of a civil conflict; there
has been a border dispute between Cambodia and Viet
Nam which must be seen as a factor in the development of
the present situation; finally there are wider dimensions of
great-Power competition for influence.

136. All this is in our view fully expressed in draft resolution S/13027, sponsored by the non-aligned countries
members of the Security Council and brilliantly introduced
by the representative of Kuwait.
137. The Yugoslav Government is following the further
development of the situation with the closest attention.

145. Varying degrees of emphasis have been placed on
internal conflict inside Cambodia on the one hand and
external aggression on the other. There can be no doubt that
both have contributed to the recent events. It is evident that
a civil conflict inside Cambodia could have arisen from the
brutal policies pursued by the Pol Pot Govemmentpolicies of which there was widespread criticism and of
which the international community could have taken note
long before this.

138. The PRESIDENT: I now wish to make a statement
on behalf of the delegation of JAMAICA.
139. First of all, I should like to thank members of the
Council for the warm and friendly expressions of welcome
to Jamaica on its assumption of its term of membership of
the Council. I can assure members that my delegation will
co-operate fully with them in the work of the Council, in the
same spirit which characterizes the friendly relations between Jamaica and all the members represented on the
Council.
..

146. There can equally be no doubt, however, that no
interference by a third party in the internal affairs of Kampuchea can be justified and that any such interference is
inconsistent with the principles of the Charter.
13

147. We cannot compromise on the basic principles of the
Charter; rather, they must be reaffirmed and reinforced. We
must emphasize the principle of non-interference in the
domestic affairs of States; we must insist on respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of States;
and we must require that all States should abstain from the
threat or use of force and seek peaceful means for the
settlement of disputes.

cannot represent even that regime, since it has been overthrown by the Kampuchean people itself and no longer
exists. By thus showing contempt for the authority of the
Council, those representatives, to servetheir masters abroad,
have combined slander with distortion of the facts.
153. It is not surprising that many of those who participated in the discussions were obliged to recognize the
absence of any clear picture of the real situation in Kampuchea, which further bears out the correctness of those who
proposed that an invitation to participate in the discussion
should be extended to the representatives of the only legitimate government of Kampuchea, namely, the People’s
Revolutionary Council, which exercises complete sovereignty over the whole territory. However, some people have
obviously tried to prevent the truth about Kampuchea from
being heard in the Council from the lips of the actual
representatives of the Kampuchean people. As a result of
this, the majority of the members of the Council deprived
the representatives of the legitimate government of Kampuchea of any opportunity to be present in New York in order
to participate in the work of the Council, which precluded
any possibility of formulating an objective draft resolution.

148. Using these principles as its reference point, the
Council should, in the view of my delegation, make a sober
judgement in the present issue and adopt a position which is
constructive and conducive to the maintenance of peace
and stability in South-East Asia. This requires, in the first
instance, the immediate cessation of hostilities and, secondly, the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Cambodia
,in order to allow its people to make their own determination
on matters which are exclusively their domestic affairs.
These two conditions should provide the framework for
peace and security in an area which has already experienced
so much suffering. These countries must be given the opportunity to develop relations which will allow for co-operation
in the task of economic and social reconstruction. This is
one of the major challenges facing them at the present time,
and my delegation seesit as the duty of the Council to assist
in this process and seek to establish conditions under which
these challenges can be met for the sake of the welfare of the
peoples of the area.

154. It is obvious that in the absence of the representatives
of the legal government of Kampuchea, which exercises
sovereignty over the entire territory of the country, the
discussion of the situation in Kampuchea and the adoption
of any resolution on it can only be regarded as intervention
in the internal affairs of that State. The truth of this is borne
out by what is contained in the present draft resolution,
since it contains a provision which is clearly based on
distorted information on the actual situation in.Kampuchea. The Soviet delegation cannot agree that the Council
should adopt such a one-sided document, since to do so
would run counter to the genuine interests of the Kampuchean people.

149. We hone that the veovle of Cambodia. and indeed
the people of-all the countries in the region, will overcome
the grave problems and differences which history and other
circumstances have imposed upon them, and will find the
road to peace and development. I speak in this respect
against the background of the strong feelings of friendship
which Jamaica has had for the countries concerned and in
anticipation of the maintenance of those ties in the future.
150. My delegation will join with others in the effort to
ensure that the Council will carry out its important function
in thii matter. The draft resolution [S/13027] which has
been introduced by the representative of Kuwait in behalf of
a number of members of the Council therefore has the full
support of my delegation and our co-sponsorship.

155. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Viet Nam
has asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table.
.. . .
156. Before calling on the representative of Viet Nam, I
call on the representative of China.
%
.’
157. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (inrerprerution~om
Chinese): Since the delegations that have inscribed their names
on the list of speakers have already spoken and since, as we
understand it, the draft resolution submitted by the nonaligned countries members of the Council has already been
fully discussed by all members at consultations held outside
the Council meetings, perhaps the President could immediately put that draft resolution to the vote. Members wishing to make explanatory statements on the draft or to
exercise their right of reply could do so this afternoon. In
view of the urgency of the situation, we propose that the
President should immediately put the draft resolution to the
vote.
.a.

151. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): In connexion with
the fact that a number of delegations have submitted the
draft resolution in document S/13027, the Soviet delegation
would like clearly to express its opposition to the consideration of that draft resolution, and even more to its adoption
by the Security Council.
152. The Soviet Union from the very outset has been
opposed to consideration by the Council of the matter
relating to the situation in Kampuchea, particularly in the
absence of the genuine representatives of the Kampuchean
people. In fact, how can any objective draft resolution be
formulated if the members of the Council have not given a
hearing to the only legitimate representatives of the Kampuchean people, namely, the delegation of the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea? At the same time, this
forum has been made available to the henchmen of the
anti-popular puppet r&gime of Pol Pot and Ieng Sary, who

158. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
0;.
Soviet Union on a point of order.
_.. .
159. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet. Socialist
Republics) (interprerationfrom Russian): Mr. President, you
14

did not state that the Council was going to procuzd to a
vote. As I understand it, in accordance with the provisional
rules of procedure, any Member State invited to participate
in the discussion is entitled to speak in its turn.

166. Only the representative of China and Radio Peking
have bent over backwards in these past days to make the
world believe that the present situation in Kampuchea is
one of the utmost tension and subject to military escalation
that is gravely threatening peace, security and stability in the
region of South-East Asia and the entire world.

160. The PRESIDENT: I would put it to the Council that
in the circumstances and in view of the fact that I had called
on the representative of Viet Nam to speak in exercise of the
right of reply the Council should hear the representative of
Viet Nam and then proceed to take a decision with respect
to the question of voting.

167. But what is the purpose of this propaganda orchestrated so noisily at present by international reactionaries?
Quite simply to slander Viet Nam and to find a pretext to
push the Security Council unjustly to intervene in the internal affairs of Kampuchea and to take measures against the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. I would therefore invite
members of the Council and all the Members of the United
Nations who are studying the present situation in Kampuchea with goodwill to use information objectively and prudently and, in particular, to distrust the propaganda from
Peking.

161. As there is no objection, I call on the representative
of Viet Nam to make his statement in exercise of the right of
reply.
162. Mr. HA VAN LAU (Viet Nam) (inrerprefufion$+om
French): I would first of all express my gratitude to the
Council for allowing me to speak in exercise of my right of
reply.

168. I should like now to reply to one of the speakers in
this forum who expressed doubts about the foreign policy of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam-a policy of peace,
friendship and co-operation with neighbouring countries
and with all other countries in South-East Asia.

163. On 11 and 13 January[2108thandZZZOrh meetings], I
had an opportunity to present facts, with sufficient proof in
support of them, regarding the true nature of the events
which had lately taken place in Kampuchea, events that the
Peking authorities had instigated directly in order to
achieve their anti-Vietmanese policy and their expansionist
and hegemonic aims in South-East Asia. I also affirmed
that a new era of peace and stability was opening up in the
Indo-Chinese peninsula and the whole of South-East Asia,
following the collapse of the anti-people’s Pol Pot-Ieng Sary
regime and the emergence of the People’s Republic of
* Kampuchea.

169. Viet Nam was the victim of aggression, even of an
invasion, on the part of the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary armed forces
that has been recognized by the international press. After
much moderation and restraint, Viet Nam finally decided to
repel the aggression and annihilate the aggressive forces,
thus exercising the right to legitimate selfdefence, recognized by the Charter of the United Nations. But at’present,
as in the past, the Vietnamese people harbour the warmest
feelings of friendship and respect for the brotherly Kampuchean people. Today the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique, the
enemy of the Kampuchean people and at the same time an
enemy of the Vietnamese people, has been overthrown.
Thus, favourable conditions have been created for official
meetings and talks to take place as early as possible between
the Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and
the People’s Revolutionary Council of the People’s Republic of Kampuchea to settle matters pending between the two
countries, and in particular the consequences of the border
war, so as to restore and develop the relations of traditional
friendship and co-operation in all fields between the two
peoples. This evolution in the relations between Socialist
Viet Nam and the People’s Republic of Kampuchea will
certainly be beneficial for peace, stability and prosperity in
Indo-China and in the whole of South-East Asia.

164. However; since some delegations have continued to
express their concerns or their doubtssome in good faith,
but certain others perhaps in bad faith-I believe it to be
useful to bring additional clarification before the Council
to&y.
165. First of all, some have anachronistically concerned
themselves about tension and even an escalation of violence
in the present situation in Kampuchea. They are simply not
up to date on what has been happening during the last few
days in Kampuchea. The fact is that the recent definitive
victory of the revolutionary forces of the Kampuchean
people had as its effect the overthrow of a r&me founded
on nepotism and genocide and put an end to the war of
aggression. unleashed by the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique
against Viet Nam. As was correctly stated by the People’s
Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea in its manifesto of 11
January last:
_
“This victory has opened up great prospects for peace,
friendship and cooperation between Kampuchea and
neighbouring countries and has contributed to peace,
stability and prosperity in South-East Asia.”

170. Addressing the other countries of South-East Asia
and in particular those which belong to the Association of
South-East Asian Nations, I should like to reaflirm solemnly and in all sincerity the unswerving devotion of the
people and Government -of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam to relations of solidarity, friendship and co-operation
which today unite the people of Viet Nam with the peoples
of all those countries in our common endeavour for peace,
independence, freedom, neutrality, stability and prosperity
for the entire region, despite the fact that in the past there
were a number of misunderstandings, indeed even conflicts,
between our peoples, the victims of the nefarious policy of
colonialists and imperialists. A new page has been turned in
the history of the relations of my country and the countries

That is the voice of the genuine representative of the victorious Kampuchean people, which is at present the true master of the entire country. It is that voice that must be heeded
and relied on, sinceit alone reflects the objective reality in
the present situation in Kampuchea.
._
15

of South-East Asia. The time when colonialism and imperialism pursued at whim their policy of “divide and rule”
with respect to the peoples of South-East Asia, using IndoChinese to fight other Indo-Chinese and Asians to fight
Asians, is gone for ever.

ary elements so as to push them into so-called guerrilla
operations inside Kampuchea. If there is anyone in that
region whose acts are not in accord with their words, thus
sowing suspicion among peoples, it is precisefy the Peking
authorities. It is they who should be condemned and not the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which is the victim of their
policy of aggression and intervention.

171. The world is witness to the fact that, throughout 30
years of a bitter and difficult struggle against colonialism
aid and new imperialism, the Vietnamese people have followed always and strictly one guiding principle. Just as they
are determined to defend their independence and freedom,
so they show respect for the independence and freedom of
other peoples. The battle cry of our late President Ho Chi
Minh--” nothing is more precious than independence and
freedom”+erves at all times to guide us in our thinking
and in our feelings as well as in the internal and foreign
policies of the people and Government of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam. That sacred battle cry is being
carried out by the Vietnamese people for itself, but it
observes it equally in respect of other peoples.

175. The dark designs of the Peking authorities are well
known; they have been put into practice. But will they be
able to achieve their designs? Certainly not, since it is up to
us, the peoples of South-East Asia, to decide our own atfairs
and to thwart their aims at hegemony and expansion. We
have victoriously fought colonialism and imperialism, and
from that experience we learnt the lesson of militant solidarity among peoples. It is from this point of view that I have
the firm conviction that the countries and peoples of SouthEast Asia will vigilantly view with mistrust any manmvres
by Peking aimed at division and sabotage and will triumphantly meet the challenge.
176. One might wonder, at the end of these three meetings
of the Security Council, whether there are now sufficient
objective facts to serve as a valid basis for a relevant pronouncement and conclusion by the Council on the problem
of Kampuchea. Some claim that the situation is already
clear. Others, on the contrary, maintain that it is still confused. But since the Council has not yet heard the voice of
the genuine representatives of the Kampuchean people,
namely, the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea, I believe that it still lacks some of the fundamental
facts to enable it to obtain an exact idea of the situation in
Kampuchea. In these circumstances, any hasty conclusion
could not fail to be mistaken and would be fraught with ,
serious consequences.

172. The Vietnamese people have self-respect and strictly
observe their commitments to other peoples. They honours
their promises to friends. This is why I should like to
reaffirm once again to all our friends in South-East Asia
that Viet Nam is determined to implement strictly the principles governing its relations with other countries in SouthEast Asia, as recorded in the recent joint declarations of our
Prime Minister Pham Van Dong and the heads of Government of the countries of that region, namely: respect for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of each
country; respect for the right of each country to decide on its
own political, economic and social regime; reciprocal noninterference in internal affairs; refraining from engaging in
direct or indirect subversion; non-use of force or the threat
of force; the settlement of disputes between countries by
peaceful means by way of negotiations in a spirit of equality,
understanding and mutual respect, in the interest of consolidating and developing relations of friendship, co-operation
and good neighbourliness among countries.

177. In my opinion, therefore, the essential condition for
the Security Council to be able to arrive at an informed
judgement and a valid conclusion on the problem of Kampuchea is that the author&d, authentic and representative
voice of the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea
-the only legal and legitimate representative of the Kampuchean people at present--should be invited to make itself
heard in this lofty body.

173. It is on the basis of these principles that the people
and Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
have not spared nor will spare any effort to implement these
agreements that have been or will be signed, in order to
strenghten our bilateral relations with various countries of
the region and to contribute to make of South-East Asia a
zone of peace, independence, freedom, neutrality, stability
and prosperity.

178. In concluding, I would take theliberty of drawing the
Council’s attention to the statement of 14 January of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of
Kampuchea, which I have the honour to transmit today to
the President of the Council with a request to him to have it
distributed to members of the Council as an otlicial Council
document. It reads as follows:

174. It is therefore a matter of great pain for us, the
Vietnamese people, to note that at present it is the reactionary circles of Peking which, in South-East Asia, have taken
it upon themselves to exercise the policy of “‘divide and
ruie” so as to achieve their hegemonic and expansionist
aims in South-East Asia. Indeed, how much harmful and
subversive material is poured forth daily by the Peking
radio and press into the countries of that region of Asia,
slandering Viet Nam and other peoples, inciting hatred and
division among our countries, setting our peoples against
one another! Only a few days after the heroic Kampuchean
people had become masters of their own country, the Peking authorities again started their endeavour to undermine
the new authorities by seeking to arm counter-revolution-

‘The Foreign Ministry of the People’s Republic of
Kampuchea resolutely and completely refutesall contentions made in the Security Council aimed at distorting
the truth and slandering the Kampuchean and Vietnamese peoples, and regards all conclusions by this meeting
as wrong and invalid.” /S/13029, annex.]
179. The PRESIDENT:
The Council must now take a
decision. There are two draft resolutions before us. 1 am
aware of the desire on the part of many members to proceed
quickly to a vote on this matter, and the representative of
16

China exnressed himself formallv on this a short while ago.
on the oher hand, I have been advised of the desire of some
members to have the voting take place this afternoon.

183. My delegation cannot agree to our taking a hasty
decision on this draft resolution, which has been put before
us only this morning. On the basis of rule 33, subparagraph
3, of the provisional rules of procedure I propose that the
meeting should now be adjourned and that a new meeting
should be called for this afternoon.

180. Let me say that, as President, I am very much aware
of the urgency of this matter and of moving to a quick
conclusion expressing the view of the Council, and I intend
to continue to respect this wish on the part of Council
members.

184. Mr. ROL6N ANAYA (Bolivia) (interpretationf
Spanish): Mr. President, I wish to echo your views and
strongly support your proposal to adjourn the meeting now
and vote this afternoon.

181. We have, I believe, after the vote, to call those
members who wish to explain their votes at that stage. The
question, therefore, is whether we should proceed to a vote
now or vote in the afternoon meeting and proceed to complete the business of the Council. As far as I am concerned,
in view of the wishes which have been expressed to me, I
would suggest to the Council that it might wish to consider
postponing the vote until after lunch. However, this is a
matter on which the views of members would assist me. As I
said before, I am aware of and respect the proposal made by
the representative of China, but I would wish to hear
whether the Council would agree to having the voting after
lunch.
182. Mr. HULINSKY

185. The PRESIDENT: To repeat what I said before, I
am very much aware of the strong desire on the part of
many members to have a vote taken now, but I ask Council
members whether, in view of other wishes which have been
expressed to me, they would be prepared, in the circumstances, to postpone the voting until immediately after lunch. By
this I mean that the wishes of the members who would like
to have the voting taken quickly would be met in that,
immediately on resumption of the meeting, the vote would
be taken. It is in those circumstances alone that I could ask
the Council to act in this manner.

(Czechoslovakia) (interpretation

jkom Russian): From the very outset of the consultations on

186. Mr. EL-JEAAN (Kuwait): Mr. President, we should
like to support your views as presented. We think that there
is no difference, actually, in time-or only about a one-hour
difference-and I think your suggestion would accommodate all the points of view which have been expressed.

this matter, and in the Council itself, my delegation has
consistently held the view that the Council should be
extremely cautious regarding matters connected with the
internal affairs of a Member State. We understand the haste
with which the representative of the People’s Republic of
China, for propagandistic purposes, called for the convening of this meeting, because, as soon as the world learns the
facts, it will change its position. I should like once again to
warn the Council against any hastiness in proposing a
solution of this question without even having given the legal
representatives of the new State of Cambodia an opportunity to make themselves heard.

187. The PRESIDENT:
If that is agreeable, members
who wish to speak in explanation of vote before the vote will
then do so after lunch; we shall then vote and proceed.
The meeting rose at 2.05 p.m.

17

.

Unite
1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York
or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

.

may
your

LES

’

be obtained
bookstore

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

and
distributors
Nations,
Sales

DES

UNIES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sont en vente
dans
les librairies
depositsires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
de votre
libraim
a : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes,
New York ou Geneve.
ICAK

HOJlYPHTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

H3AAHHR

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
partes
Unidas,
Section
de Ventas,

L.iiho in United Nations, New York

OPI-AHH

3A4HH

DE

OE-LEnHHEHHhIX

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
estin
de1 mundo.
Consultc
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

NACIONES

HA4HH

UNIDAS

en venta
en libmrfas
a su librero
o dirijase

Price: su.s. 2.50

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

y casas distria: Naciones

79-70002-November

1981-2.250
