United Nations

S/PV.6674

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6674th meeting
Monday, 5 December 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Laher
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-62085 (E)

*1162085*

S/PV.6674

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Djibouti,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and Uganda to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Ismaël Omar Guelleh, President of the
Republic of Djibouti; His Excellency Mr. Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed, President of the Republic of Somalia;
His Excellency Mr. Meles Zenawi, Prime Minister of
the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia; His
Excellency Mr. Moses Wetangula, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Kenya; and His Excellency
Mr. Mull Katende, Permanent Representative of
Uganda to the African Union, who are taking part in
today’s meeting via video teleconference from Addis
Ababa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ismaël
Omar Guelleh, President of the Republic of Djibouti.
President Guelleh (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, and other Council
members for having made this exchange today
possible. I have twice come to brief the Council on the
situation prevailing in our region, in particular in my
country, since Eritrea’s aggression against my country
in June 2008. As is already known, that country has
long denied the existence of any border conflict
between our two countries, and has continued to give
misleading and arrogant responses to our efforts to
resolve our disputes diplomatically and peacefully.
Despite the irresponsible attitude of the Eritrean
regime, the Djibouti Government and people, who are
peace-loving and eager to have the best possible
relations with all neighbouring countries, positively
welcomed the mediation agreement proposed by our
Qatari friend and signed it on 6 June 2010 under the
auspices of the Emir of Qatar, His Highness the dear
Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani.

2

Unfortunately, the signing of that agreement and
the efforts of our Qatari friend did not deflect the
Eritrea regime from its hostilities towards my country.
Worse, it flagrantly and systematically continued its
destabilization activities by kidnapping and the forced
military training of young Djiboutians, who then
infiltrated northern Djibouti in order to carry out
terrorist attacks on our land.
My country is convinced of the virtues of
dialogue and mediation. However, we will not allow
the Eritrean regime to violate our territorial integrity or
to launch terrorist attacks on our territory with
impunity. We have concrete information on Eritrean
terrorist activities. In particular, we have arrested
rebels trained and sent by the Eritrean regime to
destabilize our country. Moreover, we also found
weapons that that same regime tried to send into the
northern part of the territory, again as part of its
destabilization attempt. My Government immediately
conveyed that information to the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the African Union
and United Nations.
The deafening, three-year silence on the fate of
our prisoners is completely intolerable and
unacceptable. Article 3 of the mediation agreement
stipulates that the two parties make available to
mediators all information on the disappeared soldiers,
on the one hand, and the various appeals of the
international community, on the other. My Government
was prompt to do that by inviting, in particular, the
International Committee of the Red Cross to come and
meet the Eritrean prisoners and deserters.
However, the dishonest and untrue remarks of the
Eritrean regime, which had long stated, even sworn,
not to have detained any of the 19 Djiboutian
prisoners, were contradicted by the escape on
4 September of two Djiboutian soldiers, reported
disappeared the night of 10 June 2008. They escaped
from detention camps in Eritrea and reached the Sudan
on foot. They were then transferred to Djibouti by the
friendly Sudanese Government, which we would like to
thank here. To date, Djibouti remains without news of
the other 17 Djiboutian prisoners of war.
Such behaviour is unacceptable and reflects the
complete refusal of Eritrea to abide by international
norms and obligations. My Government therefore
demands the immediate and unconditional freedom of
the Djiboutian prisoners of war held by Eritrea.

11-62085

S/PV.6674

Furthermore, my Government demands that that
regime immediately refrain from involving itself in the
unrest in the north of our territory.
The report of the Monitoring Group on the
implementation of resolutions 1844 (2008) and 1907
(2009) is conclusive (see S/2011/433). Must I recall
that the report was submitted to the Council in June?
Eritrea not only threatens the peace and stability of the
countries of the Horn of Africa, but also continues to
flout the international community by directly
supporting the acts of terrorism of Al-Shabaab. After
three years of silence, denials and lies, the authorities
of Eritrea seem to be moving heaven and Earth in the
face of economic sanctions by wanting to explain itself
before the Council. The sole purpose of that is to avoid
sanctions by, as always, trying to be seen as a victim.
The conclusions on Eritrea’s actions are clear and
indisputable. We have given the Eritrean authorities
more than ample opportunity to agree to dialogue and
negotiation, but in vain. Their decision has been taken.
As for their choice, it is very clear, as they continue to
ignore the persistent calls of the Security Council and
the regional organizations.
In conclusion, I call on all members of the
Council to support the new draft resolution presented
on behalf of the countries of IGAD (S/2011/744). The
draft resolution seeks to remind Eritrea that the
international community will never accept that the
regime continues to destabilize and terrorize the
countries of the subregion. Given that the weapons
embargo and targeted sanctions of previous resolutions
seem unable to contain the ongoing and acute
aggression and hostility of the Eritrean regime, we
hope that this latest draft resolution will help to better
monitor it. Therefore, it is essential that members of
the Security Council be vigilant and, in particular,
aware of the threat that that regime poses to the
stability of our subregion. It needs to live in peace with
its neighbours, rejoin IGAD and stop the
destabilization and interference in the internal affairs
of neighbouring countries. That is all that we, the
Djiboutian Government and friendly country of the
region, demand of Eritrea.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
President Guelleh for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed Sheikh Sharif Sheik, President of
the Republic of Somalia.

11-62085

President Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to
greet all members of the Security Council and your
presidency, Sir, and we thank you for having given us
this opportunity to speak.
The Security Council knows how much the
Somali people are suffering from terrorist groups. The
Somali Government has, as far as possible, tried to
reconcile with those groups. However, the support that
they receive from the Eritrean regime has prevented
reconciliation.
The Council is also aware of our previous
relations with President Afwerki. We know that he has
no desire to promote calm in the region until he has
fulfilled his own expectations and ambitions.
Al-Shabaab and Al-Qaida receive political, logistical
and financial support from the Eritrean Government.
Such support arrives by sea and air. It is known that
Hassan Dahir Aweys himself was in Asmara. He then
moved to Somalia by aeroplane. That shows that the
Eritrean regime has the ability to deliver assistance that
is used by Al-Shabaab directly from Asmara to
Somalia. It is also well known that Somalia has no
direct borders with Eritrea, and has not had bad
relations with Eritrea in the past. In the current
circumstances, however, we are suffering from the
activities of Al-Shabaab and Al-Qaida and of those
providing them with material support from Eritrea. I
recall that, on 22 May 2009, Hassan Dahir Aweys
himself took to the media to thank the Republic of
Eritrea for its direct support.
The Afwerki regime is the only one that does not
recognize this Government. The Eritrean Minister of
information has declared that he has no objection to
this Government. We have tried to resolve our
problems with Eritrea by reaching out to some of its
friends, including the late Muammar Al-Qadhafi, who
called on Eritrea repeatedly to leave Somalia alone and
to encourage Al-Shabaab and Hassan Dahir Awey’s
group to seek reconciliation with the Government so
that the situation can calm down. His appeal was
explicitly rejected. We have also sought to meet with
Eritrea in the context of a conference of the Sahel
countries, but Eritrea failed to attend.
When I was elected in 2009, I contacted
Muammar Al-Qadhafi and asked him to mediate in
order to suppress incipient problems and to convince
the President of Eritrea not to intervene in my country.
Mr. Al-Qadhafi informed me that his efforts had been

3

S/PV.6674

rebuffed, and that the Eritrean President told him
clearly that reconciliation with my country was
impossible. Furthermore, our embassies in Kenya and
elsewhere became aware of certain financial
transactions and that military advisers were being
dispatched frequently to Somalia to train terrorist
elements. They provided these elements with maps and
logistical support, and engaged in attacks on the
Transitional Federal Government and the African
Union forces in my country.
Somalia has no problem whatsoever with Eritrea,
but the Eritrean regime insists on terrorizing my
people. We have repeatedly tried to overcome the
problem through diplomacy and dialogue, which have
been rejected. I do not believe that any State in the
world besides Eritrea has declared its support for those
terrorist organizations. We truly regret the plight of the
Eritrean people, but the interests of my country and our
neighbours are being harmed by the Eritrean regime.
We have therefore joined others in this gathering today,
despite the fact that members of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development do not usually meet in the
absence of a member unless the situation is especially
dire. It is my hope that a strong decision will now be
taken against the Eritrean regime.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
President Ahmed for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Meles
Zenawi, Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia.
Mr. Zenawi (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the members of the Council for
giving us this unique opportunity to express our
concerns at the regional level and as individual
countries. I shall speak today in my capacities as the
current Chairperson of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and as the Prime Minister of
Ethiopia. I really have nothing much to add to what my
colleagues have already said, but I wish to highlight a
few points.
First, we as a region are not complaining about
the domestic policies of the Eritrean Government. We
may or may not like those policies, but that is not the
issue we wish to raise before the Security Council. Our
agenda is to address the fact that Eritrea is a prime
source of instability for the region as a whole.

4

The second point that I wish to highlight is the
fact that this is not a family quarrel between Ethiopia
and Eritrea. All States members of IGAD, including the
Republic of South Sudan, which joined us recently, are
represented here today to express the joint opinion that
Eritrea is the primary source of instability in our
region.
Of course, Ethiopia itself also has a problem with
Eritrea, which began when Eritrea invaded our
territory. That is not an allegation made by Ethiopia; it
is the finding of a neutral arbitral tribunal that was
established by Ethiopia and Eritrea. The arbitral
tribunal decided that Eritrea had indeed invaded
Ethiopia without provocation and should therefore pay
compensation. A boundary commission was established
and has pronounced itself on the matter. A delimitation
decision has been taken, and we in Ethiopia have
accepted it without precondition. We may or may not
like the delimitation decision itself, but we have made
it officially and abundantly clear that we accept it
unconditionally.
The Eritreans claim that the boundary
commission has actually demarcated the boundary on
the map. As a famous Foreign Minister of a permanent
member of the Security Council told our Foreign
Minister, the demarcation of boundaries on maps is a
legal fiction, and a very dangerous one. What we have
therefore asked the Eritreans to do is to engage us in
dialogue so that we can move towards demarcation.
That is what Nigeria and Cameroon did; they engaged
in dialogue to implement a delimitation decision. That
is what grown-up people should do. That, and nothing
more, is what we have asked of Eritrea.
That is the sum total of the so-called border
dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea. It is not a family
quarrel because it did not start with Ethiopia. Eritrea
first invaded the Hanish Islands of Yemen. Its policy is
one of shoot first, start talking later. It invaded our
territory, and then started talking. It invaded Djibouti’s
territory, denied that it had invaded that territory, and
in the end admitted that it had invaded that territory by
withdrawing its troops and allowing Qatari troops to
replace them.
This is not just about borders. In 1995, just one
year after it had achieved its formal independence,
Eritrea had a quarrel with the Government of the
Sudan; it closed the Sudanese embassy in Asmara, gave
it to the South Sudanese opposition, and publically

11-62085

S/PV.6674

stated that it would arm and train any opposition that
was prepared to remove the regime in Khartoum. It has
characterized the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia as a puppet regime, and has openly and
repeatedly held conferences with armed opposition
groups of Somalia, including Al-Shabaab, in order to
try to destabilize Somalia. It is not a family quarrel; it
is a regional problem. It is not a question of lack of
communication; it is a problem of the attitude of a
certain clique in Asmara that has never grown up from
being a rebel group. It is a problem of lawlessness and
reckless disregard for international norms.
We ask the Security Council to help us to stop
that lawlessness because, as it is, the Horn of Africa is
a very fragile region. In the absence of the rule of law
and action by the Security Council, the implication
would be that we are all on our own and that we have
to defend ourselves or perish. That is not a choice that
we want to make. We believe in the rule of law. We
believe in the mandate of the Security Council. We
believe that the Security Council can, and must, act.
The Council has a draft resolution before it. We
in IGAD have been very actively involved in its
preparation. We would like to thank our African
brothers in the Security Council, in particular Gabon
and Nigeria, for working with us very closely in the
drafting process and in its presentation to the Council.
I am personally disappointed that many of the teeth of
the draft resolution were subsequently removed. But I
am convinced that, even as it is, it will convey the right
message. We therefore appeal to the members of the
Council, individually and collectively, to ensure that
the message that the clique in Asmara gets is that it
cannot continue to destabilize the region without any
consequences. We ask the Council to act and to do so
decisively.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Mr. Moses Wetangula, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kenya.
Mr. Wetangula (Kenya): I speak on behalf of
President Mwai Kibaki of Kenya who, regrettably,
could not join his brothers at this very critical debate in
the Security Council.
The imperative for the Security Council to focus
sharp attention on Eritrea could not come at a better
time. The Council is arguably the most important
custodian of world peace and security. Kenya joins the
Presidents who spoke ahead of me in placing our case

11-62085

before the Security Council — a case that is not new.
We are simply asking for an enhancement of the
sentence and punishment already meted out on the
offending party.
In the past couple of years, the region of the Horn
of Africa has experienced serious peace and security
challenges. Indeed, the United Nations and the African
Union (AU) have partnered with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), our regional
organization, to face some of those challenges. IGAD
has been a very serious and committed player in that
regard. However, we regret that one of our members,
who has since disengaged from membership, namely,
Eritrea, continues to engage in activities that are
inconsistent with, and hostile to, the peace efforts that
we all are interested in. As it is now, the region is not
coming to the Security Council for the first time;
neither should the argument that we have bypassed the
AU hold any water. The Security Council is already
seized of this matter. The Council is simply being
asked to review, enhance and enforce a sentence
already passed on the offending party.
My country, Kenya, alongside other countries of
the region, has a whole raft of issues we can place
before the Council — indeed they have been placed
before the Council — that are linked to the activities of
destruction of our neighbour Eritrea. As you know,
Mr. President, Kenya has suffered a series of terrorist
attacks — on the American Embassy in 1998, as well
attacks on our tourist installations and kidnappings
committed by Al-Shabaab. What do we get from our
neighbour Eritrea? It says that Al-Shabaab does not
constitute a significant threat in the region. Since
Kenya launched Operation Protect the Nation, on
16 October, in conjunction with forces from the
Transitional Federal Government, to try to clean up the
Al-Shabaab menace in the region, we have evidence
that Eritrea has supplied arms, ammunition and other
logistics to Al-Shabaab. This is truly a hostile and
enemy act by a country that ought to be an active
member of IGAD.
It should not be forgotten that it is on the record
that, two or three years ago, Kenya was forced to expel
an Eritrean diplomat in Nairobi after establishing
beyond any doubt that this diplomat was a critical link
between supplies of ammunition, arms and explosivemaking materials from his country to Mogadishu,
sometimes through Kenya. Those materials had the
effect of being used to kill and maim troops of the

5

S/PV.6674

African Union Mission in Somalia, innocent civilians,
women and children, some going about their legitimate
business in local markets in Mogadishu.

requested — albeit somewhat watered down — is
perhaps to add a feather to the cap of impunity. And
that will not help the region in any way.

Kenya has suffered, including today when an
explosion in the Dadaab refugee camp, which is run by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, killed a policeman and injured several
refugees. After each of those violent incidents, what we
normally get is Al-Shabaab saying that it lauds the
heroic acts and that more will come. It has even said
that the skyscrapers of Nairobi are now legitimate
targets. Yet, Eritrea first of all says that Al-Shabaab
does not pose a significant threat to any country in the
region.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uganda, His Excellency
Mr. Mull Katende.

It is now time for the Security Council to take
cognizance of and act on the draft resolution that the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development has
placed before it in document S/2011/744, which is
unanimously supported by all countries and will in
some small way help to bring Eritrea to order. I have
no doubt that the Council has the will, the means and
the capacity to do even more than the region is
requesting. It may be too little, too late, but we believe
that a step in the right direction is a step in support of
peace and security in the region, of which the Security
Council is the ultimate custodian.
Once again, I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for giving us the opportunity to speak to the Council,
and I fully support and endorse the statements made by
my senior colleagues, the Presidents who have spoken
before me, and urge you and the Council to realize that
a failure to act today to sanction Eritrea in the manner

6

Mr. Katende (Uganda): Uganda has been part of
the decisions taken by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the African Union
concerning the situation in Somalia and the border
dispute between Djibouti and Eritrea. Uganda remains
committed to those decisions and hopes that the
Security Council will respond positively to the requests
made to it by IGAD and the African Union, including
taking measures against all those countries,
organizations and individuals identified as being
directly or indirectly involved in providing human,
financial or technical support to Al-Shabaab and
Hizbul Islam militias and terrorists in the Horn of
Africa.
We are particularly concerned because of what
has happened to us in the past. We are also concerned,
because we have troops in Somalia and with the
African Union Mission in Somalia. We want those
troops to do their job, accomplish that job and return
home safely.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more speakers inscribed on my list. I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 10.45 a.m.

11-62085
