General Assembly-·· fhirty-eighth Session

94

Conscious of the continued need to examine and compile information about atomic and ionizing radiation and
to analyse its effccts on man and his environmcnt.
Taking note of the decision of the Scientific Committce
to submit shorter reports with scientific supporting documents on the specialized topics mentioned in its report, as
soon as the relevant studies are completed, 1
l. Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation for the valuable
contribution it has been making in the course of the past
twenty-eight years, since its inception, to wider knowledge
and understanding of the levels, effects and risks of atomic
radiation and for fulfilling its original mandate with scientific authority and independence of judgemcnt;
2. Notes with satisfactwn the continued and growing
scientific co-operation between the Scientific Committcc
and the United Nations Environment Programme:
3. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its
work, including its important co-ordinating activities, to
increase knowledge of the levels. effects and risks of ionizing radiation from ali sources:
4. Endorses the Scientific Committee's intentions and
plans for its future activities of scientific revicw and assessment on behalf of the General Assembly:
5. Requests the Scientific Committec to continue at its
next session the review of important problems in the field
ofradiation and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its thirty-ninth session:
6. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue providing support for the effective
conduct of the Scientific Committee's work and for thc
dissemination of its findings to the General Assembly, the
scientific community and the public:
7. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance rendered to the Scientific Committee by Member States, the
specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy
Agency and non-govemmental organizations, and invites
them to increase their co-operation in this field:
8. Invites Member States and the organizations of the
United Nations system and non-governmental organizations concemed to provide further relevant data about
doses, effects and risks from various sources of radiation,
which would greatly help in the prcparation of the Scientific Committee's future reports to the General Assembly.
98th plenary meeting
15 Decemher 1983

38/79. Report of the Special Committee to lnvestigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories

A
The General Assembly,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization relative to the fate of
Ziad Abu Eain, 4
Taking note of the report of the Intemational Committee of the Red Cross of 13 December 1983, 5
l. Condemns Israel for the fact that one prisoner, Ziad
Abu Eain, who had been rcgistcred before embarkation by
3 /bid., para. 5.
4 Official Record5 ofthe General Asscmhlr. Th,m•-cighth Ses.mm, Spl'rnd

Political Committee, 40th meeting, para. 1

delega tes of thc Intcrnational Committee of the Red Cross
at Te! Aviv Airport. was takcn at the last minute by thc
lsraeli authoritics:
1
De111a11ds th,· immcdiatc rcleasc of Ziad Abu Eain.
as well as the othcr prisoners who were duly registered to
be frecd from Insar Camp and other military command
posts in southern Lebanon but have not in fact been
released, and thc securing of thcir transfer to Algicrs in
conformity with the agreement reached through the good
offices of thc International Committee of the Red Cross;
3. Requcsts thc Secretary-General to rnport on thc
implementation of the prescnt resolution.
98th plenary meeting
15 Dccemher 1983

B
The General .·lsscmbl)',
Recalling its rcsolutions 3092 A (XXVIII) of 7 December 1973, 3240 B (XXIX) of 29 November 1974, 3525 B
(XXX) of 15 December 1975, 31/106 B of 16 December
1976, 32/91 A of 13 December 1977, 33/113 A of 18
December 1978, 34/90 B of 12 December 1979. 35/122 A
of 11 December I 980, 36/ 147 A of 16 December 1981 and
3 7/88 A of 1O Dt'cember 1982.
Recalling a/so Security Council resolution 465 ( 1980) of
1 March 1980 in which, inter afia, the Council affirmed
that the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons m Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 6 is
applicable to the Arab territories occupied by Israel since
196 7. including Jcrusalem,
Considering that the promotion of respect for the obligations arising from the Charter of the United Nations and
other instruments and rules of intemational law is among
the basic purposes and principies of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convcntion,
Noting that Israel and those Arab States whose tcrritories have been occupied by Israel since June 196 7 are parties to that Convcntion,
Taking into account that States parties to that Convention undertake, in accordance with article 1 thereof, not
only to respect but also to ensurc respect for the Convention in ali circumstances,
1. Rea/jirms that the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949, is applicable to Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupicd by Israel since 196 7, including Jerusalem:
2. ( 'ondemns once again the failure of Israel as thc
occupying Power to acknowledge the applicability of that
Convention to the territories it has occupied since 1967.
including Jerusalem;
3. Strongly demands that Israel acknowledge and comply with the provisions of that Convention in Palestinian
and other Arab territories it has occupied since 196 7,
including Jerusalem:
4. Urgently ca/Is upon ali States parties to that Convention to exert every effort in order to ensure respect for and
compliance with its provisions in Palestinian and other
5 Sec A/38/7
f>

,s.

United Nat,ons, / l'<'<l/J' Smcs. vol. 75, No. 97J. p. 287.

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Politkal Comm_i_tt_e_e_ _ _ _ _ _ __

Arab territorics occupicd by Israel sincc 196 7, including
Jerusalem.
9Sth plcnarF meeting
15 Dcccmhcr 1983

e
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/5 of 28 Octobcr 1977, 33/
113 B of 18 December 1978, 34/90 C of 12 Deccmber
1979, 35/122 B of 11 Decembcr 1980, 36/147 B of 16
December 1981 and 37/88 B of 10 December 1982.
Reca/ling a/so Security Council rcsolution 465 ( 1980) of
1 March 1980,
Expressing grave anxiety and crmccrn at the prcsent serious situation in the occupied Palestinian and other Arab
territories, including Jerusalem, as a result of thc continued Israelí occupation and the measures and actions taken
by the Government of Israel, the occupying Power,
designed to change the legal status. geographical nature
and demographic composition of those territories,
Considering that the Geneva Convention relativc to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949, 6 is applicable to ali Arab territories occupied since June 1967, including Jerusalem,
1. Determines that ali such measures and actions taken
by Israel in the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, are in violation of
the relevant provisions of the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection ofCivilian Persons in Time ofWar. of 12
August 1949, and constitute a serious obstruction of etforts
to achieve a just and lasting peace in the Middle East and
therefore have no legal validity;
2. Strongly deplores the persistence of Israel in carrying
out such measures, in particular the establishment of settlements in the Palestinian and other occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem;
3. Demands that Israel comply strictly with its intcrnational obligations in accordancc with thc principies of
intcrnational law and the provisions of the Geneva Convention;
4. Demands once more that thc Govcrnmcnt of Israel,
the occupying Power, desist forthwith from taking any
action which would result in changing the legal status, geographical nature or demographic composition ofthe Palcstinian and other Arab territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem;
5. Urgently ca/Is upan ali States parties to the Gencva
Convention to respect and to excrt every etfort in order to
ensure respect for and compliance with its provisions in ali
Arab territories occupied by Israel sincc 1967, including
Jerusalem.
98th plenar_v meeting
I 5 Decemher 1983

D
The General Assemhly.
Ciuided by the purposes and principies of the Chartcr of
the United Nations and by the principies and provisions of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 7
7 Resolution 217 A (lll).
8 See O.fficia/ Records (}f the Economic and Soual Council. 191(!_ Su{J{Jle·
ment No. 3 (E/1983/13 and C'orr.l). chap. XXVII.

95

llcaring in n1111d the provisions of thc Geneva Convention rclativc to the Protection ofCivilian Persons in Time
of War. of 12 August 1949. 6 as well as of othcr rclevant
conventions and rcgulations.
Recalling ali its resolutions on the suhject, in particular
resolutions 32/91 B and C of 13 Deccmber 1977, 33/ 113 C
of 18 December 1978, 34 "90 .--\ of 12 Deccmbcr 1979, 35/
122 C of 11 Dcccmber 1980, 361147 C of 16 December
1981 and 37 188 C of 10 December 1982, and also thosc
adopted by thc Security Council, the Commission on
Human Rights, in particular its resolution 1983/ 1 of 15
February 1983, 8 and other United Nations organs concerned and by the spccialized agencies,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee
to Invcstigate Israelí Practices Atfecting the Human Rights
of the Population of the Occupied Territories, 9 which contains, inlcr afia, public statements made by officials of the
Govcrnmcnt of IsraeL
1. Commends the Spccial Committee to Investigate
Israelí Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population ofthe Occupied Tcrritories for its etforts in performing the tasks assigned to it by the General Assembly and
for its thoroughness and impartiality;

2. Deplores the continucd refusal by Israel to allow the
Spccial Committec access to thc occupied territories:
3. Dcmands that Israel allow the Special Committee
access to the occupicd territorics;
4. Rea_ffirms the fact that occupation itself constitutes a
grave violation of the human rights of the civilian population of thc occupied Arab territories:
5. Condemns the continued and persistent violation by
Israel of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,
and other applicable international instruments. and condemns in particular thosc violations which that Convention designates as '·grave breaches" thereof;
6. Declares once more that lsracl's grave breaches of
that Convcntion are war crimes and an atfront to humanity:
7. S1ro11gl_1• condemm the following Israelí policies and
practiccs:
(a) Annexation of parts of the occupied territories,
including Jerusalem;
(b) Imposition of Israelí laws, jurisdiction and administration on the Syrian Golan Heights, which has resultcd
in the effective annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights:
(e) Establishment of new Israelí settlements and
cxpansion ofthe existing settlements on prívate and public
Arab lands, and transfer of an alien population thereto;

(d) Evacuation, deportation, expulsion, displacement
and transfer of Arab inhahitants of the occupied territories
and dcnial of their right to return;
(e) Confiscation and expropriation of priva te and public Arab property in the occupied territories and ali other
transactions for the acquisition of land involving the
Israeli authorities, institutions or nationals on the one
hand and the inhabitants or institutions of the occupied
territorics on the other;
(() Excavation and transformation of the landscape
and the historical, cultural and rcligious sites, especially at
Jcrusalem;
9 See A 38"409.

General Assembly-Thirty-eighth Session

96

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ___.___ __ : _ - - - - = - - - - - - - - - -·-- --- ---- ----

(g)
(h)

Pillaging of archaeological and cultural property:
Destruction and demolition of Arah houses:
(i) Collective punishment, mass arrests, administrative detention and ill-treatmcnt of the Arah population:
U) Ill-treatmcnt and torture of persons under dctention:
(k) Interference with religious freedoms and practices
as well as family rights and customs:
(/) Interference with the system of education and with
the social and economic development of the population in
the occupied Palestinian and other Arah territorics:
(m) Interference with the freedom of movement of
individuals within the occupied Palestinian and other
Arab territories:
(n) Illegal exploitation of thc natural wealth, resources
and population of the occupied territories:
8. Strong/y condcmns the arming of Israelí settlers in
the occupied territories to commit acts of violence against
Arab civilians and the perpetration of acts of violence by
these armed settlers against individuals, causing injury and
death and wide-scale damage to Arah property:
9. Reaffirms that ali measures taken by Israel to change
the physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure or status of the occupied territories, or any
part thereof, including Jerusalcm, are null and void, and
that Israel's policy of settling parts of its population and
new immigrants in the occupicd territories constitutes a
flagrant violation of the Geneva Convention and of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations:
1O. Demands that Israel desist forthwith from the policies and practices referred to in paragraphs 7, 8 and 9
above;
11. Ca/Is upon Israel, the occupying Power, to take
immediate steps for the return of ali displaced Arab and
Palestinian inhahitants to their homes or former places of
residence in the territories occupied by Israel since 196 7:
12. Urges the international organizations and the specialized agencies, in particular the lnternational Labour
Organisation, to examine the conditions of Arab workcrs
in the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories.
including Jerusalem:
13. Reiterares its cal/ upon ali States, in particular
those States parties to the Geneva Convention, in accordance with article I of that Convention, and upon international organizations and the specialized agencies not to
recognize any changes carried out by Israel in the occupied
territories and to avoid actions. including those in the field
of aid, which might be used by Israel in its pursuit of the
policies of anncxation and colonization or any of the other
policies and practices referrcd to in the prcscnt resolution:
14. Requests thc Spccial Committee, pending thc early
termination of Israelí occupation, to continue to investigate Israeli policies and practices in the Arab territories
occupied by Israel since 196 7, to consult, as appropriate.
with the lnternational Committee of the Red Cross in
order to ensure the safeguarding of the welfare and human
rights of the population of the occupied territories and to
report to the Secretary-General as soon as possible and
whenever the necd arises thereafter:
15. Rcquests the Special Committee to continue to
investigate the treatment of civilians in detention in the
Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967:
16. Condemns lsrael's refusal to permit persons from
the occupied territories to appear as witnesscs before the
Special Committee and to participate in conferences and
meetings held outside thc occupied territories:

17.

Requests the Secrctary-General:
To provide ali necessary facilities to the Special
Committec. including thosc required for its visits to thc
occupied territories. with a view to invcstigating the Israeli
policics and practices rcfcrred to in the prescnt resolution:
(h) To continuc to makc availablc additional staff as
may be necessary lo assist the Spccial Committee in the
performance of its tasks:
(e) To ensurc the widcst circulation of thc reports of
the Special Committce. and of information regarding its
activities and findings. by ali means available through the
Department of Public lnformation of the Secretariat and.
where necessary, 10 reprint those reports of the Special
Committee which are no longer available:
(d ) To report to the General Assembly al its thirtyninth session on thc tasks cntrusted to him in the present
paragraph:
18. Rcquests the Security Council to ensure lsrael's
respect for and compliancc with ali the provisions of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, in Palestinian
and other Arab territories occupied sincc 196 7. including
Jerusalem, and to initiate measures to halt Israeli policics
and practiccs in those territories:
19. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth session the item entitled "Report of the Spccial Committee to lnvestigate lsraeli Practices Affecting
the Human Rights ofthe Population ofthe Occupied Territories".
(a)

98th p/cnar_)' 111eeti11g
15 Dcccmhcr 1983

E
Thc General Asscmh/y,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 468 ( 1980) of 8

May 1980, 469 ( 1980) of 20 May 1980 and 484 ( 1980) of
19 December 1980 and General Assembly resolutions 36 1
147 D of 16 December 1981 and 37 188 D of 10 December
1982.
Dcep/_1• concerncd at thc expulsion by the Israeli milita!)
occupation authoritics of the Mayors of Hcbron and
Halhul and of the Sharia Judgc of Hebron,
Recalling the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. of 12 August
1949, 6 in particular articlc I and the first paragraph of
article 49, which read as follows:

".frtic/e I
"The High Contracting Parties undertake 10 respect
and to ensure respect for the prescnt Convention in ali
circumstances."
"Art1clc 49

"Individual or mass forcible transfers, as well as
deportations of protected persons from occupied territory to the territory of the occupying Power orto that of
any other countl). occupicd or not. are prohibited.
regardless of their motive ... ".
Reajfirming the applicability of the Gcneva Convention
to the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied b~
Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem.
l. Demands 011cc more that the Government of Israel.
the occupying Powcr. rescind the illegal measures taken b:
the lsraeli milita!) occupation authoritics in expelling and
imprisoning the Mayors of Hebron and Halhul and in
expelling the Sharia Judge of Hebron and that it facilitate

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political C"ommitlee

the immediate return ofthe expelled Palestinian leaders so
that they can resume the functions for which they were
elected and appointed;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly as soon as possible on the implementation
of the present resolution.

97

5. Ca/Is once again upon Member States not to recognize any of the legisla ti ve or administrativc measurcs and
actions referred to abovc;
h. Rcqucsts the Sceretar,-General to submit to the
General Asscmbly at its thiity-ninth session a report on
the implementation of the prcsent resolution.
981h plenarr meeting
15 Dcccmhcr 1983

98th p/e,zar¡• /1/CCting
15 Dcccmher 1983

F

G

The General Asscmhly.
Deeply concerncd that the Arab territories occupied
since 196 7 have been under continued Israeli military
occupation,
Recalling Security Council resolution 497 ( 1981) of 17
December 1981 and General Assembly resolutions 36/226
B of 17 December 1981, ES-9/ 1 of 5 Februarv 1982 and
37/88 E of 10 December 1982,
•
Recalling its previous resolutions. in particular resolutions 3414 (XXX) of 5 December 1975, 31/61 of 9
December 1976, 32/20 of 25 November 1977. 33/28 and
33/29 of 7 December 1978. 34/70 of 6 December 1979
and 35/ 122 E of 11 December 1980. in which it, inter afia,
called upon Israel to put an end to its occupation of the
Arab territories and to withdraw from ali those territories.
Reaffirming once more the illegality of Israel's decision
of 14 December 1981 to imposc its laws, jurisdiction and
administration on the oceupied Syrian Golan Heights,
which has resulted in the effective annexation ofthat territory,
Reaffirming that the acquisition of territory by force is
inadmissible under the Charter ofthe United Nations and
that ali territories thus occupied by Israel must be
returned,
Recalling the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. of 12 August
1949, 6
1. Strongly condemns Israel, the occupying Power. for
its refusal to comply with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, particularly
Council resolution 497 (1981 ), in which the Council, intcr
afia, decided that the Israeli decision to impose its laws.
jurisdiction and administration on the occupied Syrian
Golan Heights was null and void and without international legal effect and demanded that Israel, the occupying
Power, should rescind forthwith its decision;
2. Condemns the persistence of Israel in changing the
physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure and legal status of the occupicd Syrian
Arab Golan Heights;
3. Determines that ali legislative and administrative
measures and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, that purport to alter the character and
legal status ofthe Syrian Arab Golan Heights are null and
void and constitute a flagrant violation of intemational
law and of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949, and have no legal effect;
4. Strongly condemns Israel for its attempts and measures to impose forcibly Israelí citizenship and Israeli identity cards on the Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian
Arab Golan Heights and calls upon it to desist from its
repressive measures against the population of the Syrian
Arab Golan Heights;

Fhc (Ícncral .·lsscmhfr.
Hcanng in 111ind thc (ieneva Convcntion rclative to thc
Protcction of Civilian Persons in Time of War. of 12
August 1949. ''
J)cep/r shockcd by the most reeent atrocities committed
by Israel. the occupying Power, against educational institutions in thc occupied Palestinian territorics.
1. Rcaf/mns thc applicability of the Gencva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War. of 12 August 1949. to the Palestinian and other
Arab territories occupied by Israel sinec 196 7. including
Jcrusalem:
.., Condcmns Israelí policies and practiccs against Palcstinian students and faculties in schools, universities and
other educational institutions in thc occupied Palestinian
territories. espccially the policy of opening fire on defenceless students. eausing many casualties:
3. Condcmns the systematie lsraeli campaign of
repression against and elosing of universities in thc occupied Palcstinian territories, rcstricting and impcding thc
academic aetivities of Palestinian universities by subjecting the selection of courses. textbooks and cducational
programmes. the admission of studcnts and the appointment of faculty mcmbers to the control and supervision of
the military oecupation authorities. in elear contravcntion
of the Geneva Convention;
4. Dcmands that Israel. the occupying Power. comply
with thc provisions of that Convention. rescind ali actions
and measures against ali educational institutions. cnsure
the freedom of those institutions and refrain forthwith
from hindering the eflcctive operation of the universities
and other educational institutions;
5. Rcqucsts the Secretary-General to submit a report
on the implementation of the present rcsolution before the
end of 1984.
98th plcnarr meeting
15 Dcccmhcr 1983

H
Thc General .-lsscmhfi·.
Rccal/ing Security Council resolution 4 71 ( 1980) of 5
Junc 1980, in which the Couneil condemned thc assassination attempts against the Mayors ofNablus. Ramallah and
Al Bireh and called for the immediate apprehension and
prosecution of the perpetrators of those crimes.
Rccalling a/so General Assembly rcsolutions 36/ l 4 7 G
of 16 Dccember 1981 and 3 7/88 G of IO December 1982.
Rccal/ing once again the Gcneva Convention rclative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. of 12
August 1949, 6 in particular article 27. which states, i11tcr
afia:

General ,hscmhl) - Thirt)-eighth Session

98

"Protected persons are entitled, in ali circumstances,
to respect for their persons ... They shall al ali tunes he
humanely trcatcd, and shall he protccted espccially
against ali aets of violcnce or threats thercof ... ",
Reaffirming the applicability of that Con\cntion to thc
Arab territorics occupicd by Israel since 1967, including
Jerusalcm,
I, ExprC'SSC'S dcep conccrn that Israel, thc occupying
Power, has failed for threc years to apprehend and prosccute the perpetrators of the assassination attemph:
2, DC'mands oncl' more that lsraeL the occupying
Power, inform thc Sccrctary-General oí Lhe rcsults of thc
investigations rclativc to the assassination attempts:
3, Requests the Secrctar)-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session a rcport on
the implcmentation of thc prcsent rcsolution.
91\th plcnary meeting
15 Decc111her /983

38/80.

International co-operation in the peaceful
uses of outer space

The GenC'ral Assemhly,
Recalling its resolutions 37 189 ami 37190 of 10 Dccem-

bcr 1982,
Deeply convinccd of thc common interest of mankind in
promoting the exploration and use of outcr spacc for
peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to cxtend to ali
States the bencfits dcrived therefrom, and of the importance of international co-opcration in this ficld, for which
the United Nations should continue to providc a focal
point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing thc rule of law for the advancement and prcservation of the explora! ion and peaceful
uses of outer spacc,
Grave/y conccrncd al the cxtension of the arms race into
outer space,
Aware of the need to increase the benelits of space technology and its applications and to contribute to an orderly
growth of space activities favourable to the socioeconomic advancement of mankind, in particular the peoples of developing countries,
Taking note with satisfactíon ofthe progress achieved in
the further development of peaceful spacc cxploration and
application as well as in various national and co-operative
space projects, which contribute to international cooperation in this field,
Taking note of thc report of the Serrctary-< icneral on
the implementation of resolution 37 /90, 10
Having considercd the rcport of the Committce on the
Peaceful Uses of Outcr Space on thc work of its twentysixth session, 11
l. Endorses the rcport of the Committce on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space:
2. Invites States that ha ve not yet become parties to thc
international treaties governing the use of outcr space 12 to
give consideration to ratifying or acccding to thosc trcatics:
10 A/38/412.
11 Ojficia/ Records ofthc General .·l.rn'l11hil". Th1rti·-e1ghth Scssion, Sup¡,/c-

ment No. 20 (A/38/20).
12 Treaty on Principies Goveming the Activities of States in thc Exploration and Use ofüuter Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Rodies
(resolution 2222 (XXI), annex); Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, thc
Retum of Astronauts and the Retum of Objects Launched into Outer Spacr
(resolution 2345 (XXII), anncx): Convent,on on lntcrnat1onal 11ahili1, for

>. l'ú11es that the Legal Sub-Committee of the Committec on thc Peaceful l lses of Outer Space al its twentysccond session continued:
(a)
lts effórts to formulate draft principies relating to
the legal implications of remole sensing of the Earth from
space:
(/1)
lts rnnsideration of thc possibility of supplementing the norms of international law relevant to the use of
nuclear power sources in outer space through its working
group:
(d lts discussion of mattns relating to lhe dcfinition or
delimitation of outer space and outer s¡:íace activities,
bt·aring in mind, 11I1cr alw, qucstions relating to the geostationary orbit:
4. :\'ntes w11h sa11stác11011 the successful efforts of the
Legal Sub-Committee· of the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses ofOuter Spaee in elaborating an agreed text concerning the formal and the procedure for notification in case of
malfunction of a spacecraft carrying a nuclear power
source on board:
S. Decides that the Legal Sub-Committee at its twenty1h1rd session should:
(a) Continuc, on a priority basis, its detailed consideration of the legal implications of remote sensing of the
Earth from space, with the aim of formulating draft principies rclating to remole sensing:
(/1) Continue its considcration of the possibility of supplementing the norms of international law relevant to the
use of nuclear powcr sources in outer space through its
working group:
(el Establish a working group to consider, on a priority
basis, matters relating to the definition and delimitation of
outcr space and to the character and utilization of the geostationary orbit, including the elaboration of general principies to govern the rational and equitable use of the geostationary orbit, a limited natural resource. and. to that
cnd, requests Membcr States to suhmit draft principies: in
doing so, it would havc to take account of the different
legal régimes governing airspace and outer spaee, respectively, and the need for technical planning and legal regulation of the geostationary orbit:
6. l\'otes that the Scientific and Technical SubCommittee of the Committee on the Pcaceful Uses of
Outer Space at its twentieth scssion continued:
(a) Its consideration ofthe United Nations Programme
on Space Applications and the co-ordination of space
activities within thc United Nations system:
(h) lts consideration of questions relating to remole
sen~ing of the earth by satellites:
(e) lts examinat1on ofthe physical nature and techni,·al
attributes of the geostationary orbit:
(d)
lts considcration of technical aspects and safety
measures rclat ing to the use of nuclear power sources in
outer spacc:
(e) Its considcration of questions rclating to space
transportation systems and their implications for future
activities in space:
(/) Its consideration of the implementation of the recommendations of the Second lJnited Nations Conference
on the Exploration and Pcaceful Uses of Outer Space: 13
Damage Caused hy Space Objects (resolutíon 2777 (XXVI), annex): Conventllln on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space (resolution 3235
(XXIX), annex): Agreement Goveming the Activities ofStates on the Moon
and Other Celestial Bodics (resolution .,4168, annex).
11 See Re¡>ort o(thc Second l'nited ,\"at,m,s Crmferenn' on thc Fxp/oratum
ami Peaceful Uses o(Out,·r Spacc. 1·1cn11a. 9-:!l AUK11Sf 1982 (AICONF.I0J.
1O and Corr. l and 2)
