S/PV.8190

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8190th meeting

Monday, 26 February 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Allen
Ms. Eckels-Currie

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 26 January 2018 from the Panel of Experts on Yemen mandated
by Security Council resolution 2342 (2017) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2018/68)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-05193 (E)
*1805193*

S/PV.8190

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 26 January 2018 from the Panel of
Experts on Yemen mandated by Security Council
resolution 2342 (2017) addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2018/68)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2018/156 and S/2018/157, which contain
the texts of two draft resolutions, respectively.
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The Security Council
has long recognized that the situation in Yemen
threatens international peace and security. It has
caused the world’s largest humanitarian crisis, which
gets worse by the day. The conflict creates ungoverned
spaces in which terrorists can operate, poses security
threats to countries in the region and international
shipping, and fuels regional tensions.
While international attention is rightly focused on
the horror that continues to unfold in Syria, the Council
must not ignore the appalling situation in Yemen. We
have a duty to respond, using all the tools at our disposal.
We must show unity of effort and purpose to put an end
to this terrible and destabilizing conflict. That is why
we have submitted draft resolution S/2018/156, which
is before us today.
The United Nations sanctions regime is a critical
tool that we must use to pressurize the individuals
and organizations bent on undermining peace and
security in Yemen. We welcome the work of the Panel
of Experts, which has played a key role in supporting
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2140 (2014) in carrying out its mandate,
including through the provision of recommendations
regarding the implementation of measures decided
upon in resolutions 2140 (2014) and 2216 (2015). It is
vital that the Panel’s work continue.
2/9

26/02/2018

Furthermore, we in the Council must not ignore
the growing ballistic-missile threat emanating from
Yemen, which gravely threatens international peace
and security. Attacks such as those launched on 22 July,
4 November and 19 December against civilian targets
in Saudi Arabia are unacceptable. They undermine
the prospects for peace, prolong the conflict and put
civilian lives at risk. The Council must speak out with
a united voice against such attacks. We can do this by
voting in favour of the draft resolution before us today,
which strongly condemns these attacks.
The United Kingdom is deeply concerned about the
fact that Iran failed to take the necessary measures to
prevent the direct or indirect supply, sale or transfer
of short-range ballistic missiles, missile propellant and
unmanned aerial vehicles to what was then the HouthiSaleh alliance, as reported by the Panel of Experts. We
agree with the Panel’s assessment that in the light of
that, Iran is in non-compliance with paragraph 14 of
resolution 2216 (2015). Iran, and other States that violate
Security Council resolutions, must be held accountable
for it. The Council must stand firm in the face of
non-compliance by States and send a clear message
that it will not be tolerated. That is what the Charter of
the United Nations demands from us — respect for the
obligations arising from treaties and other sources of
international law.
We are also deeply concerned about the growing
humanitarian crisis in Yemen. A record 22.2 million
people are now in need of assistance, which is 3.4 million
more than last year. Last year’s United Nations
humanitarian appeal was only 70 per cent funded, and
this year’s appeal stands at $2.96 billion. We encourage
all Member States to respond fully to it. Restrictions on
vital humanitarian access continue to be imposed by all
the parties to the conflict. The United Nations Panel of
Experts has made the impact of access restrictions on
the people of Yemen clear. Draft resolution S/2018/156,
which the members of the Council have before them,
therefore calls for full and unfettered access for
humanitarian and commercial cargo through all of
Yemen’s ports, including Hudaydah and Salif, and for
supplies to be increased beyond pre-November levels.
This is an important year. With a new United
Nations Special Envoy in place, it is vital that the
international community redouble its efforts to achieve
a political solution to the conflict. We call on all the
parties to the conflict to resolve their differences
through dialogue and consultation, and to refrain from
18-05193

26/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

provocation. Until an enduring political settlement is
reached, we must maintain the sanctions regime in
order to deter those who would otherwise use violence
to achieve their political aims.
The United Kingdom has worked hard with all
Council members in order to reach consensus on a draft
resolution that responds to our concern about all the
ongoing political, security, economic and humanitarian
challenges in Yemen, and the threats arising from the
illicit transfer and misuse of weapons. Today we spent
more than five hours in detailed talks with delegations,
and we have proposed a number of compromises. I am
personally grateful for the patience that everyone has
showed today. We have tried to agree on a text that
provides a balanced and impartial assessment of the
situation in Yemen but that does not shy away from
calling out those whose actions undermine international
peace and security.
Today we must show that we in the Council are
united against a threat to Yemen’s future. We must also
send a clear message that we support the independence
and integrity of the Panel of Experts. We in the Council
rely on those independent expert international panels.
We may not always like all of their reports, and we
may find their conclusions politically inconvenient, but
if we want the United Nations to function, we should
support them in their work.
Those who do not vote in favour of the draft
resolution today are preventing us from sending a clear
message to those who seek to undermine peace and
security in Yemen and the region beyond. They are also
failing in their duty to do all they can to uphold the
international rules-based system and hold States that
violate resolutions agreed on by the Council to account.
With that in mind, I strongly urge everyone here to vote
in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation will not be able to
support draft resolution S/2018/156, proposed by our
British colleagues, on the extension of the mandate of
the Panel of Experts of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to paragraph 19 of resolution 2140
(2014) on sanctions against Yemen, but we do not want
any misunderstanding in that regard. While we fully
endorse the majority of the draft resolution’s provisions,
we cannot concur with its unconfirmed conclusions and
evidence, which will require verification and discussion
by the Sanctions Committee.

S/PV. 8190

We agree with extending the embargo, and we did
everything we could to achieve adoption of the draft
resolution today, without proposing even a single
compromise on the wording. Unfortunately, however,
we were unable to get there. We are generally in
principle against a politicized approach to the technical
rollover of the Sanctions Committee’s Panel of Experts,
one whereby their assistance is used to decide neither
technical nor expertise issues but geopolitical ones,
at a time when the situation in Yemen is far more
complicated than the frequent attempts to lead us to
believe otherwise would have it. Incidentally, we spoke
about the importance of continuing such expert work
just three days ago, when the Russian Federation sent
a request to the Secretariat to clarify certain details
regarding the use of arms in Yemen to which we have
not yet had an answer. During the expert consultations
we — and we were not the only ones — clearly explained
our disagreement with a number of provisions in the
draft resolution based on selective and contentious
conclusions of the Panel of Experts.
I should point out that during the discussion of the
final report of the Sanctions Committee, there was no
consensus-based approach. We tried to convey to our
colleagues that assessing the conclusions of the Panel
of Experts before the 2140 Committee has formulated
a final evaluation of them is wrong and premature.
Unfortunately, our concerns, which we know are shared
by many delegations, were disregarded.
Voting on a draft resolution that does not have the
approval of all of its members divides the Security
Council at a time when it desperately needs unity. To be
blunt, the wording of the draft resolution proposed by
the United Kingdom could have seriously destabilizing
consequences, not just for the situation in Yemen but
for the entire region, which would inevitably escalate
regional tensions and opposition among key players.
We have frequently said that we see a grave danger
in playing fast and loose with geopolitical cards, and
that includes the highly volatile relations between
Sunni and Shiite within the Islamic world. Rather than
making relations in the Middle East more antagonistic,
we should be taking steps aimed at reaching agreement
through mutually respectful dialogue.
We have repeatedly proposed an alternative and
viable plan for united action that assumes that the focus
should be, not on sanctions or pressure, but on genuinely
concerted efforts to seek ways to resolve crisis situations.
We should begin by coming up with ways to launch a

18-051933/9

S/PV.8190

The situation in the Middle East

dialogue. The Russian Federation previously proposed
an initiative for starting inclusive regional discussions
on confidence- and security-building in the region of
the Persian Gulf. The course of events has shown that
such a format would be valuable for the entire Middle
Eastern region as well. Security should be reciprocal,
regional and indivisible. We should also point out that
the potential of resolution 598 (1987) is still unrealized.
It directs the Secretary-General to work collaboratively
with all interested parties to devise an architecture for
security in the region.
In order to avoid undermining the Security
Council’s unity, its resolutions should be unpolitical
and predominantly technical in nature. We support
extending the mandate of the Panel of Experts. However,
provisions that can potentially lead to action under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations must
be rooted in verified facts. The Committee should be
given more information, and in that regard the Panel’s
work should continue. As an alternative, therefore,
we propose adopting a technical draft resolution on
extending the mandate of the Panel of Experts of the
Sanctions Committee for Yemen that we request be put
to a vote today.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Council is
now ready to vote on the two draft resolutions. I shall
first put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/2018/156, submitted by the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France,
Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America
Against:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Russian Federation
Abstaining:
China, Kazakhstan
The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution received 11 votes in favour, 2 votes against
and 2 abstentions. The draft resolution has not been
adopted, owing to the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Council.
4/9

26/02/2018

I shall now put to the draft resolution contained
in document S/2018/157, submitted by the
Russian Federation.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America
The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2402 (2018).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
Today, Russia accused the majority of the Security
Council of attempting to destabilize the region by
supporting the United Kingdom’s draft resolution
(S/2018/156). This is perverse, when in fact Russia’s
veto today serves only to protect Iran’s efforts to
destabilize the region and spread its malign influence.
The Security Council’s failure to pass the
United Kingdom draft resolution today has set back
our collective efforts to promote peace in Yemen.
Not all Member States are responsible for this
egregious failure, but we will all have to deal with its
consequences — continuing conflict and suffering in
Yemen and the possibility of a wider war in the region.
The report of the Security Council’s Panel of Experts on
Yemen (see S/2018/68) has laid out in devastating detail
the evidence of Iran’s ongoing destructive defiance of
the Security Council’s resolutions. The Panel has found
significant evidence that Iran has violated the Yemen
arms embargo established by the Council in 2015 in
resolution 2216 (2015).
Iran failed to prevent the transfer of ballistic
missiles, related military equipment and unmanned
aerial-vehicle technology to the Houthi militants. And
how did the Panel know? It knew because the ballistic
missiles launched by the Houthis, which struck near
civilian areas in Saudi Arabia, were found to be Iranian
origin. As the United States intelligence community
has long known, Iranian weapons are getting into the
18-05193

26/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

hands of Yemeni militias, and these militias are using
them to target the capitals of Yemen’s neighbours.
In response, the United Kingdom’s draft resolution
was a simple common-sense one. It called out Iran
for giving the Houthis the tools to threaten Yemen’s
neighbours and to threaten freedom of navigation
through the Red Sea. But this common-sense attempt to
hold Iran accountable has failed, and all members of the
Council should be aware of the potential consequences.
The Panel of Experts warned that the Houthis’ use
of ballistic missiles against Saudi Arabia has “the
potential to turn a local conflict into a broader regional
one” (S/2018/68, p. 2).
In the Council, we talk a lot about using preventive
diplomacy. It is in fact how we fulfil the mandate of the
Charter of the United Nations to maintain peace and
security. Today, preventive diplomacy has failed. We
have rolled over the sanctions but we have not targeted
the party that is destabilizing Yemen. The principles
of the United Nations Charter have been betrayed and,
as a result, the world is a step closer to a worsening
confrontation in the Middle East.
Our partners have spoken often about their desire
to address the Iranian regime’s regional misbehaviour
in the context of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action. We thank those members of the Council
who stood by this commitment today. Their votes in
support of the United Kingdom draft resolution sent
the clear message that they expect Iran to live up to its
international obligations.
Russia, Bolivia, China and Kazakhstan sent
an opposite but equally clear message. Instead of
demanding accountability from Iran, they decided to
shield Iran from responsibility. Instead of protecting
their fellow Member States, they have declined to
step in and defend partners like Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates. And instead of insisting that
Iran live up to its international obligations, they have
invited Iran to continue promoting chaos in the Middle
East. Their actions will not be forgotten, nor will they
go unanswered.
Today’s vote was a deep disappointment, but this is
far from the end of the road to accountability for Iran.
Across the region, Iran is entrenching itself. We see this
in Lebanon, Syria and Iraq. It is flouting its obligations
under multiple Security Council resolutions as we speak,
and it is making the world a more dangerous place. We
will not hesitate to continue to make the world aware of

S/PV. 8190

Iran’s misdeeds, and we will not stop until Teheran is
stopped and peace is once more possible for the people
of the Middle East.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2402 (2018), which
renews the Yemen sanctions regime. I would like to
thank the United Kingdom, as penholder, for its efforts
and commitment to seeking a consensus to renew the
sanctions regime. We regret that it was not possible to
reach consensus on the its draft resolution.
As we have repeatedly said to all our Security
Council partners, France’s priority was to renew the
sanctions regime. That is why we voted in favour of
a technical renewal of resolution 2140 (2014). It was
essential that the sanctions regime be maintained and
that the Panel of Experts be renewed so that it could
continue its work in the coming year. We have already
expressed our concern at the conclusions of the report
of the Panel of Experts on Yemen (see S/2018/68), which
states that Iran is in non-compliance with the arms
embargo imposed by resolution 2216 (2015). We have
also expressed our deep concern about the Houthis’
ballistic-missile launches into Saudi Arabia and the
Red Sea, which we have repeatedly condemned.
I would like to be very clear on this point. We strongly
condemn Iran’s failure to comply with its international
obligations under resolution 2216 (2015), which requires
it to take all necessary measures to prevent the supply,
sale or transfer — direct or indirect — of missiles and
their components, as well as unmanned aerial vehicles,
for the benefit of individuals and entities subject to
United Nations sanctions, in particular the Houthis.
France will continue to be mobilized on the issue of
transfers of ballistic technology and equipment in the
region in the coming months.
As the report of the Panel of Experts also shows,
the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate in a
very worrying manner. We are very concerned about the
Panel’s report on the massive violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
that have been committed. Continued fighting and
strikes have resulted in the deaths of many civilians and
injured many others. Yemen is in a situation of extreme
humanitarian emergency, with severe food insecurity,
and lack of desperately needed basic necessities and a
severely affected health sector.
The coalition’s humanitarian plan is a positive
first step that should be welcomed and put in place

18-051935/9

S/PV.8190

The situation in the Middle East

26/02/2018

in full coordination with the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations. Our priority must
remain to address the crisis, which is among the
most serious in the world, by ensuring full, secure
and unhindered humanitarian access to the affected
populations in all governorates of Yemen.

of the resolution, for which it voted in favour. The
resolution reflects the broadest possible consensus
within the Security Council. It can help to advance the
political resolution of the issue and to strengthen the
efforts of the international community. It serves the
interests of both Yemen and the countries of the region.

Finally, in parallel with our commitment to the
humanitarian aspect, we must remain mobilized
to launch new essential political momentum. The
appointment of the new Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral on Yemen, Martin Griffiths, provides an
opportunity for all parties to meaningfully re-engage
in the negotiations without preconditions.

Draft resolution S/2018/156, submitted by the
United Kingdom, proposes renewing the targeted
sanctions and extending the mandate of the Panel of
Experts for a year. That reflects the consensus among
the members of the Council, which we welcome.
Meanwhile, there remain significant differences and
disagreement among the members of the Council on
some elements of the draft resolution. We believe that
the matter under consideration is extremely complex
and delicate. It is inadvisable for the Council to reach a
hasty conclusion in the absence of adequate evidence.
We believe that the members of the Council should
patiently continue consultations, meet each other half
way, strive to achieve consensus and maintain the unity
of the Council so as to give full play to the sanctions
mechanism and to advance a political solution.

Furthermore, we must continue to convey to
regional actors the message of the need for a responsible
and constructive role in Yemen. The goal of us all must
remain to achieve a lasting cessation of hostilities
and, in support of the United Nations mediation, to
encourage the parties to resume the dialogue with
a view to a comprehensive and inclusive political
agreement that respects the territorial integrity of the
country. The unity of the Council in that regard is
crucial. Individually and collectively, we each have a
important role to play to that end.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Recently, the situation in Yemen has further deteriorated
with the stalled political process, a protracted military
conflict and the dire humanitarian situation. China is
deeply concerned about the current situation in Yemen.
We call on the international community to step up its
mediation efforts in order to impel the Yemeni parties
to cease hostilities and to resume the negotiations for a
political settlement so that peace, security and stability
can be restored in Yemen as soon as possible.
The renewal of the Security Council targeted
sanctions on Yemen and the extension of the mandate
of the Panel of Experts on Yemen can help to advance
the political resolution of the issue, strengthen the
international effort to facilitate peace, and serve the
interests of both Yemen and the countries of the region.
China therefore firmly supports the renewal of the
targeted sanctions and the extension of the mandate of
the Panel of Experts.
Resolution 2402 (2018), which was submitted by
the Russian Federation and has just been adopted by
the Security Council, decides to renew the targeted
sanctions and to extend the mandate of the Panel of
Experts for one year. China welcomes the adoption
6/9

China has always held an objective and impartial
position on the question of Yemen. We do not have a
hidden agenda. We support the unity, sovereignty,
security and territorial integrity of Yemen. We believe
that a political solution is the only way to achieve lasting
peace in Yemen. We call on all parties to support the
United Nations mediation efforts and to promptly reach
an inclusive solution through dialogue and negotiation
on the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council, its means
of implementation and the outcome of the National
Dialogue Conference. We hope that the countries of the
region can overcome their differences through dialogue
and negotiation.
China voted on draft resolutions S/2018/156 and
S/2018/157 on the basis of the consistent position that
I have just outlined. We were actively engaged in the
consultations, having played a constructive role through
our tireless efforts towards building consensus.
We regret that some countries have made unfounded
accusations against the principled positions of other
countries, despite the facts. Such practices, which
will not help to resolve the issue under consideration
or to preserve the unity of the Council, are totally
unacceptable to us.
18-05193

26/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom, in its capacity as penholder for issues
relating to Yemen, for its efforts to reach a compromise
acceptable to all members of the Council on the renewal
of the relevant sanctions regime. Our support for the
two draft resolutions (S/2018/156 and S/2018/157) that
we considered is based primarily on our conviction
of the importance of preserving the aforementioned
sanctions regime in order to contribute to ending the
conflict and the humanitarian crisis in Yemen.
We believe that it is necessary to deter and to limit
the capacity for action of the individuals or entities that
threaten peace, security and stability in that country
in order to promote the achievement of a political
solution. We are committed to that, in particular since
the Council has entrusted us with the responsibility
of chairing the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014). That is a task that we hope
to fulfil with equanimity and impartiality, working
constructively with all the members of the Council. In
that regard, we emphasize the importance of always
considering developments in Yemen in a balanced way,
with respect for due process and on the basis of the
available evidence.
Peru condemns the launching of missiles against
the territory of Saudi Arabia, among various other
equally condemnable events and actions that are also
mentioned in the most recent report of the Panel of
Experts on Yemen (see S/2018/68), some of which have
serious humanitarian consequences on the territory of
Yemen. We believe that, in that context, it is essential
to ensure that the Panel of Experts can continue to
conduct impartial and detailed assessments on the
implementation of the sanctions regime and on the
current situation on the ground for the due consideration
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014) and of the Council.
We also believe that it is necessary to provide
all necessary means to the new Special Envoy and
to support him in his difficult task of re-establishing
dialogue and trust among all the parties involved in
the conflict.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia voted against
draft resolution S/2018/156, submitted by the United
Kingdom, because during the only consultations the
draft resolution did not enjoy the support of all the

S/PV. 8190

members of the Council and, despite the repeated
remarks and concerns expressed, including breaking
the silence, such considerations were not taken into
account. In addition, before today’s meeting, Bolivia
supported the proposal of a technical rollover that
would make it possible to overcome the impasse.
Bolivia will not apologize to anyone for defending
the principles in which we believe, in particular the
sovereign equality of States. We regret that further
consultations did not take place in order to ensure a
text that took the remarks of all members into account.
We also regret the fact that there was no attempt to
reach agreements that allowed for a balanced text and
emphasized the situation that Yemen is experiencing.
Moreover, the tendency to involve other regional actors
in the crisis that Yemen is undergoing, based on the
argument that new members of the Council have yet to
reach an agreement, is irresponsible.
Lastly, my delegation is concerned about the fact
that there have again been attempts to use the Security
Council as a political tool with clearly unilateral
agendas that run completely counter to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I will be brief
today, as the Security Council will address the political
and humanitarian situation in Yemen tomorrow.
Sweden welcomes the renewal of the sanctions regime
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) and the extension
of the mandate of the Panel of Experts on Yemen.
Sweden approached today’s voting from a position of
principle, as we are fully committed to the effective
use of sanctions as one of our many tools for restoring
and maintaining international peace and security. We
strongly support the United Nations panel-of-experts
instruments, and it is important that the Council uphold
the integrity, independence and effectiveness of its
sanctions instruments and panels. Lastly, concerning
the resolution’s substance, we reiterate that the arms
embargo is a vital part of the sanctions regime that must
be upheld, as should the resolution’s calls for all parties
to comply with international humanitarian law and to
provide humanitarian access.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the adoption of resolution 2402
(2018), on the extension of the mandate of the Panel
of Experts on Yemen mandated by Security Council
resolution 2342 (2017) and the renewal of sanctions
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), and we thank

18-051937/9

S/PV.8190

The situation in the Middle East

all the delegations that supported it. Its unanimous
adoption creates an opportunity for further joint work
on reaching a settlement for Yemen and improving
the situation in the region in general. We assume that
the Panel will continue to carefully investigate the
information on rockets launched against Saudi Arabian
territory, which we condemn in the strongest terms.
We stress once again that we need a united approach
from all international and regional stakeholders,
including, needless to say, Saudi Arabia and Iran, if we
are to deal with the fundamental issues in the region.
The Russian Federation supports and values its relations
with all the Arab States, including Saudi Arabia and
Iran, and we will continue to build on those relations
with the aim of improving the situation in the region,
where peace must, ultimately, be established.
I would like to respond to the United States
representative’s remarks. We withheld our support to
draft resolution S/2018/156, proposed by the United
Kingdom, not because we wanted to kill it by any
means possible, but because we were unable to reach
agreement on the wording of a few specific but key
sections. I spoke about this earlier. After all, the goal
of the draft resolution is to extend the mandate of the
Panel of Experts on Yemen, not to hold Iran accountable
or attempt to cobble together an anti-Iran coalition. The
United States representative’s statement showed that
our concerns in that regard were well founded. In any
event, we are grateful to all the members of the Council
for making the right decision today.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We regret that
draft resolution S/2018/156, submitted by the United
Kingdom, was not adopted. We voted in favour of
resolution 2402 (2018) because the sanctions regime
and the mandate of the Panel of Experts on Yemen
needed to be renewed. We strongly support the Panel
and the sanctions regime in question. We regret that
our concerns regarding non-compliance with the arms
embargo, violations of humanitarian law and problems
with humanitarian access are not adequately addressed
in the resolution that was adopted. We feel very
strongly that the Security Council should address the
humanitarian crisis as a separate Council product, and
we hope that a text to that effect can be finalized as
soon as possible.
Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity to call on
all the parties to work with the newly appointed United
Nations Envoy to achieve an inclusive political solution.
8/9

26/02/2018

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Kuwait.
The State of Kuwait voted in favour of the first
version of draft resolution S/2018/156, submitted by the
United Kingdom, because it renews the sanctions regime
mandated by resolutions 2140 (2014) and 2216 (2015).
The draft resolution also extended the mandate of the
Panel of Experts on Yemen mandated by resolution 2342
(2017), and contained important language that made it
possible for the Council to address a dangerous aspect
of the Yemeni crisis that it should pay more attention
to — the smuggling of ballistic missiles into Yemeni
territory, which the Houthis launched against our sister
State of Saudi Arabia, firing a total of 95 missiles by
5 February. We condemn those acts by the Houthis in
the strongest terms.
The Houthis have also claimed that they have
launched such missiles against the sister State of the
United Arab Emirates and have announced that they
intend to wage such attacks against Saudi Arabia and
other States in the region. This represents a dangerous
development and a challenge to the entire international
community. It undermines every effort aimed at
reaching the political solution we want that can end the
crisis in our brother State of Yemen. We underscore our
position that we stand fully with our brothers in Saudi
Arabia and support all measures designed to maintain
its peace and security.
We are all members of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), on sanctions against
Yemen. We read the report of the Panel of Experts on
Yemen (S/2018/68) concerning the fact that the Houthis
have been receiving support from outside parties,
especially arms that were sent to Yemen after the arms
embargo. That constitutes a clear violation of paragraph
14 of resolution 2216 (2015), and we therefore call on
all States Members of the United Nations to comply
with the arms embargo and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
In conclusion, we underscore that a political
solution in Yemen should be based on paragraph
1 of resolution 2216 (2015). We should bear in mind
the three references that were agreed on: the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its implementing
mechanism, the outcome of the Yemeni National
Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015), which
is the cornerstone for a resolution of the crisis in
18-05193

26/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Yemen. The sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity
of Yemen must be maintained.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

S/PV. 8190

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

18-051939/9
