S/PRST/2000/31

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 November 2000
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4216th meeting of the Security Council, held on 3 November 2000, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Sierra Leone”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the continued fragile
situation in Sierra Leone and the related instability in the wider subregion. It
condemns the continued cross-border attacks along the border area of Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. The Council stresses that only through a
comprehensive regional approach can security and stability be restored. In this
regard, it expresses its support for the efforts undertaken by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to address the situation, and
calls on Member States to provide support.
“In this context, and following the return of its mission to Sierra Leone,
the Security Council welcomes the recommendations made in the mission’s
report (S/2000/992). It in particular expresses its support for the establishment
of a continuous, United Nations-based process for overall strategic
coordination on Sierra Leone, bringing together Security Council members, the
United Nations Secretariat, ECOWAS, troop-contributing countries to the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and the Government of
Sierra Leone. The Council notes the Secretary-General’s support for this
proposal in his report of 31 October 2000 (S/2000/1055) and encourages him
to take early steps to put such a process into effect.
“The Security Council underlines that such a coordinated strategy for
lasting peace in Sierra Leone must combine both political and military
elements. The Council fully supports efforts to strengthen the State institutions
of Sierra Leone and to maintain the principles of democratic accountability and
the rule of law. It also places emphasis on the humanitarian and human rights
aspects. It welcomes the current efforts of ECOWAS to explore the
possibilities of dialogue towards peace, but stresses that this should only be
pursued under terms acceptable to the Government of Sierra Leone. In this
context, the Council underlines the importance of the Revolutionary United
Front relinquishing control of the diamond-producing areas, full freedom of
movement for UNAMSIL leading to its deployment throughout the country,
proper provision for the disarmament and demobilization of all nongovernmental forces, full and secure humanitarian access and the extension of

00-72859 (E) 031100
`````````

S/PRST/2000/31

the authority of the Government throughout its territory. The Council also calls
upon those armed groups responsible for continuing human rights abuses to
put an immediate end to such activities.
“The Security Council is convinced that the continuation of a credible
military presence of the international community in Sierra Leone remains an
indispensable element of the peace process. The Council concurs with the
Secretary-General’s view that a key aspect of the overall approach on Sierra
Leone is the continued provision of security by UNAMSIL in key areas of the
country. The Council reiterates its view that to achieve this UNAMSIL
requires strengthening. The Council also underlines the importance of
continued action to improve the effectiveness of UNAMSIL through the full
implementation of the recommendations of the May assessment mission. The
Council notes the decisions by the Governments of India and Jordan to end
their troops’ participation in UNAMSIL, and expresses its appreciation for the
important contribution made by these two contingents. It also warmly
welcomes the new commitments made by Bangladesh and Ghana of additional
battalions, by Ukraine of equipment and support personnel and by Slovakia of
equipment to enhance the force’s capability. The Council urges both departing
and incoming contingents to display all possible flexibility to ensure that force
capability is maintained as UNAMSIL moves into this period of transition.
“The Security Council supports the appeal by the Secretary-General to
Member States, as set out in paragraph 55 of his report, urgently to consider
participating in UNAMSIL or otherwise contributing to its reinforcement, and
encourages him to intensify his consultations to this end. The Council
reiterates its firm intention to take action to strengthen UNAMSIL at the
appropriate time, taking into account the readiness of troop-contributing
countries to provide sufficient forces to this end.”

2
