General Assembly- Thirty-eighth Session

252

organizations concemed to co-ordinate their implementation of these standards in order to utilize fully the opportunities they provide for improved job design, recruitment,
career planning and training;
4. Welcomes the Commission's efforts to develop a
common approach to skills inventories on an interorganizational basis:
5. Recommends that the organizations normally dispense with the requirement for a probationary appointment as a prerequisite for a career appointment following a
period of five years' satisfactory service on fixed-term contracts;
6. Again requests the Commission to pursue its mandate under article 14 of its statute, in consultation with
organizations and staff, with regard to the development of
common training, recruitment and promotion policies for
the organizations and to report thereon to the General
Assembly as each phase of its studies is completed;
Vil

Notes the progress made to date by the Intemational
Civil Service Commission in its review of conditions of
service in the field and requests the Commission to keep
the General Assembly informed of further developments
in its review;
VIII

Requests the Intemational Civil Service Commission to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session
on the question oflongevity and merit steps in the various
grade levels.
104th plenary meeting
20 December 1983

38/233. Report of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board 64
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board for 1983 to the General Assembly and to the member organizations of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, 65 and the related report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 6~
Welcoming the improvement in the actuaria! situation
of the Fund as a result of the economy measures applied
with effect from 1 January 1983,
Concerned at the continuing actuaria! imbalance of the
Fund and the mounting cost of the pension system,
Desirous ofbringing about a further improvement in the
actuaria! situation of the Fund,
Concerned at the different evolution over the years of
the levels of pensiona ble remuneration for staff in the Professional and higher categories and those of the comparator civil service,
Recalling its resolutions 3526 (XXX) of 16 December
1975, 31/196 of22 December 1976, 33/120 of 19 December 1978, 34/221 of 20 December 1979, 35/215 of 17
December 1980, 36/118 of 10 December 1981 and 37/131
of 17 December 1982,
64 See also sect. X.B.6. decision 38/45~.
65 Otficial Record.,· o('rhc General Asse,11/,/r, Thirry-c1gh1h Scssion. Supplc-

ment No. 9 (A/38/9 and Corr.2): and A/38/9/ Add. l and Corr. l and 2.

Bearing in mind earlier General Assembly resolutions
which stated, inter alia, that changes in the pension adjustment system should not lead to increases in the liabilities
of Member States,
Conscious that a number of factors have combined to
make necessary the consideration and adoption of significant remedia! actions on the problem of the actuaria!
imbalance, including the raising of the rate of contributions hereinafter referred to,
Mindful of the social aspects of the pension system,
Aware that a co-operative effort by member organizations, participan ts and beneficiaries is required if the actuaria! imbalance is to be reduced or eliminated, thereby
securing an adequate leve\ of benefits under the Fund,

ÁMENDMENTS TO THE REGULATIONS OF THE
UNITED NATIONS JOINT STAFF PENSION FUND

1. Decides that, with effect from 1 January 1984, the
rate ofcontributions shall be raised from 21 to 21.75 per
cent of pensionable remuneration, of which the employing
member organization shall pay 14.5 per cent and the participant 7.25 per cent;
2. Amends the Regulations ofthe United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund, without retroactive effect, as set forth
in the annex to the present resolution;
11
MEASURES TO IMPROVE THE ACTUARIAL BALANCE
OF THE FuNo

Requests the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board,
with the assistance of the Committee of Actuaries, to consider, early in 1984, the various proposals discussed at the
thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly with a view
to reducing or eliminating the actuaria! imbalance of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund. including the
following measures:
(a) Increasing to a realistic leve! the interest rate used
to calculate the amount of the lump-sum commutation;
(b) Determination of the lump sum in net equivalent
terms, subject to the reimbursement of any taxes payable
thereon:
(e) Re-examination of the early retirement provisions,
taking into account, ínter afia, the observations made by
the Committee of Actuaries;
(d) Imposition of a ceiling on the highest levels of pens10ns;
(e) Review of the two-track system followed to determine the initial amount of the pension and its subsequent
adjustment:
(/) Re-examination of the survivor benefits under the
Regulations ofthe Fund, together with altemative ways of
financing them;
and to submit its findings and recommendations thereon
and on such other measures as may be deemed appropriate, through the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, to the General Assembly at its
thirty-ninth session;
66 A/381547

VIII.
----------------

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

III

VI

PENSIONABLE REMUNERATION FOR THE PRüFESSIONAL
AND HIGHER CATEGORIES

1. Decides to review at its thirty-ninth session the pensionable remuneration for the Professional and higher categories;
2. Requests the International Civil Service Cummission, in co-operation with the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board, to submit to the General Assembly at its
thirty-ninth session recommendations on the appropriate
leve! ofpensionable remuneration for the Professional and
higher categories;
3. Further requests the International Civil Servicc
Commission, in examining the compara ti ve levels of pensiona ble remuneration in co-operation with the Board, to
compare the levels of pension entitlements in the light of
ali the factors it brought to the attention of the General
Assembly in its fifth annual report, 67 as part of the total
compensation comparisons to be carried out within thc
framework of the Noblemaire principie, and to report
thereon to the Assembly by the beginning of its thirtyninth session on the basis of the latest data available in
1984;
4. Decides that the implementation of any adjustment
which may become due in 1984 on the basis of article 54
(b) of the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund shall be deferred until the General Assembly, at its thirty-ninth session, has considered the recommendations ofthe International Civil Service Commission
and the Board on the leve! of pensionable remuneration;
5. Decidesfurtherthat, ifthe General Assembly is unable to take a decision on the leve) ofpensionable remuneration at its thirty-ninth session, it will re-examine at that
session the question of the deferment of implementation
of adjustments which become due under article 54 (b) of
the Regulations of the Fund;
6. Requests the Board, in the light ofthe recommendations on the leve! of pensionable remuneration, to recommend to the General Assembly, at its thirty-ninth session,
consequential amendments to articlc 54 (h) of the Regulations of the Fund;

ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES

Approves expenses, chargeable directly to the U nited
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, totalling $6,723,100
(net) for 1984 and additional expenses of $17,700 (net) for
1983 for the administration of the Fund.
104th p/enary meeting
20 December 1983
ANNEX
Amendments to the Regulations of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
Art1cle 1
DHINITIONS

(11) ··own contributions" shall mean the contributíons, not excccding
thc perccntage of his pensionable remuneration specified in column B in
article 25 (a), made to the Fund by or on behalf of a participan! in rcspect
of contnbutory scrvice under article 22, with interest, provided that, in
respect of servicc in a member organintion prior to its admission to membership 1n the Fund, which has becn recognized as contributory, it shall
mean:

Suhparagraphs (i) and (1i) rcmam unchangcd.
-lmcle 21
P4.RTICIP<\TION

(/>) Participation shall erase when the organization by which the participant ,s employed ceases to be a member organization, or when he dies
or separa tes from such mem ber organization, except that participation
shall not be deemed to haw ceased where a participan! resumes his contributory service w,th a member organIZation within twelve months aftcr
separatron. w1thout a henefrr havrng hem paid to him.

('ONfRIBl!TORY SJ-.RVICF

(u) ( 'ontnbutory service shall accrue to a participan! in pay status from
thc date ofcommencement to thc date ofcessation ofhis participation. For
purposes of each of the articles 28 (/>), 28 (e) and 29 (h) separa te periods of
contributory service shall be aggregated except that in such aggregat,on no
account shall be taken of periods of service in respect of which a withdrawal scttlement was paid and which were not subsequently rcstorcd.

Arride 25
( \)NTRIBUTIONS

IV
COMPLEMENTARY PENSION SCHEME OF THE
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ÜRGANISATION

Draws the attention of the International Labour Organisation to the strong concern expressed during the thirtyeighth session of the General Assembly about the need to
maintain the unity, cohesion and integrity of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension system and to avoid any action
which may have an adverse effect on the said system;
V
EMERGENCY fliND

Authorizes the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board
to supplement the voluntary contributions to the Emergency Fund, for a further period of one year, by an amount
not exceeding $100,000;
67 Officia/ Records ofthe General Assnnbly
ment No. 30 (A/34/30 and Corr. l ). chap 111

253

/"hir11•-/,nmh

\'ns,on, Su¡,¡,/,

(a) Contributions by the participan! and by the employing member
organization shall be payable to the Fund concurrently with the accrual of
rnntributory servicc under artíclc 22 (a). at the percentage rates ofpensionable remuneration spccified hclow

e

A

B

For penods of
contnhutorv serria

By pamcrpants

By emplo.,·mt mnnbn
,irgam::arwn

(per cenfi

(¡wr cem1

7.00
14.00
Before 1984 ..
As from 1984
7.25
14.50
(/>) (1) Contributions for the purpose of article 22 (h) in respect of a
period of lea ve without pay ,hall be al a percentage rate of the pensiona ble
rernuneration ofthc participan! equal to thc applicable rates specilicd in (a)
above payable by the participan! and by the employing member organizat1on. combined. Such contributions shall be payable concurrently with such
lcave by the participan! in full or by the organization in foil. or in part by
the participan! and in part hy the organization:
Subparagraph (ii) remains unchanged.
(e) Contributions for the purpose ofvalidation under article 23 shall be
payable, with interest, b) the participan! and the organization in the
amounts which would have t>een payablc respectivcly by each, had service
during thc pcrind been rnntrrbutory.

General Assembll--Thirt}-eighth Session

254

-~ ----·-·-~

(h) Thc benetit shall. subJcct to (d) and (<') hel<m. 111 respcct ola pcnod
or periods ofparticipation commencing on or alter I January 198}_ he pa1able at the standard rate obtaincd by multiplying:
Subparagraphs (i), (ii) and (iii) remain unchangcd. Howner. m re,pcct
of a participant with a prior period of contrihutory service of live years 01
longer ending between I January 1978 and 11 Dcccmhn 1982. thc standard annual ratc specified a hove shall he cakulated by takmg into acrnunt '"
periods ofcontributory servicc for the purposc ofsuhparagraphs (1). (11) ami
(iii) above thc period of contrihutory sen ice bcforc I January 198:1_
(e) The bencfit shall, subject to (d) and (<') belo"', in rcspert of an,
period ofparticipation commencing prior to 1 January 198:1_ he payahlc at
the standard annual ratc obtained by multiplying:
(i)

The first thirty ycars ofthc partietpant's contrihutor\ scn1l'l'. h, -'
per cent of his final average rcmuncratton. and

(ii)

The years of his contrihutory servicc 111 excess of th1rty_ hut not
exceeding livc_ by I pcr cent of hrs linal a,-eragc· remunerat1on
. lr11c/e ./l
0EFI-RMl:NT 01- PA'rl\.HNI OR Cl!OJCI U! BJ·"-<1·111

(a) The payment to a particrpant of a withdrawal sctllcmcnt. or tlw
exercise by a participan! of a choice available to him hctwccn onc benelit
and another, or between a form of bcnelit involving paymcnt in a lump
sum and another form. may he delcrred al his requcsl at thc t11ne ofscparation for a period of twelvc months_
lrtu-/c 4ll

(h) Such a participant. who again becomcs a participant and 1s aga1n
separated after at least five years of additional contributory scrvice, shall
also be entitled, al the time of such subscquent ,cparation, in rc,pect ol
such service and subject to (d) hclow, to a retircmcnt. carly rctrrement or
deferred retirement bencfit. or a withdra"'al scttlcmcnt undcr anide 28_
29, 30 or 31. as the case may he.
(e) Such a participant, who again hccomcs a part1npant and is aga111
separated after less than tivc years of additional eontrihutorv sen ice. shall_
in respect of such servicc. bccome cntitled to:
(i) A withdrawal settlcmenl undcr articlc _l 1. or

(ii)

If he is at lcast age fifty-livc at such separation, and suhicct to (d)
below, a retirement, early retiremcnt or defcrrcd retircmcnt henefit, as the case may be. under article 28. 29 or 30, hascd on tht'
length of such additional contributory servicc: such henefit ma;
not be commuted into a lump sum. in wholc or in part. and shall
not be subject to any mínimum provisions_

(d) Payment ofbenefits undcr (h) or (e) (ii) above shall commerice 011
the date of the resumption or commencemcnt. as the case may he, of pa;-ment ofbenefits suspended under (a) ahove. In no cvent shall thc total henefits payable to or on account of a former participant in rcspect of scparak
periods of contributory service exceed the bencfits which would havc bccn
payable had his participation in the Fund hecn continuous.

38/234. Questions relating to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 1984-1985
The General Assemblv

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL ÜEVELOPMENT
ÜRGANIZATION

Invites the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions to examine the financia! aspccts of
68 !bid.. Thirty-ei!(hth Session, S11pp/ement No_ 38 (A/38/38). part one

69 A/C.5/38/39.
7o A/C.5/38/42.
71 A/C.5/38/14.
72 A/C.5/38/22.

73 Official Record1 ofthe (i('lleru/ 1s.,c111/>!,-_ /'/11r1_1--<'lghth Sn.11on. S11¡,¡1/,·

ment No. 7A (A/3817/Add.l-23). document A,l8-7'Add.6.

thc recommendat1ons of the Committcc for Programmc
and Co-ordination containcd in paragraphs 286 (e) and (d)
of its repon, 6 x as wcll as thc mcrger of programme elemcnts 4.9 and 4.15. as recommended by that Committee
in paragraph 286 i a) of its report, and to rcport thereon to
the General Asscmbly;
11
INTER!',A noNAL CoMPUTING CENTRE

. lpproves the hudgct estimates for thc lntcrnational
( ·omputing Centre for the ycar 1984; 69
III
ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR THE Co-ORDINATION OF
INFORMATION SYSTEMS

.-1pprorcs the programme of work and budget estimates
for the Advisof\ Committee for the Co-ordination of
lnformation Syst~·ms for thc biennium 1984-1985; 70

IV
FIRST-l'LASS TRAVEL ANO ORGANIZATION ANO
METIIODS FOR OFFICIAL TRA V EL

/'akcs note of the repons of the Secretary-General on
tirst-class travel 71 and on the organization and methods
for official travel 7 2 and of the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 73
V
REVISED ESTIMATES UNOER SECTION 27 (PUBUC
INFORMATION): Ycarhook ()(the United Nations

I _ Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
thc Ycarhook of thc United Nations 74 and of the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Quest1ons; 75
2. Endorses the conclusions of the Advisory Committec as contained in its rcport:
VI

Yiwhook o(the Unitcd Nations
Bearing in mind the desirability ofmaking the Yearbook
o! thc United Nations more widely used by the general
public.
Recalling the problems which have been encountered in
the timely issuance of the Yearhook o_( the United Nations,
Taking note of the paragraphs of the Secretary-General's
repon which relate to the measures to eliminate the backlog in publication of the Yearbook o_( the United Nations 76
and of the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 77
1. Requcsts thc Secretary-General to undertake a comprehensive revicw ofthe current format ofthe Yearbook ()(
thc Unitcd Nations, with a view to developing a new format in ordcr to makc it more usablc and accessible;
74 A/C.5/_38, 38.
75 Ofjic1a/ Record,- ,,1 thc <;mera! lssemhl_r. Thini--l'!ghth Scsswn. Supplc-

ment No_ 7.-1 (A/38•7 \dd.1-23), document A/3817/Add.8.

76A/C.S/38:18, paras. 10-15.
77 O/final Record,,,¡ thc <icnera/ .-lsse111hfr,, F/1m_1·-cig/11h s,,_uwn. Supple-

'"""' N,, 7 1 (A•38 7 \dd.1-23). donrment A/38/7/Add.8, paras. 5-9.
