S/PV.8124

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8124th meeting

Thursday, 7 December 2017, 10.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zambrana Torrelio
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Awad
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Biagini
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (covering the period from
2 September to 14 November 2017) (S/2017/1011)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-42476 (E)
*1742476*

S/PV.8124

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (covering the period from 2 September
to 14 November 2017) (S/2017/1011)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; and Mr. Ismail Wais, Intergovernmental
Authority on Development Special Envoy for South
Sudan, who is joining today’s meeting via video
teleconference from Addis Ababa.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/1011, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan covering the period
from 2 September to 14 November 2017.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on South
Sudan in advance of the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
Further to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/1011) on South Sudan published on 1 December
and Assistant Secretary-General Keita’s briefing to
the Council last week (see S/PV.8115), I will focus my
remarks on some key developments and challenges over
the past year, including with respect to the security
situation in the country, the peace process and the
efforts of UNMISS to protect civilians and build durable
peace. The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, my friend and colleague Mark Lowcock, will
follow me and cover the humanitarian situation.
2/10

07/12/2017

At the outset, let me repeat that we remain gravely
concerned about the precarious security situation
prevailing in South Sudan. As the dry season sets
in, we face the possibility that the military conflict
will escalate, as well as intercommunal fighting.
The economic crisis also continues to have serious
repercussions for the security environment. Civilians
will suffer the consequences of any escalation of
violence. We cannot continue to stand by and watch.
Now more than ever, I urge the Council to remain
vigilant and exert more effort to condemn and stop
the violence, protect civilians and urgently facilitate a
political settlement to the conflict.
Further to the 90-day report before the Council, I
would like to reflect more generally on the situation in
the country and the United Nations sustained efforts
to effect change on the ground, which will require the
continued support of the Council. In that challenging
environment, UNMISS has endeavoured to be more
robust, nimble and proactive in its approach to mandate
delivery. UNMISS peacekeepers have helped protect
humanitarian facilities, facilitated aid delivery in
areas plagued by insecurity and, on many occasions,
contributed to the evacuation of humanitarian personnel
caught up in active hostilities. To further deter violence
and human rights abuses, they have intervened to
protect civilians from abduction, recruitment, sexual
violence and harassment.
The efforts of UNMISS to assert its freedom of
movement have also resulted in the Mission’s patrols
reaching areas to which it had long been denied access,
including areas south-west of Wau and in Equatorian
villages outside of Yei. Shortly, UNMISS will establish
a permanent presence in Yei, and has already reinforced
its presence in Yambio and Torit. The Mission is also
working with partners to halt the increasing number
of local-level conflicts through reconciliation and
peaceful coexistence activities. Meanwhile, the
brave efforts of humanitarian partners have resulted
in 5 million vulnerable people being reached with
life-saving assistance.
Those efforts have come about as conflict has spread
across the country and as the young nation struggles to
define a path towards inclusive governance. Since the
setback to the peace process in July 2016, we have seen
a new wave of armed conflict and insecurity spread
into the Equatorias. Those military offensives forced
tens of thousands of civilians to flee their homes. At
17-42476

07/12/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8124

the height of hostilities, more than 2,000 civilians were
crossing into Uganda daily.

be ramping up hostilities in an effort to demonstrate
relevance as players in the ongoing political processes.

In 2017, major clashes between the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA) and the Opposition shifted
towards Greater Upper Nile state as the Government
continued efforts to exert military dominance and take
opposition strongholds in the area. At the same time,
clashes continued in the Equatorias and Western Bahr
el-Ghazal. Civilians were displaced in droves, including
25,000 from the West Bank of the Nile, 100,000 from
parts of Jonglei and 22,000 from Western Bahr elGhazal.

Further impacting the security situation is
intercommunal fighting. The most significant recent
example took place on 28 November, when around 45
people were killed, 19 others injured and hundreds of
huts and houses burned when members of the Murle
ethnic group attacked a Dinka village in Jonglei. The
attack came exactly six months after the signing of a
cessation of hostilities agreement between the Dinka,
Bor and Murle communities, intended to launch
a comprehensive dialogue process. This is a stark
example of the continued intercommunal tensions and
proliferation of arms at the local level, and highlights
the need for sustained engagement in intercommunal
dialogue and reconciliation efforts.

While members of the Council will hear more
from Mr. Lowcock in a few minutes on the impact
of the conflict on the humanitarian situation, let me
just underscore that the human cost is catastrophic.
In total, we are looking at approximately 4 million
people displaced since the conflict began in 2013.
Moreover, conflict-related human rights violations
and abuses, including looting and burning of houses,
killings of civilians, arbitrary arrests and detentions
and sexual violence, accompanied those hostilities,
with organized forces being implicated as perpetrators
in most instances.
Our fears of a further escalation of hostilities during
the dry season are not unwarranted. In the past two
weeks, we have seen a resurgence of fighting in southern
Unity state between opposition forces allied to Riek
Machar and those affiliated with First Vice-President
Taban Deng and allied to the SPLA. On 20 November,
intense clashes between the two forces took place
10 kilometres north of our temporary operating base
in Leer. Thereafter, reports of an imminent attack
on Leer town prompted local authorities to urge
civilians to move towards our base. On 26 November,
approximately 350 displaced civilians rushed into the
UNMISS base for temporary protection in response to
conflict. Further hostilities in Leer town broke out on
30 November.
In addition to protecting civilians near its base
and supporting the relocation of aid workers to safety,
UNMISS peacekeepers have continued their patrolling
in Leer in an effort to show the United Nations presence.
Meanwhile, the continued fragmentation of the
opposition — particularly in the Equatorias — remains
a source of instability. A case in point is Kajo-keji,
where SPLA in Opposition forces have clashed with
other opposition groups. Armed groups appear to

Prompted by the rapidly deteriorating situation in
the country, regional partners have stepped up their
efforts to revitalize the peace process. In particular,
we welcome and fully support the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD)-led high-level
revitalization forum, which aims to secure a cessation
of hostilities, implementation of the 2015 peace
agreement, and the development of a revised and
realistic timeline for its implementation. I welcome the
efforts of the African Union (AU), including through
its High Representative, former President Konaré,
to urge the region to speak with one voice. I also
welcome its Peace and Security Council’s expression
of intent to consider punitive measures against those
who aim to spoil the peace process. We hope that the
high-level revitalization forum will not be a one-off,
time-limited event, but rather that it will unfold as a
sustained process to hold all parties accountable in
order to maintain a cessation of hostilities and engage
in the inclusive implementation of the peace agreement
to ensure a successful transition. Tough issues will
need to be tackled during these discussions, however,
including on governance and security arrangements if
the Forum is to succeed, as I am sure Ambassador Wais
will tell us.
Meanwhile, at the local level, the national dialogue is
progressing, with subnational consultations conducted
on the root causes of the conflict. By most accounts, the
consultations have been frank and have raised legitimate
public grievances related to governance, corruption and
the rule of law. Concerns remain, however, as to how
the outcomes of these consultations will be used. The
United Nations continues to reiterate the importance

17-424763/10

S/PV.8124

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

07/12/2017

of complementarity between the national dialogue and
the implementation of the peace agreement, and of
their being transparent and genuinely inclusive of all
political viewpoints, including those of key political
actors and parties to the conflict.

change of course from South Sudan’s leaders and all
parties to the conflict. For our part, the United Nations
will continue to engage the parties and support the
region and the international community in order to
facilitate a political solution of the crisis.

The conflict in South Sudan is now entering
its fifth year. We believe that both the high-level
revitalization forum and the national dialogue can
address the spiralling crisis, if well coordinated. But
fighting cannot continue in tandem with efforts to craft
a durable peace. The two are simply incompatible. We
must not allow tactics we have seen before to frustrate
a change in course. The people of South Sudan have
simply suffered too much for far too long, and we must
not take their resilience against incredible odds for
granted. In that regard, I urge the Council to redouble
its efforts in support of the region and the ongoing
political process.

The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.

In March, recognizing the failure of the parties to
the conflict to meet their commitments to implement the
peace agreement, the Council laid out five benchmarks
to be met immediately. The first was immediate
adherence to the permanent ceasefire by all forces of the
parties to the conflict and all other armed groups. The
second was the urgent tackling of challenges faced by
humanitarian personnel in the delivery of humanitarian
assistance throughout South Sudan and specifically to
famine-affected areas, including through meetings of
the Humanitarian High-Level Oversight Committee and
the urgent implementation of its decisions. The third was
unconditional support of all parties for the endeavours
of the United Nations, the AU and IGAD towards
ensuring the implementation of the agreement and the
inclusivity of the national dialogue as outlined in their
29 January statement. The fourth was the immediate
removal of obstacles to UNMISS and the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism operations, including obstacles to the
deployment of the regional protection force and attacks
on UNMISS and Monitoring Mechanism personnel.
The fifth was the immediate cessation of obstructions
to and attacks on all national and international
humanitarian personnel and facilities endeavouring to
provide life-saving assistance throughout South Sudan.
Those benchmarks are even more relevant today
as we head into the dry season and look towards the
convening of the high-level revitalization forum. I thus
urge the Council to speak with a united voice, once
again, and to use all means necessary to demand a
4/10

I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: This is my first briefing to the
Security Council on South Sudan, and I would like
to focus on four issues. The first is the humanitarian
outlook for the coming months. The second is
humanitarian access constraints. The third is current
aid delivery, and the fourth is the help we seek from the
Council to guarantee free and consistent access to all
those who need humanitarian assistance and protection.
I agree with and will try not to repeat everything that
Mr. Lacroix has said.
On Tuesday, we released the 2018 South Sudan
Humanitarian Needs Overview. The conclusions of
this comprehensive assessment are bleak. Even though
more than 2 million people have fled South Sudan as
refugees over the past four years of conflict, 7 million
people inside the country — almost two-thirds of
the remaining population — still need humanitarian
assistance. About 1.9 million people are internally
displaced, of whom some 210,000 seek safety in the
protection of civilians sites located on United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) bases.
According to the latest integrated food security
phase classification released by the Government of
South Sudan and food security partners a month ago,
the number of severely food insecure people has steadily
increased with each successive year of the conflict. As
we approach the end of 2017, 1.25 million people are in
the emergency phase of food insecurity; that is almost
twice as many people one step away from famine as
was the case at the same time last year. In early 2018,
half of the population remaining in South Sudan will
be reliant on emergency food aid. The next lean season,
beginning in March, is likely again to see famine
conditions in several locations across the country.
The massive and debilitating needs do not stop with
hunger. Only one in 10 people currently has access to
basic sanitation, which helps prevent deadly diseases.
Only half of the country’s schools are functioning, and
2 million children are currently out of school. In one
of every two households, a woman or girl experienced
17-42476

07/12/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

gender-based violence in the past year, according to
the International Organization for Migration. A study
just released by the International Rescue Committee
underscored the high levels of violence, with many
incidents directly related to a raid, displacement or
abduction. Reported rates of violence against women
and girls in South Sudan are among the highest in
the world.
On access, the suffering faced by civilians in
South Sudan is primarily the result of actions by the
parties in their conduct of the conflict. The alarming
level of food insecurity, for example, is directly linked
to restrictions on people’s freedom of movement,
their access to humanitarian assistance and their
ability to plant or to harvest. The impact of conflict
on agricultural production is particularly severe in
the greater Equatorias, which was typically a surplus
food-producing area before the conflict, but is now
seeing production deficits owing to insecurity and
related access challenges. Most farmers from the most
productive area along the border with Uganda are now
in refugee camps inside Uganda.
The recent rainy season did not see the usual lull
in fighting, nor a respite in humanitarian need. Now,
with the beginning of the dry season and ahead of the
anticipated peace talks between parties this month,
military offences have further intensified in recent
days, especially in Jonglei’s Ayod county, Unity’s
Leer and Mayendit counties, and Western Equatoria’s
Greater Mundri, all forcing more civilians to flee these
areas in search of safety and the essentials to survive.
The protection of civilians remains a key concern.
The violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights violations and abuses continue to be
perpetrated by both the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army (SPLA) and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army in Opposition. I remind all parties
that they must take constant care to spare civilians and
the infrastructure civilians rely on.
The suffering is also both a cause and a
consequence of the economic situation, which
continues to deteriorate, as Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix has
said. Many Government workers have not been paid in
months. The brutal reality of the economic situation
puts food out of reach for many people; it reduces
the provision of even the most basic services, such
as health and education; and it increases criminality,
especially in urban areas. Civilians’ safety is at risk and

S/PV. 8124

humanitarian organizations face an increasing number
of armed robberies and looting of convoys. Just last
week in Jonglei, around 2.3 metric tons of food were
looted from a humanitarian warehouse. Such actions
are perpetrated both by parties to the conflict and by
criminal groups for economic benefit.
Aid workers are paying with their lives to deliver
assistance. At least 95 humanitarian workers have been
killed in the line of duty since the start of the conflict,
and at least 28 of them have been killed this year alone.
More than 90 per cent of those people are national staff,
who form the backbone of the humanitarian response.
Mr. Lacroix mentioned the recent horrific attack
in Jonglei. That is just one example of the violence
aid workers face and five aid workers were killed in
that attack.
Allowing and facilitating rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access for civilians in need is an
obligation for all parties and essential for humanitarian
relief organizations to effectively save lives. The parties
regularly and flagrantly ignore these obligations. There
are areas of the country where humanitarians have
been unable to deliver assistance and programmes for
extended periods. That compounds the already dire
food security and nutrition situations. One example
is the opposition-held territory of Greater Baggari,
near Wau, which is classified in the emergency phase
of food insecurity — so it is just a step away from
famine — and where agencies have been able to deliver
aid only sporadically owing to access denials and SPLA
roadblocks. The situation will get even worse without
an improvement in access.
In recent weeks, the Government, as well as
opposition forces and non-State armed actors, have
continued to interfere with the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to people in need. Government security
forces have denied humanitarian access in Liwolo in
Kajo-keji county, non-State armed actors continue to
deny access in areas outside Yei and Mundri towns, and
opposition forces have denied access in Torit county’s
Gunyoro town. Access blockage to a waste disposal
site in Bentiu also continues, despite assurances from
the Governor that humanitarian agencies would be
provided unhindered access to the site.
Ongoing fighting also prevents us from delivering
aid, including clashes between SPLA and SPLA in
Opposition in Yei and surrounding counties. In 2017,
more than 500 humanitarian workers across the country

17-424765/10

S/PV.8124

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

07/12/2017

have been relocated for extended periods of time owing
to conflict and insecurity. Humanitarian organizations
do not relocate staff lightly — the objective is always to
stay and deliver — so when we do have to relocate, the
situation must be very extreme.

international humanitarian law to respect and protect
civilians, including humanitarian workers; and,
secondly, to ensure that the parties allow and facilitate
humanitarian relief operations and people’s access to
assistance and protection.

In early November, President Kiir released
a Republican order for the free, unimpeded and
unhindered movement of humanitarian assistance
convoys. I take note of this order, which enshrines
existing international obligations. I urge for it to be
translated into concrete actions and instructions at
all levels to remove roadblocks and bureaucratic and
other types of impediments and for it to be realized in
practice on the ground, because, as I have said, that is
not happening now.

The President: I thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.

Thirdly, despite these challenges and as Mr. Lacroix
has said, the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners have reached 5 million people with essential
assistance this year and the aim for next year is to
reach more. About 4 million people have received food
assistance and emergency livelihood support this year;
nearly 730,000 children and pregnant and breastfeeding
women have benefited from emergency nutritional
assistance; more than 2.1 million have gained access
to clean water; nearly 780,000 people have been
assisted with vital non-food items, including blankets
and mosquito nets; more than 350,000 children have
a chance to go to school; and nearly 400,000 people
have received gender-based violence services. To ease
aid delivery, an additional humanitarian corridor was
opened from the Sudan last month.
The fact remains that until international
humanitarian law is complied with, until the fighting
ends and until basic services are established, the
humanitarian situation will remain dire. This year,
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners have
halted famine, but that has taken enormous resources
and involved substantial risk to staff, some of whom, as
I have said, have lost their lives in the endeavour. We
must avoid a recurrence of famine next year. UNMISS
has played and will continue to play an important role
in protecting civilians and creating the conditions
conducive to the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
but its efforts cannot replace or in any way substitute
the responsibilities of the host Government.
Fourthly and in conclusion, I call upon Council
members, first, to use their influence to ensure
that the parties comply with their obligations under
6/10

I now give the floor to Mr. Wais.
Mr. Wais: First of all, I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your leadership of the Security
Council for the current month. I wish you, Sir, success
in your presidency.
I thank the Council for this opportunity to brief
it on the progress made in preparation towards the
convening of the high-level revitalization forum of the
parties to the peace process, including estranged groups,
to restore the permanent ceasefire, full implementation
of the peace agreement and establish realistic timelines
for democratic elections at the end of the transition
period. Since this is my first time briefing the Security
Council, I will just concentrate on what we have done
so far.
For six months, we have been doing everything
possible to revitalize the peace process in South
Sudan. The first action we undertook was to assist
the stakeholders of the conflicting parties in South
Sudan. After concluding the mapping exercise of the
key stakeholders, we planned a pre-forum consultations
schedule, which was also approved by the Council of
Ministers. In September and October, we conducted
pre-forum consultations and presented our findings to
the Council of Ministers in the first week of November.
We held the consultations in various locations within
and outside the region, such as Ethiopia, South Africa,
the Sudan and Juba. The Council of Ministers of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
took an active part in the discussions in the course of
those consultations. It is worth mentioning, for example,
that all of the members of the Council of Ministers were
present in South Sudan’s capital, Juba, where they led
the consultations. After the conclusion of the pre-forum
consultations, we sat down again to draft a report on
those consultations, which we concluded in November
and presented to the Council of Ministers.
For the Security Council’s information, I would
now like to provide a brief summary of the contents
of the pre-forum consultations. In total, more than
48 different stakeholders made submissions, either
17-42476

07/12/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

directly or indirectly, through consultations or in
position papers. All submissions were analysed, and I
would now like to highlight some of the key findings.
Stakeholders made proposals for a new transitional
Government, which included the following five options:
maintaining the status quo; returning to the status quo
ante of 8 July 2016; reconstituting the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan to include new parties; establishing a new
transitional Government of national unity composed
of technocrats; and establishing a hybrid transitional
Government of national unity made up of technocrats
and politicians.
In addition, three key proposals were advanced for
the restructuring of the states, namely, first, revoking
the current number of states and reverting to 10 states;
secondly, maintaining the 32 states and renegotiating
new power-sharing arrangements based on that number;
and, thirdly, reverting to the three regions of Bahr elGhazal, Equatoria and Upper Nile.
Some stakeholders demanded that the status quo
of the Transitional Government of National Unity be
maintained until the end of the current transitional
period. Alternative proposals were made for the current
governance system to be restructured into a federal or a
confederal system of governance. Under a restructured
governance system, two options were proposed for the
presidency in the interim period, namely, a rotational
presidency or a ceremonial President with an executive
Prime Minister.
Three main proposals for constituting the Council
of Ministers were also put forward: first, maintaining
the 30 ministries and establishing a deputy ministry
for each; secondly, reducing the numbers of ministerial
positions to 18 so that the Cabinet is lean; and, thirdly,
restructuring the Council of Ministers based on the
three regions, with each of one holding 10 portfolios
and 10 deputy portfolios.
The report made it very clear that all stakeholders
demanded a total cessation of hostilities before the
convening of the IGAD-led high-level revitalization
forum. The report also proposed that all parties and
estranged groups must sign a political charter that
committed all parties to non-violence before the the
holding of the forum. It was furthermore proposed
that an inclusive permanent ceasefire and transitional
security arrangements be negotiated at the forum, with
the regional protection force at the centre. There was also

S/PV. 8124

a call for an effective ceasefire monitoring, verification
and enforcement mechanism, including measures to
guarantee the freedom of movement of citizens through
the provision of enablers and multipliers. Stakeholders
also recommended that the citizens’ mandate be
reviewed to make it robust and effective. A national
ceasefire commission was proposed to oversee the
implementation of the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism.
The report also mentioned several critical issues.
The success of the IGAD-led high-level revitalization
forum was deemed to be dependent upon the following
factors: inclusivity; the cessation of hostilities and the
establishment of a permanent ceasefire; political will;
a unified position on the part of the opposition; IGAD’s
leadership and credibility as an impartial arbiter;
a robust enforcement mechanism agreed by IGAD,
the African Union and Security Council prior to the
holding of the revitalization forum; the structure of
the forum; gender parity and women `s participation;
the participation of Riek Machar; coordination of
concurrent political initiatives, such as the national
dialogue, the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
re-unification process and revitalization, and wider
consultations and transparency.
Suggestions on the timeline were also put
forward. On average, the stakeholders suggested that
a new transitional period would require four years to
deliver an effective transition that would culminate in
democratic elections. The majority proposed a two to
three year period, while others suggested four to five,
and others five to 10 years. In addition, the majority
thought that a three to six month pre-transitional period
would be required.
The report was subsequently presented to the
Council of Ministers, which endorsed it. I am very
glad to mention that, last week, at the African
Union-European Union Summit held in Abidjan, the
IGAD Council of Ministers held an informal meeting
at which they endorsed the pre-forum consultations
report. They also agreed to hold a Council of Ministers
meeting on 15 and 16 December. Immediately after
the Council’s meeting, they also agreed that the highlevel revitalization forum should take place between
17 and 28 December. Both the Council of Ministers
and the forum should take place in the African Union
Multi-Purpose Hall.

17-424767/10

S/PV.8124

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I am very pleased to say that we are now at the
threshold of commencing the IGAD-led high-level
revitalization forum, according to the decisions of the
IGAD Council of Ministers and the Summit.
The President: I thank Mr. Wais for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General of Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Special Envoy for South Sudan, Mr. Ismail Wais,
for their briefings. Those briefings have given us
a comprehensive overview of the latest events in
South Sudan.
Given that the Security Council dealt with this issue
just last week (see S/PV.8115), and without wishing to
repeat ideas, I shall focus my statement on the most
recent events in South Sudan, many of which the
briefers referred to quite clearly. However, before doing
that, I would like once again to express Uruguay’s deep
concern at this protracted crisis.
Just a few weeks from the end of this year — the
fifth year since the conflict broke out — the future
of South Sudan is at a critical juncture. All of the
promises and announcements of commitments have
already been made by all the parties to the conflict.
All that has not been lacking. What there has been
a dearth of, and what the country and its population
urgently need, are concrete actions and tangible results
that lead to a resolution of the crisis. In that regard, the
parties will soon have a unique opportunity, perhaps
a last chance, to demonstrate to their people their
commitment to a peaceful solution to the crisis. We
have great expectations for the convening of the highlevel revitalization forum on the 2015 Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, to be led by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development. We reiterate that, for that initiative to
be conducted normally and successfully, it is essential
that the parties involved once and for all comply with
their commitments to immediately put an end to the
hostilities across the entire country. It should be clear
that the persistence of any armed confrontation is
8/10

07/12/2017

incompatible with the establishment and conduct of a
genuine dialogue.
With regard to the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS), we regret to note that it
continues to face all kinds of restrictions imposed by
the Government, at the same time that the regional
protection force approved by the Security Council over
a year ago is still far from being 100 per cent operative.
In that regard, we once again urge the Government
of South Sudan to lift restrictions imposed on the
Mission and all humanitarian workers, as well as to
fully cooperate with the United Nations. We have heard
numerous promises on that topic, but it is now time for
those to translate into concrete action. On the other
hand, we note the progress that is under way on the
Secretariat’s strategic review of the UNMISS mandate.
We are fully confident that its conclusions will enable
the Security Council to take a responsible decision on
the future of the Mission, which plays a crucial role in
protecting civilians.
In conclusion, by way of summary, given that our
participation in the Security Council is coming to an
end, I must highlight our disappointment about the
situation of South Sudanese civilians. We had hoped for
more diligent action on the part of the Government in
Juba. We all know what goes on and how people live in
the so-called civilian protection sites. Many of us here
in the Council saw it barely over a year ago when, in
September 2016, we visited civilian protection sites in
Juba and Wau — places close to, or under the protection
of, UNMISS, or the Catholic Church in the case of Wau.
Unfortunately, the displaced people living there
are facing the terrible dilemma of remaining cooped up
without being able to work, with little or no prospects for
their future, or of leaving those centres to return to their
homes at the high risk of being robbed, sexually attacked
or killed. This week, the Minister for Humanitarian
Affairs and Disaster Management, Mr. Hussein Mar
Nyuot, presented a so-called resettlement package that
encouraged civilians to leave protection sites to return
to their homes. No one in their right mind would want
to return to their homes, or what is left of them, when
they pose so much danger. We have to set our priorities:
there must first be an immediate cessation of hostilities
and, thereafter, security guarantees have to be provided
for the entire civilian population.
17-42476

07/12/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

As this is our last statement on South Sudan at
the Security Council, we pay tribute to all South
Sudanese civilians.
Mr. Zambrana Torrelio (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Japanese
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
meeting, and Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for presenting the quarterly report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in South Sudan (S/2017/1011).
We also welcome and thank the Special Envoy of
the Intergovernmental Authority for Development
(IGAD) for South Sudan, His Excellency Mr. Ismail
Wais, for briefing us in detail about the progress in
the preparations for the holding of the high-level
revitalization forum.
I shall briefly touch upon three points at today’s:
the political process, access to humanitarian aid, and
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
First, my delegation expresses the support of the
Government of Bolivia for IGAD’s initiative and
the work carried out by Mr. Wais. We reiterate that a
sustainable solution to the conflict in South Sudan must
take place through a free and sincere political process
and through an inclusive dialogue that consolidates the
fulfilment of the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. The
efforts being made by regional organizations are
crucial and need the support of the international
community; however, above all, real commitment by
the Government and the opposition groups in South
Sudan is what is required.
In that connection, we believe that the inclusiveness
being demonstrated when it comes to the high-level
revitalization forum is very encouraging. We know that
there is still a lot of work is to do, but the fact that direct
interaction with all the parties has been initiated and that
those parties show interest in the forum is something
that we should underscore and continue to foster. We
encourage the parties to continue actively taking part
in the revitalization forum and to take advantage of
that opportunity so that the South Sudanese people can
establish a dialogue that allows for, first, a restoration
of a permanent ceasefire; secondly, the development
of a realistic time-frame for the holding of democratic
elections at the end of the transition period; and, thirdly,
the full implementation of the peace agreement.

S/PV. 8124

With regard to access to humanitarian aid, we
regret the current situation and we are concerned
about the alarming statistics concerning displaced
persons who constantly face food insecurity. We hope
that we will not face a famine situation, and therefore
believe that priority should be given to guaranteeing
a propitious operational environment for humanitarian
workers and for UNMISS. That cannot simply be just
a call in a statement — it is crucial that Government
and opposition forces comply with the order issued
by the President Salva Kiir on 9 November, in order
to guarantee the security of humanitarian workers and
their free movement throughout the territory, as well as
enabling people who are urgently in need to be able to
access humanitarian aid. Along those lines, we commend
the work of the United Nations Mine Action Service,
which, during the reporting period under consideration
deployed dozens of mine-clearance teams to determine
and demine highways and landing strips with the aim of
providing security and humanitarian access.
As to my third point — with regard to the renewal
of the UNMISS mandate — my delegation supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General for a twomonth extension while the strategic review is concluded.
We hope that, with the progress in the deployment
of the regional protection force, it will be possible
to extend and guarantee a more robust presence for
UNMISS patrols in areas of major conflict, such as the
Equatorias, the Bahr el-Ghazal region and the Upper
Nile. We also hope that such an extension will provide
for greater flexibility of movement for UNMISS so as to
prevent clashes between the parties and to be able to act
in a timely manner in order to reduce tensions between
communities. We believe that the strengthening of the
three-level strategy for the protection of civilians is
also a very important point to take into account.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation to the United Nations team and to
UNMISS for the important work they do in South
Sudan in fulfilling the noble task of saving lives and
looking after the welfare of millions of South Sudanese
people, who have already suffered almost five years of
conflict in their country. That is why we urge all the
parties involved and the international community to
support this commendable work as well as the highlevel revitalization forum, so as to prevent the civilian
population from continuing to bear the consequences
of the conflict.

17-424769/10

S/PV.8124

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me, first of all,
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the duties of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I assure you of my delegation’s support
and cooperation.
I would also like to welcome and acknowledge
the two Under-Secretaries-General for their briefings
and their work on South Sudan. Likewise, I would
like to welcome and thank the Special Envoy for
South Sudan of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), His Excellency Mr. Ismail Wais,
for his briefing regarding the IGAD pre-high-level
revitalization consultations that took place in October.
We are happy to reiterate the commitment of the
Transitional Government of National Unity to the
high-level revitalization forum. As reported, key
consultations have been held with the presidency and
members of the Council of Ministers of the Transitional
Government of National Unity. We look forward to the
upcoming meetings of the IGAD Council of Ministers
and the summit that will be convened in December. I
would like to assure the Council that the Government
will attend the summit with an open mind in the hope
that all parties will recommit themselves to fully
implementing the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.

10/10

07/12/2017

I would also like to inform you, Mr. President, and
the Council of the Government’s recent meeting in Juba
with the review team of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS). That was the first time that
the Government of South Sudan was included and
consulted in the review of the mandate of UNMISS. It
was a welcome change.
On 4 December, the Transitional Government of
National Unity met with the UNMISS review team
to discuss and conduct a comprehensive review of
the engagement of UNMISS in South Sudan. We are
reliably informed that the meeting was frank and
open, and that the Government put forth a number of
proposals regarding the future mandate of UNMISS.
Among those proposals was the Government’s wish to
see UNMISS engage in the capacity-building of human
resources and institutions, and to commission some
much-needed development projects. We therefore look
forward to the final report and its recommendations,
which we hope will reflect some of the Government’s
points of view.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

17-42476
