General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Session

94

of the International Women's Year" and an item entitled "Status and role of women in society, with special
reference to the need for achieving equal rights for
women and to women's contribution to the attainment of the goals of the Second United Nations Development Decade, to the struggle against colonialism,
racism and racial discrimination and to the strengthening of international peace and of co-operation between
States".
2311 th plenary meeting
10 December 1974
3277 (XXIX). Consuitative Committee for the
Conference of the International Women's
Year" 8

The General Assembly,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1851
(LVI) of 16 May 1974, in which the Secretary-General was requested to convene, in consultation with
Member States, specialized agencies and interested
non-governmental organizations in consultative status
with the Council, an international conference during
the International Women's Year, in 1975,
Realizing the importance of consultations, at the
highest possible level, for the preparation of the Conference of the International Women's Year,
1. Expresses the hope that the preparation of the
Conference of the International Women's Year will be
given the full attention which it warrants, having regatd
to the importance of the question;
2. Decides to establish a Consultative Committee
for the Conference of the International Women's Year
composed of not more than twenty-three Member
States designated by the Chairman of the Third Committee after consultation with the different regional
groups, on the basis of equitable geographical distribution;~9
3. Expresses the hope that the Consultative Committee will be comprised of highly qualified individuals
designated by their respective Governments;

4. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the
Consultative Committee not later than March 1975
at United Nations Headquarters, for a period not
exceeding ten working days, to advise him on the preparation of an international plan of action to be finalized by the Conference;

5. Decides that all the costs of convening the Consultative Committee, including the travel expenses of
its members, will be met from the fund for voluntary
contributions for the International Women's Year established under Economic and Social Council resolution
1850 (LVl) of 16 May 1974;
6. Appeals to Member States to make, in so far
as it lies within their power, voluntary contributions
to the above-mentioned fund in order to meet the
necessary financial implications for the convening of
the Consultative Committee;
7. P :!quests the Secretary-General to prepare a
draft 111ternational plan of action in time to be considered by the Consultative Committee and to submit
a progress report on the preparation of the Conference
r.9 See also p. 95, item

12.

to the organizational session of the Economic and Social Council in January 1975.

2311th plenary meeting
JO December 1974

•

•

•

At the 2311th plenary meeting, on JO December 1974, the
President of the General Assembly announced that the Chairman of the Third Committee, in pursuance of paragraph 2
of the above resolution, had designated the members of the
Consultative Committee for the Conference of the International
Women's Year.
As a result. tire Consultatfre Committee is composed of
the following Member States: AUSTRALIA, BELGIUM, BRAZIL,
FRANCE, GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, INDIA, IRAN, JA.
MAICA, JAPAN, JORDAN, MEXICO, NIGER, PHILIPPINES, ROMANIA,
RWANDA, SENEGAL, SIERRA LEONE, SWEDEN, TUNISIA, UNION
OF SOVIET SoCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
and VENEZUELA.

3278 (XXIX). Contributions to the United Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Control

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3145 (XXVIII) and 3146
(XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
' Realizing that drug abuse control is a iong-term
problem the resolution of which requires sustained international action,
Recognizing. that the United Nations Fund for Drug
Abuse Control was established to provide the international community with a means to assist in undertaking the required action to eliminate illicit drug
supply, trafficking and demand,
Noting that the Fund, which has already undertaken
many useful programmes, requires larger resources in
order to respond affirmatively to requests from Governments for assistance,
Urgently appeals to Governments for generous and
sustained cont,ributions to the United Nations Fund for
Drug Abuse Control.
2311th plenary meeting
10 December 1974
3279 (XXIX). Abuse of and illicit traffic
in narcotic drugs

The General Assembly,
Noting with concern that the abuse of and illicit
traffic in narcotic drugs have transcended national
boundaries and affect the well-being and health of
mankind as a whole,
Mindful of the dangers of the increasing abuse of
psychotropic substances and the greater volume of the
illicit traffic in these substances, as well as of various
narcotic drugs,
Recalling with appreciation the activities of the International Narcotics Control Board and the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in this matter,
Appealing for global participation in all efforts to
stop the abuse of and the illicit traffic in those drugs,
Reaffirming that the misuse of narcotic and psychotropic substances presents an actual as well as a potential danger to the health and future of mankind,
especially that of youth,

95

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

I. Calls for more extensive and effective co-operation among nations directly concerned, in order to
wage an all-out effort against the abuse of and illicit
traffic in narcotic drugs;
2. Notes that unincised poppy cultivation and the
use of the straw process for harvesting have been welcomed by the United Nations as one of the means of
production, depending on the social and economic
considerations of different countries, which lends itself
to more effective control of illicit traffic when accompanied by efficient and effective enforcement procedures;
3. Invites the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to
remain seized of the technical and economic aspects of
the poppy straw process;

•

4. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of the Division of Narcotic Drugs, to provide the
necessary financial and technical assistance from the
United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control to those
countries which require it in order to establish and
develop the poppy straw process and other techniques
of control of illicit traffic;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to consult
with the United Nations Development Programme and
the international financial institutions to that effect,
which will make possible a more effective fight against
the illicit traffic in narcotic drugs.
231 Ith plenary meeting
JO December 1974

•

•

Other decisions
Report of the Economic and Social Council
(Item 12)

At its 2311th plenary meeting, on 10 December 1974, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Third Committee,,;0 decided that the Chairman
of the Third Committee should be invited to participate as an observer in the
work of the Consultative Committee for the Conference of the International
Women's Year, on the understanding that the costs for this participation would
be met from the fund for voluntary contributions for the International Women's
Year. 61
Freedom of information
(Item 57i

At its 2311th plenary meeting, on 10 December 1974, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Third Committee, 62 decided to include in the
provisional agenda of its thirtieth session the item entitled "Freedom of information".
Status of the International Covenant on Economic, Sodal and Cultural
Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Ri!?;hts and
the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
(Item 58)

At its 2311th plenary meeting, on 10 December 1974, the General Assembly
took note of the understanding set forth in paragraph 8 of the report of the Third
Committee, 63 relating to paragraph 4 of resolution 3270 (XXIX).

United Nations conference for an international convention on
adoption law
(Item 61)

At its 2311th plenary meeting, on l O December 1974, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Third Committee, 64 decided to include in the
'"' Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth Sessio11, A11nexes, agenda
item 12, document A/9829/Add.1, para. 38.
t:1 See resolution 3277 (XXIX).
~~ Of]icwl Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth Session, Annexes, agenda
item 57, document A/9934, para. 9.
63 Ibid., agenda item 58, document A/9938.
64 Ibid, :igem:,1 item 61. document A/9935. para. 5.
