S/2020/798

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 August 2020
Original: English

Situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 2 of Security Council
resolution 2527 (2020) and paragraph 37 of Council resolution 2520 (2020) and
provides updates on the implementation of those resolutions, including on the
mandates of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The report covers major
developments in Somalia from 5 May to 4 August 2020.

II. Political, security and economic overview
A.

Political developments
2.
On 22 June, the President of Somalia, Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
“Farmajo”, held a virtual meeting with the leaders of the federal member states and
the Governor of Banaadir Region. It was the first time all federal and state leaders
had met in a decision-making forum since June 2018, marking an important step
towards the resumption of dialogue and collaboration. The leaders agreed to hold a
face-to-face summit in July.
3.
To prepare the ground for the July summit, the leaders of the federal member
states held a consultative meeting on 11 and 12 July in Dhuusamarreeb. The state
leaders issued a communiqué calling for timely elections with no term extension.
They also called for inclusive consultations to agree on a viable electoral model that
could be implemented within the remaining period of the current Administration ’s
term.
4.
The summit was held in Dhuusamarreeb from 18 to 22 July, with the
participation of Mr. Farmajo and the Prime Minister, Hassan Ali Khayre. The leaders ’
discussions focused on the 2020/21 elections. On 22 July, the heads of the Federal
Government and the federal member states issued a communiqué, agreeing to hold
timely and credible elections acceptable to all Somali stakeholders. They also decided
to establish a technical committee comprising representatives of the Federal
Government and the federal member states to prepare recommendations on modalities
for the holding of elections. They agreed to meet again on 15 August, in
Dhuusamarreeb, to consider those recommendations.

20-10527 (E)

170820

*2010527*

S/2020/798

5.
On 25 July, the House of the People of the Federal Parliament passed a motion
of no confidence against Mr. Khayre, with 170 votes in favour and 8 against.
Introducing the motion, the Speaker, Mohamed Sheikh Mursal Abdirahman, accused
the Prime Minister of failing to prepare a clear plan for the holding of one person,
one vote elections; to complete federalism; to decide on the status of Mogadishu; to
complete the review of the Constitution and hold a referendum on it; and to implement
the political party system. In a statement immediately following the vote, Mr. Farmajo
announced his acceptance of the Parliament’s decision and said that he would appoint
a new Prime Minister. In an address to the nation, Mr. Khayre questioned the legality
of the procedure followed by Parliament but said that he accepted the President ’s
decision for the sake of preserving the unity of the nation.
6.
The Federal Parliament had reconvened on 6 June following a two -month delay
owing to restrictions imposed as a result of the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic. Soon after resuming the session, a rift emerged between the Lower and
Upper Houses of Parliament over how to process recommendations from the joint ad
hoc committee they had tasked with addressing the gaps in the electoral code. On
12 June, the Speaker of the Upper House appointed a nine-member committee to
facilitate consultation among federal and state leaders and called for consultations
with federal member states before deciding on the ad hoc committee ’s
recommendations. Meanwhile, the Speaker of the Lower House emphasized the
primacy of Parliament in deciding on electoral modalities.
7.
On 27 June, the National Independent Electoral Commission presented to the
Lower House of Parliament a report on its plans for the upcoming federal elections.
Given the delays in electoral preparations and readine ss, the Commission proposed
two possible options for the conduct of parliamentary elections: same day paper-based
voter registration and polling, which could take place in March 2021; or elections
with standard biometric voter registration, to be held in A ugust 2021.
8.
Following the presentation of the Commission’s report, my Special
Representative held intensive consultations with federal and state leaders, as well as
with leaders of the Federal Parliament, political parties and civil society, and called
for inclusive dialogue to reach political consensus on the modalities and timing of the
elections. He also coordinated with international partners to ensure a unified approach
to engaging the divided Somali stakeholders.
9.
On 30 July, the Cabinet approved the appointment of five members to the
Judicial Service Commission. Somali civil society organizations, the Somali Bar
Association and the Forum for National Parties publicly opposed the appointments,
stating that the Cabinet was currently a “caretaker government” and lacked the
authority to appoint senior government officials.
10. At the initiative of the President of Djibouti, Ismaël Omar Guelleh, Mr. Farmajo
and the President of “Somaliland”, Muse Bihi Abdi, held a consultative meeting in
Djibouti on 14 June, aimed at facilitating the resumption of dialogue between Somalia
and “Somaliland”. The Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Abiy Ahmed, also attended the
meeting. The two sides agreed to form a joint committee, which met in Djibouti from
15 to 17 June, under the mediation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Djibouti and
facilitators from the United States of America and the European Union. The
committee discussed the way forward for talks, established three technical
subcommittees on aid coordination, airspace management and security cooperation,
and agreed to resume its work in Djibouti within 45 days. However, further talks
scheduled to take place on 12 July were postponed for an indefinite period owing to
“Somaliland” objecting to the alleged inclusion of two members from “Somaliland”
in the delegation of the Federal Government of Somalia.

2/17

20-10527

S/2020/798

11. In “Somaliland”, the House of Representatives approved the final composition
of the National Election Commission on 27 June. On 11 July, the President of
“Somaliland” and the Chairpersons of the two opposition parties requested that the
Commission prepare an election timeline for the holding of parliamentary and local
council elections in 2020. The House of Representatives began considering the
revised electoral law on 25 July.
12. In Galmudug, the state assembly approved, on 17 May, the nominations of the
President of Galmudug, Ahmed Abdi Karie, to the 61-member state cabinet, including
five women.
13. The President of Puntland, Said Abdullahi Mohamed Deni, and the President of
Galmudug, Mr. Karie, met in Gaalkacyo on 27 June and jointly committed to
cooperating on the maintenance of peace, security and economic development,
notably in Mudug Region, which spans both Galmudug and Puntland. On 15 June, at
the opening of the forty-sixth session of the Puntland state assembly in Garoowe,
Mr. Deni announced that he would not accept the outcome of any dialogue between
Somalia and “Somaliland” that excluded Puntland.
14. On 14 June, the President of Jubbaland, Ahmed Mohamed Islam “Madobe”, was
formally recognized by the Federal Government as “President of the interim
Jubbaland administration” for a period of two years from August 2019. On the same
day, the Jubbaland administration rebutted the conditional recognition and stated that
Mr. Madobe would complete his four-year term of office in accordance with the
Constitution of Jubbaland.
15. On 30 May, the South-West State Police reinstated a 2019 ban on the holding of
political meetings without prior authorization by the South-West State administration.
16. On 28 May, the President of Hirshabelle, Mohamed Abdi Ware, established a
committee to investigate the circumstances surrounding the abduction and killing of
seven health workers from a local non-governmental organization and another person
in Shabelle Dhexe Region on 27 May.
17. On 22 May, the International Court of Justice announced that it would postpone
oral proceedings in the case Maritime delimitation in the Indian Ocean (Somalia v.
Kenya) to the week beginning 15 March 2021.

B.

Security developments
18. The security situation remained volatile, with 288 incidents in May, 269 in June
and 218 in July. Most of those incidents were crime-related killings and shootings and
Al-Shabaab attacks, including those using improvised explosive devices. Levels of
crime and armed conflict-related incidents have remained steady since January, with
a slight decline in June and July. The number of terrorism -related incidents remained
at an average of around 75 per month in May and June, with 53 incidents in July.
19. Mortar attacks declined slightly countrywide, with a total of 23 bet ween May
and August, compared with 28 between February and April. The attacks mainly
targeted African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and local security forces in
Hiraan, Shabelle Dhexe and Banaadir Regions. On 9 May, Al-Shabaab carried out an
attack with 60 mm mortars against the Aden Adde International Airport zone in
Mogadishu, where the United Nations compound is located. While the United Nations
infrastructure was damaged, no casualties were reported. The attack was the sixth
targeting the Aden Adde International Airport zone in 2020, the highest frequency of
such attacks on the zone ever recorded. On 30 June, Al-Shabaab carried out an attack
on a stadium in the Wardhingley district of Mogadishu during a ceremony attended
by Mr. Farmajo. No casualties were recorded.

20-10527

3/17

S/2020/798

20. Al-Shabaab maintained the capability to use vehicle-borne and person-borne
improvised explosive devices to carry out high-profile attacks. On 13 July, the Chief
of Defence Forces of Somalia, Brigadier General Odawa Yusuf Rage, survived a
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device attack on his convoy in Hodan district. At
least six people – three Somali National Army soldiers escorting the convoy and three
civilian bystanders – were killed, and 10 others were injured. On 4 July, a vehicl eborne improvised explosive device detonated at a security post manned by the Somali
Police Force in Xamar Jajab district, resulting in five police officers and an
unconfirmed number of civilian bystanders being injured. On 23 June, a suicide
bomber detonated his explosive vest near a Turkish military training facility, killing
two Somalis. On 17 May and 27 June, vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices
targeted government officials in Mogadishu but there were no casualties.
21. On 3 August, a suicide bomber detonated his explosive vest inside Luul Bar and
Yameni Restaurant, near the seaport in Xamar Jajab district. Three people were
reportedly killed, including the perpetrator and two guards. Three civilian bystanders
were injured in the explosion.
22. An increase in Al-Shabaab activity was also recorded in the northern regions. In
Mudug, on 17 May, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device targeted the convoy
of the Governor of Mudug in Gaalkacyo, killing the Governor and four of his
bodyguards. It is the second high-profile attack claimed by Al-Shabaab in northern
Somalia in 2020, after the killing of the Governor of Nugaal in Garoowe on 29 March.
On 21 June, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device exploded at a checkpoint
near a police station in Hobyo district, killing two soldiers. On 5 July, in Shabelle
Dhexe, the group abducted and killed a Member of Parliament from Hirshabelle.
23. While security operations have been ongoing in Shabelle Hoose since the
resumption of Operation Badbaado in March, Al-Shabaab continued to target
recovered areas with attacks on the Somali National Army and AMISOM forces.
Pressure on Al-Shabaab in Shabelle Hoose appears to have forced the group to adapt
and increase its presence in the Bay and Shabelle Dhexe Regions. In Bay, Al-Shabaab
intensified an improvised explosive device campaign targeting AMISOM convoys on
the main supply routes. Two Al-Shabaab attacks on 23 and 24 May targeted civilians
during Eid celebrations in Baidoa and Diinsoor, reportedly resulting in seven people
being killed and over 40 injured. A World Health Organization contractor was injured
in a hand grenade attack at a restaurant on 10 July in Kismaayo.
24. Three attacks against government security forces were attributed to pro-Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) elements: two in Mogadishu and one in Boosaaso,
Bari Region. This represents a decrease compared with the previous period, when six
incidents were recorded. A total of seven air strikes in May, two in Jun e and three in
July were recorded in the Gedo, Juba Dhexe, Lower Juba, Shabelle Hoose and Bari
Regions, targeting Al-Shabaab and ISIL. In the first seven months of 2020, there were
a total of 45 air strikes, compared with 47 in all of 2018 and 63 in all of 2019.
25. On 25 May, a commercial aircraft, contracted by the World Food Programme to
carry humanitarian cargo, was shot at during its approach to land in Qansaxdheere,
Bay Region. The crew managed to land the aircraft and no casualties were reported.
Investigations into the crash of an African Express Airways aircraft registered in
Kenya on 4 May in Bardaale, South-West State, are ongoing. UNSOS supported the
movement of officials and investigators from Kenya, Somalia, Ethiopia and AMISOM
during several joint visits to the crash site.

4/17

20-10527

S/2020/798

C.

Economic developments
26. The triple shock of COVID-19, the desert locust infestation and flooding has
disrupted the trajectory of Somalia towards economic recovery. According to World
Bank estimates from June, gross domestic product is projected to decline by 2.5 per
cent in 2020 to $4.6 billion, compared with an estimated pre-crisis growth of 3.2 per
cent to $5.2 billion. It is estimated that remittances will fall by 17 per cent in 2020
owing to the reduced financial capacity of the Somali diaspora and increased
difficulties sending funds to Somalia.
27. On 28 May, the federal Cabinet approved revisions to the 2020 budget. Federal,
state and local governments expect shortfalls in domestic revenue. On 23 June, the
World Bank approved $55 million in supplemental financing to help the Federal
Government to bridge the fiscal gap caused by the triple shock and to continue the
implementation of fiscal and economic policy reforms. The supplemental financing
follows the approval by the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) of a three-year financing package of $395 million under the Extended Credit
Facility and the Extended Fund Facility, in support of policies and reforms between
the decision and completion points under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative and in support of the implementation of the ninth national development
plan. Prior to the decision point, arrears to IMF were cleared, thanks to the
contributions of IMF members and bridge financing from Italy.
28. The United Nations updated the socioeconomic component of the Somalia
COVID-19 country preparedness and response plan to align it with the global
framework of the United Nations. The revised plan consists of an integrated support
package for the humanitarian, development and political workstreams of the United
Nations, and seeks to adapt existing programmes to the changing context and the
socioeconomic impact of COVID-19. It is also aligned with the Global Humanitarian
Response Plan for COVID-19 and the Federal Government’s comprehensive
socioeconomic impact and response plan for COVID-19. The funding appeal for the
Somalia COVID-19 country preparedness and response plan is $526.8 million
($255.7 million for the humanitarian component and $ 271.1 million for the
socioeconomic component).
29. The Ministry of Petroleum and Mineral Resources announced the virtual launch
of an offshore licensing round that will run from 4 August 2020 to 12 March 2021.
The Forum for National Parties opposed the initiative.

III. Support for peacebuilding and state-building efforts
A.

Establishment of a functional federal state

1.

Preparations for elections
30. The report of the joint parliamentary ad hoc committee tasked with addressing
gaps in the electoral code was submitted to the House of the People on 17 June.
31. Between 22 and 30 June, the House of the People debated the committee ’s
recommendations and adopted four resolutions that, respectively, guaranteed a
minimum 24 per cent quota for the representation of women in Parliament; outlined
a separate modality for electing members of both houses from “Somaliland”;
allocated 13 additional seats to the Upper House for representation of the Banaadir
Region; and confirmed the allocation of seats to constituencies for both houses . The
House of the People also adopted the amendments to the political parties law on
22 July.

20-10527

5/17

S/2020/798

32. Progress on elections security planning has been slow since the National
Electoral Security Task Force met from 15 to 18 March. My Special Representative,
together with other international partners, engaged with the leadership of the Somali
Police Force and offered support to put security arrangements in place. A mapping
tool with proposed voter registration and polling sites was developed by the National
Independent Electoral Commission and shared with the National Electoral Security
Task Force to allow for ongoing site assessments by the fe deral member states and
Banaadir police chiefs.
2.

Deepening federalism
33. Concerted efforts, including virtual meetings at the technical and political
levels, were undertaken by the United Nations and international partners to promote
collaboration and foster political consensus among the federal and state leaders, with
a view to advancing the implementation of national priorities. Following the
agreement of Mr. Farmajo to designate a focal point for relations between the Federal
Government and the federal member states, the federal member states also appointed
their representatives to a joint secretariat that was tasked with preparing for a meeting
between federal and state leaders. The secretariat held three virtual meetings between
27 May and 4 June but did not reach an agreement on the timing and agenda of the
envisaged summit, prompting the representatives of Puntland and Jubbaland to
withdraw from the secretariat. Subsequent engagement by my Special Representative
and other international partners helped to elevate the consultations to the level of the
federal and state leaders, which culminated in an agreement to hold the virtual summit
on 22 June.
34. On 14 June, the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation
convened an interministerial consultation to review and analyse the draft
intergovernmental relations act, which aims to define the vertical, horizontal and
sectoral dimensions of different levels of government. Participants agreed to form a
technical working group with federal and state representatives to identify
institutional, administrative and technical aspects of the draft act. Meanwhile, the
establishment of key national institutions identified in the Federal Government ’s
political road map and in the Mutual Accountability Framework, including the federal
Constitutional Court and the Human Rights Commission, is yet to be completed.

3.

Constitutional review
35. Efforts by the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, the joint parliamentary
Oversight Committee and the Independent Constitutional Review and Implementation
Commission to conclude the constitutional review process continued. The three
implementing entities prepared a workplan covering the period from July to
December 2020 after the 30 June deadline set in the Mutual Accountability
Framework for the adoption of the revised constitution was not met.
36. On 23 June, my Special Representative hosted a virtual meeting with
international partners and the three entities to take stock of the review process and
agreed to explore ways of facilitating the resumption of high-level dialogue between
federal and state leaders to reach the political agreement required to complete the
review process.

4.

Prevention and resolution of conflicts
37. On 18 May, the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation
convened a virtual meeting of the National Reconciliation Framework Advisory
Board with international partners to move the reconciliation agenda forward. For the
first time, the federal member states participated in the meeting.

6/17

20-10527

S/2020/798

38. Security cooperation between Galmudug and Puntland improved markedly in
Gaalkacyo, Mudug Region, which resulted in the arrest of suspected Al -Shabaab
elements and the death of an Al-Shabaab official on 6 June. In the aftermath of armed
clashes on 3 May in the villages of Taaroge and Saho-Kurun, the Leelkase and Sa’ad
clans held a peace conference from 5 to 12 June in Bandiiradley and signed an
agreement to end the cycle of violence and promote peace in west Mudug. The second
phase of the reconciliation conference, held from 28 June to 5 July in Galdogob,
concluded with the exchange of compensation and the signing of a cooperation
agreement for peaceful coexistence between the clans.
39. On 5 July, a South-West State ministerial delegation secured an agreement on
the cessation of hostilities between the Shamta-Alemod and Galjel sub-clans of the
Digil and Hawiye clans, respectively, in Wanlaweyn district, Shabelle Hoose,
allowing displaced people to return, and the recruitment from both communities of a
250-member special police force, working closely with Somali National Army units.
40. In Jubbaland, reconciliation talks, facilitated by the state administration and the
Soransoor clan, took place between the Majerten and Awramale clans. From 10 May
to 4 June, the two clans agreed to withdraw armed militia from the affected areas. A
meeting of Hawadle clan elders was convened in Beledweyne on 11 June by the
President of Hirshabelle, Mr. Ware, with a view to minimizing conflict over district
council formation processes. Mr. Ware also intervened to end clashes over land
between the Reer Hassan and Hawadle sub-clans in Hiraan Region, which had
resulted in the killing of nine persons on 16 June. The Hirshabelle adm inistration also
arranged a ceasefire on 14 June between the Hawadle and Habergidar sub -clans
concerning a land dispute in Matabaan district.

B.

Cross-cutting issues

1.

Gender equality and the empowerment of women
41. On 17 June, UNSOM and the United Nations Development Programme
provided a virtual training session on gender awareness and on the women and peace
and security agenda for 16 staff members (11 women and 5 men) of the Security
Analysis Unit of the Office of the Prime Minister.
42. On 14 June, women leaders in Xuddur met the President of South-West State,
Abdiaziz Hassan Mohamed “Laftagareen”, to discuss the lack of female
representation in the current district council. The President assured them that the next
elections in Xuddur would follow a model implemented in Diinsoor district, which
achieved female representation of 47 per cent.
43. On 14 May, the state assembly of South-West State established a parliamentary
committee on women, human rights and humanitarian issues. The committee is
chaired by a female Member of Parliament and could increase opportunities for
women and help to promote legislation that empowers women and boosts gender
equality.

2.

Youth empowerment
44. From 20 March to 15 June, with support from the United Nations Population
Fund and in partnership with the Somali Youth Peer Education Network, a youth -led
caravan travelled to parts of Hargeysa, Gebiley, Halaya, Arabsiyo, Wajaale, Garoowe,
Buuhoodle, Boosaaso and Baidoa, delivering education and communication materials
relating to sexual and reproductive health, HIV and COVID -19. The caravan reached
27,000 people (19,000 females and 8,000 males). Another youth caravan visited
42 villages in Jubbaland with the support of a local non-governmental organization,

20-10527

7/17

S/2020/798

Somali Lifeline Organization, reaching 1,539 men and 3,155 women with messaging
aimed at countering female genital mutilation and raising awareness of COVID -19.

C.

Development coordination
45. The Federal Government began operationalizing the revised aid architecture in
June to streamline coordination structures and focus on the priorities stipulated in the
Mutual Accountability Framework. The new architecture is simpler than the previous
one and is expected to be cost-effective and more agile and strategic. The Somalia
Partnership Forum will continue as the apex of the aid architecture. However, plans
for the next forum are currently on hold owing to uncertainty around travel
restrictions.
46. On 25 June, Mr. Khayre wrote to me endorsing the request for Somalia to
continue to receive support from the Peacebuilding Fund. On 21 July, I declared
Somalia eligible for support from the Peacebuilding Fund for a period of five years
to enable continued funding for new peacebuilding and sustaining peace initiatives in
line with national priorities. The endorsement of the Prime Minister was preceded by
virtual consultations on peacebuilding priorities involving 383 people from across
Somalia. The consultations concluded on 14 May. A closed phase of the consultations
included participation from the Federal Government, the federal member states, civil
society, members of the diplomatic community and the United Nations system in
Somalia. Participants agreed that future interventions under the Peacebuilding Fund
would focus on reconciliation, justice, governance and security. In the new eligibility
phase, funding will be prioritized for initiatives supporting gender equality and
women’s empowerment, in line with the Somali Women’s Charter.
47. Since the endorsement of the National Environmental Policy of Somalia in
February 2020, the Federal Government has drafted a climate change policy and a
national environmental act. Both documents are with Parliament for appr oval and are
expected to strengthen legislation on environmental protection. On 30 June, the World
Bank released the Somalia Country Environmental Analysis, which contains short -,
medium- and long-term recommendations on such issues as stemming the depleti on
of natural wealth, resource protection, capital accumulation and diversifying the
economy.
48. The United Nations in Somalia prepared a draft common country analysis of the
situation in the country, undertaken within the framework of the Sustainable
Development Goals and the development, humanitarian and peacebuilding nexus, and
shared it with the Federal Government for feedback. The common country analysis
will inform the next United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework for the period 2021–2025, which will be aligned with the ninth national
development plan of Somalia and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

IV. Human rights and protection
A.

Human rights
49. UNSOM recorded 319 civilian casualties, including 138 killed an d 181 injured,
compared with 170 killed and 120 injured during the previous reporting period .
Al-Shabaab was the main perpetrator, responsible for 41 per cent of civilian casualties
(132), followed by unknown actors with 31 per cent (98). Other perpetrator s included
State security forces with 12 per cent (39), clan militias with 12 per cent (39) and
AMISOM with 2 per cent (7). Unidentified aerial attacks accounted for 1 per cent of
civilian casualties (4).

8/17

20-10527

S/2020/798

50. Journalists and media workers in Somalia continued to face challenges
exercising their right to freedom of expression. A total of six journalists were arrested:
one in Hirshabelle, two in Jubbaland and three in “Somaliland”. On 21 May, the Chair
of the Banaadir Regional Court ordered the Office of the Attorney General to conduct
an urgent investigation into complaints by journalists. On 29 July, the Banaadir
Regional Court sentenced the Deputy Director of the Goobjoog Media Group to six
months’ imprisonment and imposed a fine for insulting a judicial b ody of the Federal
Government and for publishing fake news related to COVID -19. He was released a
day later, after paying the fine and an additional amount in lieu of the imprisonment
term.
51. A total of 85 individuals, including 70 Al-Shabaab suspects, were arbitrarily
arrested and/or held in prolonged detention, which constitutes a 4 per cent decrease
from the previous reporting period, when 89 individuals were arbitrarily arrested or
detained. A total of 37 individuals, including six journalists, were r eleased without
charge or being brought before a court, as required under the Code of Criminal
Procedure.
52. Two members of the Somali security forces were executed on 16 and 28 May in
Kismaayo and Boosaaso, respectively, after being sentenced to death f or the killing
of their colleagues. Eight death sentences were handed down by the Somali military
courts in Jubbaland, Puntland and Mogadishu to four Al-Shabaab suspects and four
members of the Somali security forces.
53. To ease overcrowding in prisons, Somali authorities pardoned and released
380 inmates (365 in “Somaliland” and 15 in Hirshabelle).

B.

Compliance with the human rights due diligence policy
54. In May and June, UNSOM provided support for the implementation of the
human rights due diligence policy mitigation measures under the Mine Action Service
Somali police mobile vehicle checkpoint project. Support to strengthen internal
compliance and reporting systems was provided to the Mine Action Service as part of
the preparations for UNSOS support to an additional 3,000 Somali security forces, as
mandated by Security Council resolution 2520 (2020). UNSOM also communicated
to AMISOM two incidents of alleged violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law by AMISOM involving seven civilian casualties.

C.

Children in armed conflict
55. The country task force on monitoring and reporting on grave violations against
children in armed conflict verified 546 grave violations affecting 495 children
(376 boys and 119 girls), one attack on schools, one attack on a hospital and three
cases of denial of humanitarian assistance. A total of 143 children were abducted,
185 children were victims of killing and maiming, 165 were victims of recruitment
and use and 48 were victims of conflict-related sexual violence.
56. The violations were attributed to Al-Shabaab (320, or 58.6 per cent), unknown
armed elements (108, or 19.78 per cent), clan militia (31, or 5.68 per cent), federal
and state armed forces (83, or 15.2 per cent), AMISOM (2, or 0.37 per cent) and
unidentified aerial attacks (2, or 0.37 per cent). A total of 17 incidents of deprivati on
of liberty affecting 31 boys were recorded, with 26 boys detained by the Somali Police
Force, 2 by Puntland state forces, 2 by Jubbaland state forces and 1 by Galmudug
state forces. Reintegration programmes supported 986 children associated with armed

20-10527

9/17

S/2020/798

forces or armed groups, and 299 vulnerable children continued to receive support
from reintegration programmes supported by the United Nations Children ’s Fund.
57. On 7 June, a meeting of the working group on children and armed conflict was
convened. Participants reviewed the steps taken by the Federal Government to
implement the 2019 road map on children and armed conflict and agreed on strategies
for strengthening child protection measures. Following the issuance of the report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (A/74/845-S/2020/525),
specific and time-bound measures have been developed in collaboration with the
Somali Police Force to address the reported violations committed against childre n.

D.

Prevention of sexual and gender-based violence
58. Forty incidents affecting 45 victims and survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence were documented. All those affected were women and girls (41 minors and
4 adults). While the majority of the perpetrators (31) were reportedly unidentified
armed men, four incidents were attributed to Somali National Army personnel, one to
South-West Special Force personnel, one to clan militia members, one to Somali
Police Force personnel, one to Al-Shabaab and one to Ethiopian National Defence
Forces personnel.
59. On 14 May, in the Wadajir district of Mogadishu, a four-year-old girl was
reportedly raped by a Somali National Army officer. Upon the arrest of the alleged
perpetrator on 17 May, UNSOM worked closely with the Office of the Attorney
General to ensure that the perpetrator was held accountable.
60. On 19 June, Somalia commemorated the International Day for the Elimination
of Sexual Violence in Conflict. My Special Representative issued a statement
commending the work of front-line health workers and emphasized the need to
support the victims and survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.
61. A motion to return the sexual offences bill to Parliament for its first reading was
dismissed by the Speaker in June. An alternative bill, entitled the law on sexual
intercourse-related crimes, was recently drafted by Parliament. The bill is narrow in
scope and contravenes a number of the country’s obligations under international
human rights law, in particular the Convention on the Rights of the Child. UNSOM
and other international partners have engaged with the Speaker to bring the
shortcomings of the bill to his attention and proposed ways to address them.

V. Humanitarian situation
62. Multiple shocks, including COVID-19, desert locusts and floods, have deepened
the humanitarian crisis in Somalia. Since 16 March, COVID -19 has affected 3,212
people, including 133 health workers, with 93 associated deaths and 1,598 recoveries.
COVID-19 has exacerbated pre-existing vulnerabilities, disrupted socioeconomic
gains and affected livelihoods. It has also reduced the humanitarian footprint in
Somalia, with most staff working in restricted environments, including from home or
remotely.
63. Humanitarian partners have expanded their support to the Somali authorities to
detect, prevent and interrupt transmission of COVID-19. Polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) testing laboratories are operational in Mogadishu, Garoowe and Hargeysa.
GeneXpert testing capacity has been established in Mogadishu, Kismaayo,
Beledxaawo, Baidoa, Dhuusamarreeb and Jawhar and is being established in
Beledweyne. In addition, hospitals and isolation centres have been equipped and risk
communication and community engagement have reached 10.9 mil lion people. At the
10/17

20-10527

S/2020/798

same time, 279 humanitarian organizations are implementing humanitarian
programmes in all 18 regions. In May, 2.3 million people received food assistance, a
more than three-fold increase from the 700,000 people reached per month from
January to March. A total of 1.8 million people were reached in June.
64. The gu rains (from April to June) have eased and most displaced people have
returned to their homes, but the impact of flooding owing to climate change remains
widespread. At least 1.3 million people in 39 districts were affected by flooding, with
over half a million displaced. Riverine and flash floods since late June have also
affected almost 198,000 people. The rains washed away crops, thereby exacerbating
food insecurity, and contributed to the current outbreak of acute watery diarrhoea and
cholera. From January to mid-July, there were 5,177 confirmed cholera cases and
29 deaths reported in 23 districts, which is a more than three -fold increase compared
with the same period in 2019.
65. The gu rains created favourable conditions for desert locust breeding in
“Somaliland”, Puntland and Galmudug. With support from the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the Ministry of Agriculture and
Irrigation, the implementation of the joint desert locust crisis – Somalia action plan
has expanded local surveillance and control capacities. FAO and the Federal
Government have sprayed 43,655 hectares with bio-pesticides to reduce desert locust
populations. Those efforts have saved an estimated 87,255 metric tons of staple foods,
valued at $26.2 million, which will be sufficient to feed 581,700 people for a year.
The spraying has further protected feed and pasture sources needed by 40,505 pastoral
households. Of the $56.9 million required for the action plan, $34.3 million had been
received as at 4 August.
66. Preliminary estimates indicate that the overall 2020 gu season crop harvest
could be 30–40 per cent lower than the long-term average owing to the combined
impact of locusts, other pests and climate change. An estimated 3.5 million people
are projected to face crisis or emergency food insecurity (Integrated Food Security
Phase Classification phase 3 or higher) between July and September. The Central
Emergency Response Fund has made a $15 million anticipatory action allocation to
Somalia to mitigate the impact of the triple shock of COVID -19, the desert locust
infestation and flooding.
67. In recognition of multiple compounding vulnerabilities, the Somalia
humanitarian country team launched a reprioritization of the Humanitarian Response
Plan for Somalia, which resulted in revised requirements and numbers of people
targeted. On 26 May, the humanitarian country team endorsed the new financial
requirements, which decreased from $1.05 billion requested in the original 2020
Humanitarian Response Plan to $1.01 billion. The decreased financial requirements
do not imply an improved humanitarian situation but rather a reprioritization of the
response towards addressing the most vulnerable. As at 3 August, the 2020
Humanitarian Response Plan is 49.5 per cent funded. Additional funding is urgently
needed to continue to deliver humanitarian assistance.
68. Security remains a major constraint to humanitarian operations. From 5 May to
4 August, 76 incidents against humanitarian operations were recorded, in which
9 humanitarian workers were killed, 4 were injured, 17 were abducted and 11 were
detained or temporarily arrested.

VI. Comprehensive approach to security
69. The Federal Government aligned the comprehensive approach to security
structures with the revised aid coordination architecture. On 25 May, the

20-10527

11/17

S/2020/798

Comprehensive Approach to Security Executive Committee was renamed the Security
and Justice Committee, and on 29 July, its new secretariat was formed within the
Office of the Prime Minister. Internal consultations on updating the transition plan
continued among relevant federal institutions and federal member states.

A.

Operations
70. The Somali National Army continue to secure recovered areas in Shabelle
Hoose. Its positions in and around Jannaale are becoming more established with the
building of an additional forward operating base in the town, despite numerous
Al-Shabaab attacks, including improvised explosive devices, ambushes and indirect
fire. The extended gu rains have affected the expansion of some security activities.
Joint planning for the final phase of operations in Shabelle Hoose, addressing the
inland town of Mubaarak and the coastal town of Gandarshe, has begun. However,
generating sufficient Somali security forces remains a critical issue that has been
affected by COVID-19.
71. Stabilization activities in Shabelle Hoose continued to focus on supporting the
local administration’s outreach activities to communities in Jannaale and the
surrounding villages.
72. There are currently 525 Federal Darwish Police and 376 South-West State Police
in Mogadishu waiting to be supplied with small arms prior to their deployment to
Shabelle Hoose as part of stabilization and transition operations in that region.
Complementary non-lethal support, such as vehicles and other equipment, is being
provided through the joint police programme.

B.

Institutional capacity-building
73. Together with the Somali Police Force and in close cooperation with the
respective line ministries, the United Nations assisted in developing general orders
on the police response to COVID-19, with an emphasis on human rights protection
during operations and detention. The Somali Police Force was also given support to
calculate its requirements for protective equipment.
74. The United Nations supported the development of the new Galmudug
administration’s action plan for building the Galmudug state police, including the
state Darwish (special armed police units), and expanding the state ’s maritime police
capacity.
75. Although the COVID-19 pandemic has slowed the implementation of capacity building activities, the Federal Supreme Court concluded a six -week training
programme in July for 21 newly recruited judges from the Banaadir Regional Court.
The training programme focused on ethics, court administration, human rights and
cases of sexual and gender-based violence.
76. UNSOM, in conjunction with the Central Bank, assisted the Office of the
Attorney General in developing its strategic plan for 2020 –2024. The plan includes
the establishment of a financial crimes agency to address money-laundering and other
financial crimes.
77. With support from UNSOM and the European Union Capacity-Building Mission
in Somalia, eight federal ministries and the respective state ministries started
implementing the action plan for women in the maritime sector by establishing a
network of officials, civil society members and academics to advance the women a nd
peace and security agenda within the country’s maritime domain.

12/17

20-10527

S/2020/798

78. In June, as part of continued efforts to ensure that the Somali security forces are
better equipped to assume responsibility for security, 39 officers from the Somali
Police Force (28 men and 11 women) were provided with online training on searches,
improvised explosive device component parts and the human rights due diligence
policy mitigation measures under the mobile vehicle checkpoint project. That was
followed by face-to-face training, which commenced on 4 July. In addition, the Mine
Action Service continued to support the Federal Government in the area of improvised
explosive device threat analysis, providing regular awareness reports on such devices.

C.

Supporting activities
79. On 6 June, the Fragility Index and Maturity Model for 2020, which provides a
dashboard and analysis on progress and conditions in 32 districts on the issues of
local governance, social reconciliation, community recovery, security and rule of law,
was issued. Coverage has been expanded from 24 districts in 2019 to 32 districts in
2020.
80. From 5 May to 4 August, the Mine Action Service continued to contribute to
reducing the threat posed by explosive ordnance to the civilian population by
providing risk education to 17,706 individuals (5,108 women, 3,767 men, 3,535 girls
and 5,296 boys).
81. In an effort to counter Al-Shabaab’s narratives around COVID-19, the Ministry
of Endowments and Religious Affairs and the Ministry of Health, in coordination with
the Office of the Prime Minister, developed joint prevention and social distancing
messaging, prepared religious burial guidelines and mobilized burial teams of trained
front-line health workers.
82. The International Organization for Migration and UNSOM con tinued to work
with women-led civil society organizations that provide rehabilitation and
reintegration support to women formerly associated with Al-Shabaab who are
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence. In June, the five rehabilitation centres
in Mogadishu, Baidoa and Kismaayo reopened fully, albeit under strict COVID -19
mitigation measures. As at 4 August, the three male rehabilitation centres are
supporting 222 male Al-Shabaab defectors, while the two female rehabilitation
centres in Baidoa and Kismaayo have 52 female beneficiaries.

VII. United Nations Support Office in Somalia support for
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the Somali
National Army
A.

Support for African Union Mission in Somalia operations
83. UNSOS provided support for the continuity of AMISOM operations and ensured
the availability of critical life support logistics capacities, despite the challenges
posed by the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated restrictions imposed by the host
and neighbouring Governments on the movement of personnel and cargo. The support
of the Somali, Kenyan and Ethiopian Governments was instrumental in enabling
UNSOS to move essential cargo and personnel across borders. Heavy rains and
flooding restricted the movement of supplies by road and resulted in the increased
use of aviation assets to supply AMISOM sectors.
84. AMISOM established a COVID-19 task force in all sectors and participated in
the United Nations Somalia COVID-19 task force. The response efforts of the
AMISOM COVID-19 task force are guided by projected transmission rates, enabling

20-10527

13/17

S/2020/798

rapid and coherent implementation of preventive measures and treatment capacity
across the AMISOM area of operations. UNSOS continued to strengthen medical
treatment capacities, including by providing COVID-19-related supplies to all
AMISOM sectors, such as personal protective equipment, cleaning and sanitizing
materials, 10-person tents for isolation facilities and wash basins. By early June,
AMISOM and the United Nations in Somalia had achieved a substantive level of
treatment capacity, including additional hospital beds and intensive care units to be
able to transfer and treat multiple serious cases in Mogadishu. Eff orts are also under
way to establish more robust practices. UNSOS support to the African Union
Commission, AMISOM and AMISOM troop- and police-contributing countries
includes reinforcing existing prevention and containment practices by establishing a
joint mechanism to monitor measures taken by AMISOM, in particular in areas where
the risks of contracting or spreading COVID-19 are high. The United Nations also
invited the African Union to align its troop rotation mechanisms and COVID -19
mitigation measures.
85. UNSOS also supported the conversion of its training centre in Mogadishu into
an isolation facility, supplementing the existing AMISOM transit camp capacity, and
commenced work to upgrade the AMISOM Level 1 plus medical clinic in Kismaayo,
augmented by additional medical personnel provided by Kenya.
86. UNSOS continued to support AMISOM to mitigate the threat of indirect fire in
Mogadishu by prioritizing construction projects to build hard -walled structures,
strengthening perimeter surveillance and defences, and installing early warning
systems, with additional systems planned for deployment to AMISOM sector
headquarter locations.
87. UNSOS support for water borehole drilling and improving forward operating
bases has slowed owing to the COVID-19 pandemic and the high security threat.
UNSOS capacity to undertake optimum oversight and accountability measures for
support to AMISOM, including certification and inspection activities, has also been
adversely affected.
88. The deployment of the AMISOM formed police unit to Baidoa, provided by
Ghana, continues to be delayed owing to the rains, which have affected roads. The
contingent-owned equipment for the unit has been in Mogadishu since October 2019,
resulting in UNSOS incurring high demurrage charges.
89. As at 4 August, the balance of the United Nations trust fund in support of
AMISOM was $2,717,712.
90. The Mine Action Service, with assistance from UNSOS, continued to support
AMISOM security operations and stabilization efforts by providing advice, analysi s,
training and mentoring concerning the use of specialized equipment, explosive
detection dogs, community liaison officers and explosive ordnance clearance teams.
91. The Mine Action Service also supported AMISOM to reduce the threat posed
by improvised explosive devices and explosive ordnance. From 5 May to 4 August,
the Mine Action Service delivered training to 548 AMISOM uniformed personnel to
enhance their ability to find and destroy improvised explosive devices and to safely
operate within the threat environment. The Mine Action Service also supported
AMISOM predeployment training for 142 troops in Mudubugu, Burundi, from 4 May
to 9 July. The Mine Action Service further contributed to the safety and security of
strategic infrastructure through the deployment of 24 teams to conduct searches of
16,306 pieces of luggage, 45,057 vehicles, 254 buildings, 168,840 m 2 of built-up
areas and 10,717,040 m 2 of open areas throughout the sectors.

14/17

20-10527

S/2020/798

B.

Support for Somali national armed forces operations
92. UNSOS delivered field defence stores, communication equipment and life
support supplies to Somali National Army troops deployed to Operation Badbaado in
Sabiid, Ceel Saliini, Awdheegle and Jannaale. UNSOS also supported the
establishment of a Somali National Army logistics hub in the AMISOM forward
operating base at KM50 and provided field defence stores to the same location,
enabling the Somali National Army to establish field headquarters for the
14th October Brigade.
93. The Federal Government has not yet advised on the modality to enable the
United Nations non-lethal support package to be extended to an additional 3,000
members of the Somali security forces, including an appropriate share of state and
federal police, as authorized by the Security Council in resolution 2520 (2020). The
Head of UNSOS continued to consult regularly the Minister of Defence and
Commander of the Somali Armed Forces on the current support to 10,900 Somali
National Army personnel.
94. On 16 June, the Head of UNSOS wrote to the embassies of Member States
accredited to Somalia in an appeal for contributions to the trust fund in support of the
Somali security forces. As at 4 August, the balance of the fund was $9,191,430, which
is sufficient to provide mandated support to 10,900 Somali security forces for seven
months.

VIII. United Nations presence in Somalia
95. United Nations entities continued to be present in Baidoa, Beledweyne, Berbera,
Boosaaso, Dhooble, Dhuusamarreeb, Doolow, Gaalkacyo, Garoowe, Hargeysa,
Jawhar, Kismaayo and Mogadishu. As at 4 August, 308 international staff and 1,261
national staff were deployed throughout Somalia. Approximately 65 per cent of United
Nations staff in Somalia have transitioned to remote work owing to COVID-19.
96. Following the unprecedented number of mortar attacks since the beginning of
the year, the United Nations enhanced safety measures within the Aden Adde
International Airport zone and strengthened security cooper ation with AMISOM and
the host Government. The frequency of the attacks highlights the intent and capability
of Al-Shabaab to target the United Nations and adjacent compounds in the Aden Adde
International Airport zone. The likelihood of further attacks re mains high.

IX. Observations
97. I welcome the long-awaited resumption of dialogue between the Federal
Government and the leaders of the federal member states and the steps taken towards
normalizing Federal Government relations with Jubbaland, which i s critical for the
restoration of collaboration between federal and state levels of government. I also
commend the work of the country’s nascent institutions, in particular the Federal
Parliament, which has made some progress towards developing an electora l code, and
the National Independent Electoral Commission, for its efforts to advance technical
preparations for the 2020/21 elections in the face of significant political challenges.
98. Somalia is at a critical juncture. The preparations for the 2020/21 elections have
suffered significant delays, the legal framework remains incomplete and security
arrangements are not yet in place. The provisional Federal Constitution mandates that
parliamentary elections must be held through direct universal suffrage an d must occur
on a four-year cycle, which ends in November. Broad-based agreement among the
20-10527

15/17

S/2020/798

major stakeholders is necessary to chart a viable way forward, as any electoral
modalities pursued by a single stakeholder, including the Federal Parliament, will no t
be implementable without the support and buy-in of other key stakeholders. I
therefore welcome the discussions held by the federal and state leaders in
Dhuusamarreeb as an important first step towards building the essential political
consensus on the electoral modalities. As the work of the technical committee
established by the leaders in Dhuusamarreeb moves forward, it is important to devise
options for electoral modalities that not only move the country away from selection
processes and towards direct elections, as codified in the provisional Constitution,
but also keep the country on a stable political path, in the interests of the Somali
people.
99. I am concerned that the abrupt removal of Mr. Khayre might disrupt the
implementation of the agreements reached in Dhuusamarreeb, as well as the ongoing
security transition operations and the political, security and economic reforms the
Prime Minister was leading. It is vital to continue to honour the agreements reached
by the federal and state leaders in Dhuusamarreeb and the timelines for follow-up
meetings, and to ensure that all Somali stakeholders, including the federal and state
leaders, Parliament, political parties and civil society representatives, undertake
urgent and concerted efforts to reach a broad-based inclusive agreement on the way
forward on elections.
100. The federal and state leaders all have a responsibility to keep the nation together
and steer it towards the essential political consensus, not only on the modalities for
peaceful elections, but also on how to advance cooperation on security and economic
development and how to complete the review of the Constitution.
101. I encourage the Federal Government to accelerate the updating of the transition
plan to allow for continued progress on the transition of security responsibilities to
Somalia. The inclusion of federal member states, AMISOM and key security partners
in the revision of the transition plan will ensure greater success in meeting updated
targets and timelines. I also look forward to the revitalization of strategic level
engagement on the comprehensive approach to security to provide the necessary
assistance towards achieving holistic security for the Somali people. This will build
on the encouraging work undertaken at the technical level between the ministries
concerned and international partners to define strategic priorities and operational
objectives.
102. Further reform in the security and justice sectors will require political will and
cooperation between the Federal Government and the federal member states. I call
upon the Federal Government and the state authorities to ensure that federal Darwish
units and South-West police personnel are appropriately equipped and deployed to
Shabelle Hoose to support stabilization efforts following successful operations. I urge
the Somali authorities to complete the transfer of high-risk cases from military to
civilian courts as a matter of priority.
103. I condemn attacks by Al-Shabaab on Somali civilians, security forces,
AMISOM, the United Nations and the international community. I call upon
international partners to continue to extend support to the Somali security sector
through training and capacity-building, as well as contributions to the trust fund in
support of the Somali security forces, including through funding earmarked for the
training, equipping and mentoring of Somali security forces to counter the threat of
improvised explosive devices.
104. In addition to the impact of conflict on civilians, I remain concerned about
attacks on freedom of expression, with the killing, assaulting and intimidation of
journalists and media workers. I commend the national authorities for recognizing the

16/17

20-10527

S/2020/798

hostile environment in which journalists carry out their vital work by committing to
undertake investigations into attacks on the media.
105. The occurrence of sexual and gender-based violence, which disproportionately
affects women and girls, is also concerning. With regard to the deterrence of such
crimes, I am alarmed by the alternative draft law on sexual intercourse-related crimes
and urge the Cabinet to reintroduce the sexual offences bill in Parliament so that it
can be adopted and enacted, while ensuring that any amendments are in line with
international standards. I also urge the Federal Government to take steps towards
establishing the national human rights commission, which has a key role to play in
promoting and protecting human rights.
106. I welcome the meeting between Mr. Farmajo and Mr. Bihi and the technical
talks between Somalia and “Somaliland” held in Djibouti. Following the earlier
meeting between the two leaders in Addis Ababa, the Djibouti talks constitute a
further positive step towards the improvement of relations and the resumption of
dialogue between the two sides. I urge the two parties to agree on concrete actions to
advance confidence-building efforts.
107. I commend the ongoing response of the Somali authorities to the COVID -19
pandemic at both the federal and state levels, which the United Nations continues to
assist. Somalia will continue to need the support of the international community in
these efforts, including to alleviate the economic impact of the pandemic on Somali
households and to address the humanitarian needs resulting from recurring floods and
the desert locust infestation. I call for donor support for these efforts.
108. I thank the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the European Union, Member States, non-governmental organizations and other
partners for their invaluable support and engagement in Somalia. I pay tribute to the
brave personnel of AMISOM, the Somali National Army and the Somali Police Force
for their sacrifices in pursuit of peace and stability in the country.
109. I also thank my Special Representative, James Swan, and all United Nations
personnel in Somalia for their dedication and untiring efforts, working in very
challenging conditions, in support of Somalia and its people.

20-10527

17/17
