UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-NINTH

COUNCIL

RECORDS

+

YEAR

MEETING:

29 MAY

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2543). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Adoptionoftheagenda.................................................

1

Letter dated 21 May 1984 from the representatives of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/16574) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

SlPV.2543

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2543rd

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday,

29 May 1984, at 10.30 a.m.

President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

I have received letters from the representatives of the
Federal Republic of Germany, Japan and Morocco in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (SiAgendal2543)

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. van Well
(Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. Kuroda (Japan)
and Mr. Mrani Zentar (Morocco) took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

of the agenda

Letter dated 21 May 1984 from the representatives
of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16574)
The ‘meeting

3. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the following documents: S/16585, letter
dated 25 May 1984 from the representative
of the
Islamic Republic of Iran to the Secretary-General;
S/16586, letter dated 25 May 1984 from the representative of Norway to the President of the Security Council; and S/16590, letter dated 27 May 1984 from the
representative of Iraq to the Secretary-General.

was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 21 May 1984 from the representatives of
Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/16574)

4. The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Bahrain, Sheikh Mohamed Bin Mubarak Al-Khalifa.
I welcome him and invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous
meetings on this item [254Ist and 2542nd meetings],
I invite the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Information
of Kuwait and the
representative of Saudi Arabia to take places at the
Council table, and I invite the representatives of Bahrain, Ecuador, Jordan, Oman, Panama, Qatar, Senegal,
Somalia, the Sudan, the United Arab Emirates and
Yemen to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

5. Mr. AL-KHALIFA
(Bahrain) [interpretation from
Arabic]: Sir, allow me at the outset to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. I pay a tribute to your well-known experience and wish you all success in your noble mission.
By the same token, I cannot fail to pay a tribute to your
country, the Soviet Union, on its positive position on
Arab causes.
6. The matter before the Council today pertains to a
situation whose continuation
threatens international
security. It needs to be dealt with decisively, clearly
and swiftly if we are to avoid exacerbating the danger in
a very sensitive and important region of the world.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Sabah
(Kuwait) and Mr. Shihabi(SaudiArabia)
tookplaces at
the Council table; Mr. Al-Khalifa (Bahrain), Mr. Albornoz (Ecuador), Mr. Salah (Jordan), Mr. Ali (Oman),
Mr. Kam (Panama), Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar), Mr. Sarre’
(Senegal), Mr. Adan (Somalia), Mr. Birido (Sudan),
Mr. Al-Qasimi (United Arab Emirates) and Mr. Sallam
(Yemen) took the places reservedfor them at the side of
the Council chamber.

7. The question submitted by the six States members
of the Gulf Co-operation Council can be summed up in
the fact that there is a threat to international freedom of
navigation in the waterways of the Gulf. The clear acts
of aggression carried out by Iran between 7 and 16 May
against the four Saudi and Kutiaiti
tankers Uhud,
Yanbu, Urn Kassaba and Bahra represent a flagrant

2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
1

violation of international
law and of the freedom of
navigation and trade to and from the ports of the Gulf
States. Iran carried out these attacks against the tankers one after the other, knowing full well that they were
unarmed tankers belonging to Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, countries which have not participated in the IranIraq war. It knew full well that they were outside the
zone of military operations between the warring countries and that they were civilian tankers in full possession of the right to the freedom of navigation, in accordance with international law.

Iraq, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Gulf Cooperation Council held an extraordinary
meeting on
17 May in which they denounced these acts of aggression and warned against the dire consequences that
could result from the widening of the scope of fighting in
the region and the direct threat to international peace
and security entailed therein. The Ministers agreed to
take all necessary peaceful measures, at both the Arab
and international
levels, to stop the aggression, including bringing the matter to the attention of the Security Council.

8. The world has followed these events with .great
concern, because they represent a premeditated attack
on the sovereignty and security of two States not parties to the Iran-Iraq war. Actually, since the very beginning of that destructive war, those two States have
made great efforts at mediation in order to put an end
to the war and have participated in the efforts made in
this regard by the United Nations, the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Gulf Co-operation Council.

13. The Ministers for Foreign ‘Affairs of the League of
Arab States held an emergency meeting on 19 May in
which they denounced theattacks against the Kuwaiti
and Saudi tankers and called upon Iran to desist from its
acts of aggression against navigation to and from ports
of States members of the Gulf Co-operation Council.
They also called upon the Security Council and the
international
community
to take decisive, clear position vis-d-vis those acts of aggression.
14. In paragraph
Council:

9. The Gulf Co-operation Council took an initiative of
its own when it sent a mission consisting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait and the United Arab
Emirates to both Tehran and Baghdad, where they
presented new ideas for ending the war. Unfortunately,
the Iranian side was not forthcoming.

3 of its resolution

540 (1983), the

“Aflmzs the right of free navigation and commerce in international
waters, calls on all States to
respect this right and also calls upon the belligerents
to cease immediately all hostilities in the region of the
Gulf, including ,a11sea-lanes, navigable waterways,
harbour works, terminals, offshore installations and
all ports with direct or indirect access to the sea, and
to respect the integrity of the other littoral States”.

10. Bahrain maintains its firm policy of ending this
war, which has caused untold suffering to the two
warring countries and whose inherent danger grows
worse with each passing day. We have always wished
our region to be one of peace, good-neighbourliness
and
constant stability. Although we have repeatedly made
clear our wish to improve the climate of relations with
our neighbour, Iran has taken very many unfair and
prejudiced positions, the latest of which have led to
the dangerous developments that broaden the scope of
the fighting, instead of responding positively to.peace
efforts based on legitimacy and the sovereignty of every
State over its territory, implementation
of the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of other States
and maintaining the region free of international
strife.

It is clear that these acts of aggression against the
tankers are in clear contravention of the provisions of
that resolution.
15. It is worth recalling that while Iraq responded to
the aforementioned
resolution of the Security Council
and was prepared to stop fighting, Iran refused to do the
same.
16. In addition, the freedom of navigation in international waters is one of the established, recognized
principles declared by the Dutch jurist Grotius, at the
beginning of the seventeenth century. It has also been
reaffirmed in all international
agreements on the subject, including the Convention on the High Seas of
1958,’ which was adopted by the first United Nations
Conference on the Law of the Sea. Moreover, the principle of free navigation in international
waters was
never,perse, a subject of controversy among the States
which participated in the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea.

11. The States members of the Gulf Co-operation
Council will make every effort to maintain peace and
stability in our region, in the interests not only of the
Gulf States, but of all countries and peoples in the
world, however different their political ideologies.
The States members of the Gulf Co-operation Council,
throughout the Iran-Iraq war, have been eager to maintain good-neighbourly
relations with Iran. Nevertheless, Iran’s recent acts of aggression threaten peace and
security and point the tension in the region in a dangerous direction leading to its intemationalization,
with
all the attendant dire repercussions for peace and stability in the world.

17. Another established rule in international
law is
that of freedom of passage in international straits, such
as the Strait of Hormuz, as declared by the International Court of Justice in 1949 in the Corfu Channel
case,* and also as provided for in article 16, paragraph 4,
of the Geneva Convention on the Territorial Sea and the

12. Proceeding from a wish to pursue all efforts to halt
hostilities and put an end to the war between Iran and
2

authority justly enjoyed by the Soviet Union, a country
with which the Kingdom of Morocco has very friendly
and long-standing ties, will ensure the successful conduct of our work and the restoration of security, concord and peace to the region of.the Gulf.

Contiguousione,’
adopted by the first United Nations
Conference on the Law of the Sea in 1958. This rule was
also referred to as “transit passage” in the Convention’
recently adopted by the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. If a State were allowed
to violate these rules &nd principles, it would undermine the international principles on which international
freedom of navigation is based.

25. May I also pay a tribute to Mr. Vladimir Kravets,
representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, for his brilliant presidency last month.

18. The attacks against the Saudi and Kuwaiti tankers
are direct acts of aggression against the safety, security
and interests of Gulf States which are not in any way
involved in the hostilities between Iraq and Iran.
Therefore, they are acts of aggression and run counter
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

26. The Security Council has met to consider the
problem of recent Iranian aggression against the freedom of navigation in the Gulf and against the territorial
integrity and national sovereignty of peace-loving
neighbouring States.
27. The Islamic Republic of Iran has thus perpetrated:
undeclared acts of war against countries which are
parties to no conflict and which have not been involved
in any way in the hostilities between the two opposing
countries of the region: Iraq and Iran. Furthermore, the
Iranian aggressive action, which according to the Iranian authorities themselves can be expected to continue,
is aimed at disrupting navigation in international waters
in the Gulf, paralyzing commercial and other forms of
traffic in the region and creating new difficulties for the
world economy. This threatens not only many developed countries but also a great number of thirdworld countries, which are beset by numerous economic problems and are sorely tested by the high cost of
energy.

19. Attempts to mediate the Iran-Iraq war, which has
been going on for more than three and a half years now,
have been unsuccessful because of insuffIcient international effort. Some influential States in the world are
still calling-albeit
from a distance-for
an end to this
war, but are taking no serious collective follow-up
steps. In the past we have repeatedly warned against
the dangers of a continuation of this war and the risk of
its widening, as well as against the grave threat it posed
to international peace and security. It is quite clear that
this war is draining the human and material resources
of the two belligerent States in vain. Its continuation
threatens the security and interests not only of the Gulf
States but of the whole world.
20. As one of the six States members of the Gulf Cooperation Council which are threatened by the continuation of this dangerous situation, my country calls
upon the Security Council to take swift and decisive
action to put an end to these attacks, as well as to the
Iran-Iraq war, the continuation of which threatens not
only the Gulf but the entire Middle East.

28. If, in describing the new situation created in the
Gulf region by Iran,-1 have perhaps shed a too harsh
light on reality, if I have called a spade a spade, it is
because I believe that it would not be .fair or respectful to the Council, and, even more, it would not be
effective, to speak to the Council in vague and falsely
reassuring, and therefore misleading, terms, when in
our opinion the situation developing in the Gulf is
extremely serious and the Council should not lose a
moment of its valuable time before facing that situation
resolutely and responsibly.

21. We call upon the Council to adopt the draft resolution submitted by Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.?
22. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Morocco.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

29. We have here all the ingredients of a much larger
explosion-even
a world-wide explosion-and
it is our
duty to make a speedy analysis of the elements of the
situation and try to put a quick end to the deterioration
that has already begun, by demanding immediate re-spect for the spirit and letter of the Charter of the
United Nations. Indeed, by the very reason of their
adherence to the Charter, all the Member States are
required to live together in peace as good neighbours,
just as they are required to refrain from the threat or the
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State.

23. Mr. MRANI ZENTAR (Morocco) [inferpretatiun
from French]: Mr. President, i wish to thank ybu and all
the other members of the Council for allowing me to
address the Council on a problem of great concern to
my Government, and, indeed, to all peace-loving Governments throughout the world.
24. It is gratifving to see YOU mesiding over the Council in this very &ffliult peiod, ior we are convinced that
your diplomatic skills, together with the prestige and

30. When the war between Iraq and Iran flared up and
assumed the regrettable proportions we are dealing
with today, the Arab nations of the Gulf-whose
strong
feelings and concern were legitimate, given the fact that
two brother countries to which they were bound by

* Circulated subsequently as S/16594.

3

close historical, cultural and blood ties were engaged in
such a violent conflict-maintained
firm neutrality and
exemplary restraint. Thus, they did not involve themselves at any time in any act of war or behave in such a
way as to provoke orjustify any reprisals against them.
But we now see their security, their sovereignty, their
interests and their legitimate rights being made the targets of wanton acts of war-an undeclared war, a war
that is certainly not theirs, since they have never taken
part in the hostilities. Their commercial vessels, their
civilian vessels-unarmed
and registered world-wide
as such, circulating in their own territorial waters or
in free international
waters-are
today the targets of
aerial attacks which at first were anonymous but have
now been publicly acknowledged by a Member State:
the Islamic Republic of Iran.

Council, calling for the immediate cessation of this
tragic fraternal, vain and sterile conflict, the international consequences of which could, moreover, be
incalculable-and
we have a very disturbing example
of this today. Good-offices missions have been arranged by the Secretary-General,
the Movement
of
Non-Aligned
Countries and the Organization
of the
Islamic Conference. Those missions have been welcomed in Baghdad, but invariably rejected in Tehran.
34. And need I recall here the moving, urgent and
inspired appeal made last March [S/26405] by His Majesty Hassan II, current President of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, to the two belligerents,
but also to world leaders and all men of good will, for
their co-operation in the establishment of an immediate
cease-fire and the resumption of talks between Iraq and
Iran under the auspices of the Islamic Peace Committee? This prophetic appeal was, by its vision and its
timeliness, an eloquent warning about the catastrophic
dimensions that the conflict would soon assume if
something was not done quickly enough.

31. On 14 December 1974, the General Assembly
gave the following Definition of Aggression in article 1
of the annex to its resolution 3314 (XXIX):
“Aggression is the use of armed force by a State
against the sovereignty, territorial integrity or political independence of another State, or in any other
manner inconsistent with the Charter of the United
Nations, as set out in this Definition.”
The resolution

35. It is well known in the United Nations that Iraq
has always responded favourably to all the peace initiatives, whereas Iran has rigidly taken a negative and
hostile position, promoting
the deterioration
of the
situation in the Gulf as well as escalation-and
today
we have an illustration of that escalation which is ex tremely dangerous to international peace and security.

also stated in article 2 that

“The first use of armed force by a State in contravention of the Charter shall constitute prima facie
evidence of an act of aggression, . . . ”

36. The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Information
of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, stated very eloquently at
a previous meeting [254Zst meeting] that the countries
members of the Gulf Co-operation Council are trying
to make their region a zone of stability and peace,
because of its strategic, economic and political importance-importance
both for the stability, peace and
economy of the world and for the bilateral, regional and
international economic development programmes. He
also made it very clear that the Gulf countries intend to
rely on themselves for the defence of their independence, sovereignty and security and that they confirm
their devotion to their status as non-aligned countries.

It added in article 5 that
“1. No consideration
of whatever nature,
whether political, economic, military or otherwise,
may serve as a justification
for aggression.
“2. A war of aggression is a crime against international peace. Aggression gives rise to international
responsibility.*’
32. Iran’s acts of aggression, furthermore, violate on
more than one count the most uncontested customary
rules of the law of the sea, since Iran has used force to
violate the internal waters and the territorial sea of
Member States and has attacked their civilian vessels in
international waters. Thus, Iran’s acts of aggression are
wanton, unprovoked and unjustifiable and are contrary
to international
law. What is more, the responsibility
for them has been unhesitatingly acknowledged by their
perpetrators, who threaten to spread them to the rest of
the world. For all those reasons, the actions by the
Islamic Republic of Iran against unarmed, civilian vessels navigating outside the areas of conflict are indeed
acts of aggression which violate international law and
for which Iran is undeniably fully responsible.

37. In response to those declarations of faith, and
because of the primary role that those Gulf countries
constantly play in the development and balance of the
world economy,. particularly
by direct and indirect
assistance to the least developed countries, the international community,
represented by the Security
Council, must shoulder its responsibilities,
condemn
these unjustified acts of hostility in the region, order
their immediate cessation and, if the countries victim of
those acts desire it, order also legitimate compensation
for the damages incurred by these-peaceful Gulf countries. The Council must also take steps to ensure the
right to free navigation and trade in international waters
and respect for all the navigation routes and installations, the ports and the equipment, within the framework of respect for the territorial integrity and independence of States.

33. Since the Iraq-Iran war broke out, many distinguished persons have spoken out and many intemational decisions have been adopted, particularly by the
4

38. In thus fully assuming its resnonsibilities.
the
Council would be-making the decisivk contribution to
the restoration and safeguarding of international peace
and security incumbent upon it. In so doing it would
also forestall any possibility of and eliminate any motive for foreign intervention
and eliminate the risks
of intemationalization
that are today so great and so
imminent in the Gulf.
’

46. This disturbing development
calls for renewed
efforts by the international
community to bring to an
end this senseless conflict that is as futile as it is destructive. This tragic war between two Islamic nonaligned countries has exacted and continues to exact a
terrible toll in human lives and in wasted resources. In
our view, it is no longer impoitant which side started
the conflict, for it is self-evident that its peaceful resolution is of the utmost urgency.

39. Finally, the Council can also reinvigorate efforts
for a comprehensive peace by proposing a solution for
the problems in the Gulf that could also represent the
long-awaited decisive step towards the just, peaceful
and equitable settlement of the fratricidal Iraq-Iran conflict, which has already lasted far too long. That is the
hope my delegation cherishes‘today
as the Council
prepares to adopt what may be historic decisions.

47. I need not emphasize the fact that the widening
of the conflict in a region of crucial importance for
world peace and economic-stability
carries the most
serious consequences, including the danger of greatPower confrontation and intervention.
Nor need I remind the Council of the fact that freedom of navigation
and commerce in the Gulf region is of vital economic
importance not only to the Gulf States but to the national interest of one super-Power and its allies and
that, similarly, the region of conflict is so geographically close to the territory of the other super-Power as
to make it of significant importance to that Power’s
national security. Indeed, the Iran-Iraq war is so pregnant with danger to international
peace and security
that a way must be found to bring it to a speedy end.

40. The PRESIDENT
[zizterpretadonfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Somalia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
41. Mr. ADAN (Somalia): I thank you, Mr. President,
and the members of the Council, for allowing my delegation to take part in this debate.

48. Last October, in its resolution 540 (1983), the
Council-not
for the first time-rightly
called for the
cessation of hostilities and affirmed the right of free
navigation in international waters.in the Gulfregion. It
also asked the belligerents to respect the integrity of the
littoral States, to exercise the utmost restraint and to
avoid any further escalation or widening of the conflict.
What has been the response to that resolution? Hostilities between the warring States have intensified, and
the conflict has been internationalized
by attacks on
ships of countries not parties to the war.

42. Your predecessor, Mr. Vladimir Kravets, has
earned our gratitude for the exemplary manner in which
he presided over the deliberations of the Council last
month. In the light of your long experience in the affairs
of the Council, over which you have presided many
times in the past, my delegation is more than confident
that you will bring the debate on the crisis in the Gulf
region to a fruitful conclusion.
43. We feel in duty bound to speak because of our
deep concern over the situation in the Gulf region. The
four-year war between Iran and Iraq has from its very
beginning posed a threat to regional and international
peace and security. That threat has gradually intensified as the repercussions of the war have increasingly
been felt’in the Gulf region and on the international.
scene.

49. In the view of my delegation, the Council is faced
with a serious threat to both regional and international
peace. It-must call upon Iran to end its attacks on sea
traftic to and from the ports of the States members of
the Gulf Co-operation Council. It must also demand
that Iran comply with relevant United Nations resolutions, respect the principles of international
law regarding the freedom of innocent passage and freedom
of navigation in international
waterways and observe
the requirements of good-neighbourliness,
particularly
those pertaining to respect for the’sovereignty and territorial integrity of the neighbouring,
non-belligerent,
Gulf States.

44. The tragic effects of this fratricidal war are compounded by the fact that neither Iran nor Iraq can hope
to profit from the continuation
of the fighting. The
interests of both parties would best be served by a
positive response from both States to the constructive
efforts of mediation that have been pursued by the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and, not least, by the Secretary-General.

50. My delegation believes that the Council must also
pursue vigorously the search for ways and means to
bring about the participation of both Iraq and Iran in the
process of peaceful negotiation. My Government has
strongly welcomed the acceptance by Iraq of the resolutions of the Council and its co-operative response to
various proposals put forward as bases for negotiation
by the Organization of the Islamic Conference, by the
Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and by the Secretary-General.
We therefore appeal to the brotherly

45. Unfortunately,
those efforts for peace have not
been heeded. On the contrary, a new degree of instability has now, regrettably, been added to an already
combustible situation by Iran’s attack on Saudi and
Kuwaiti oil-tankers in the territorial waters of those
countries and in international
waters outside the declared zone of war.
5

State of the Islamic Republic of Iran to do,likewise by
responding to the desire of the Islamic world-and,
indeed, of the whole of the international communitythat it accept the resolutions of the Council and join
without further delay in negotiations for a settlement
that guarantees the rights of both warring parties.

59. Secondly, Japan calls upon Iran and Iraq and all
other States to exercise maximum restraint so that
hostilities will not spread to other parts of the Gulf
region. Moreover, we appeal to all members of the
international community to refrain from any act which
could lead to a further escalation of the conflict.

5 1. It has repeatedly been emphasized in this debate
that neither Iran nor Iraq stands to gain from the bitter
conflict in which they are engaged. However, the belligerents, the Gulf region and the whole world would
all gain immeasurably
from an honourable, just, and
enduring settlement. It is our profound hope that counsels of moderation will prevail and that positive steps
will be taken along the road to peace.

60. Thirdly, my country expects that the SecretaryGeneral will continue his peace efforts and earnestly
hopes that other diplomatic
endeavours will be continued and strengthened by the international
community. Japan appeals to both Iran and Iraq to respond
positively to these efforts.
61. My country, for its part, will continue to make
every effort to foster a climate in which peace and
stability can be restored to the -region.

52. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Japan. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
,
statement.

62. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of the Federal
Republic of Germany. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

53. Mr. KURODA
(Japan): First of all, Sir, on behalf
of the Japanese delegation, I should like to extend
congratulations to you on your assumption of the presl
idency of the Council for this month. We are confident
that your outstanding diplomatic skill will ensure that
the Council smoothly carries out its important tasks.
The Japanese delegation also wishes to take this occasion to express its appreciation for the excellent manner
in which Mr. Kravets performed his duties as President
last month.

63. Mr. van WELL (Federal Republic of Germany):
Mr. President, let me first of all express my gratitude to
you and the other members of the Council for allowing
my delegation to participate in this debate. This gives
me the opportunity to express our confidence in your
wisdom, experience and skill as you guide the work of
the Council this month.
64. Mv delegation has asked to take Dart in this debate
in order-to exp’ress the deep concern of the Government
of the Federal Republic of Germany at the recent developments in the Gulf region and to emphasize its great
interest in a successful effort in the Council to prevent
the further deterioration of the situation. There is reason to fear that the ongoing conflict between ,Iraq and
Iran might lead to a dangerous escalation, *affecting
other countries in the region and well beyond. The
increasing attacks against tankers and other commercial ships in the Gulf region represent a severe blow to
the freedom of navigation, a fundamental principle of
international law.

54. The armed conflict between Iran and Iraq, already
more than three years old, has shown little sign of
abating, in spite of the intensive efforts made by the
international community through various channels. On
the contrary, the most recent developments indicate
that the situation is entering a new stage of escalation.
55. Japan is deeply concerned about conditions in the
Gulf, for they seriously threaten not only the peace and
stability of the region but also the peace and prosperity
of the entire world. My country is acutely aware of the
dangers inherent in the present situation.

65. The 10 States members of the European Community have in the last few days, in a common de’marche at
Baghdad and Tehran, expressed their concern to the
parties to the conflict.

56. The Government of Japan maintains friendly relations with both conflicting parties and does not favour
one side,over the other. Taking every opportunity,
it
has been tireless in its diplomatic efforts to help create a
climate conducive to an early and peaceful settlement
of the conflict.

66. My Government would like once more to stress
the importance it attaches to the principles of free navigation and free commerce in international waters. Furthermore, the Government of the Federal Republic of
Germany would like to emphasize the need for all parties concerned to observe the utmost restraint to help
prevent an already dangerous situation from being exacerbated even further. We appeal to the parties to the
conflict and to the neighbouring countries, as well as to
the international community, to help achieve this aim.
This would be not only in the interest of the countries of
the region but also in the international interest because

57. In accordance with that position, I wish to emphasize the following points.
58. First, the intensification of attacks on tankers and
commercial vessels is a source of gravest concern to
Japan. My Government strongly appeals to both parties
to respect the right to safe navigation in the Gulf and
to refrain from any act which could further endanger
peace and security in the Gulf.
6

73. Many international
agreements have guaranteed,
the sovereignty of States over their territorial waters
and freedom of navigation on the high seas, the most
recent of which is the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, concluded in 1982.’ My country’s
respect for these principles as they relate to its territorial waters, the adjacent maritime passages and the
high seas derives from our commitment
to the principles of international
law and to international
instruments and conventions. Given the strategic importance
of the Gulf and its important role in the world economy,
the adverse consequences of any violation .of those
instruments would spread beyond the countries of the
region to the entire world.

the negative economic implications of sustained warfare of the kind we have been witnessing over the last
few weeks would be clearly felt everywhere and would
affect not least the developing countries.
67. We hope that the recent series of air attacks on the
shipping of non-belligerents
in territorial waters and in
international
waters will remain a singular event and
that this dangerous spill-over of the root conflict between Iran and Iraq will not recur.
68.The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany and the people of my country are deeply troubled
by the bitter war raging between Iraq and Iran. This war
has not only meant a tremendous loss of human life and
resources on both sides; it is also dividing two countries
with which the German people has traditional bonds of
friendship as well as close political, economic and cultural relations.

74. Indeed, we have always feared the destructive
consequences of a widening of the Iran-Iraq war. That
is why we have consistently supported regional and
international
initiatives to put an end to that conflict.
Not content with supporting the initiatives of others,
the Government of the United Arab Emirates, in cooperation with the sisterly Government of Kuwait, and
in accordance with the mandate entrusted to it by the
Gulf Co-operation
Council, undertook a mission of
mediation between Iran and Iraq to put an end to the
war and to guarantee the interests and legitimate rights
of both sides of the conflict. We appreciated the position of Iraq, which responded favourably to all regional
and international peace initiatives to put an end to the
war and ensure a withdrawal to the international frontiers in order to establish security and stability in the
region.

69. We therefore earnestly hope that the present debate in the Council and the resulting resolution will
contribute to the removal of the most imminent danger
of escalation and the spread of hostilities, which is a
threat to free navigation in the Gulf. That would be a
first step towards containing and reducing the military
confrontation and preparing the ground for a comprehensive settlement of the conflict; It is obvious that this
can be achieved only if all legitimate positions and
interests are taken into consideration. We hope that all
members of the Council will be able to agree on a
resolution that will give expression and correspond
to the great responsibilities
of the Council under the
Charter.

75. Given the good relations between the United Arab
Emirates and the’ Islamic Republic of Iran and our
friendship for the Iranian people, we would once again
appeal to that Government to give a positive response
to international and regional mediation undertaken with
a view to halting the war and restoring stability and
security to our region.

70. We also appeal to all parties to be conscious of
their responsibility
and to exercise utmost restraint in
order to reduce tension. This would greatly ease the
difficult task of the Secretary-General.
.We welcome his
readiness, as expressed in his statement of 17 May, to
assist in any endeavour, and we ask the parties concerned to co-operate fully with him.

76. The Security Council has in the past conducted
thorough deliberations on various aspects of the serious
consequences of the continuing war between Iran and
Iraq, and has adopted decisions and launched appeals
designed to put an end to the war which have yielded
no positive results. Today, the Council is once again
considering recent developments and repercussions resulting from that continuing war, which are .not confined to the two countries directly involved in the conflict but also involve other fraternal countries in the
region- the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait-as
borne out by the attacks carried out against their ships
in territorial waters of the Gulf and in international
waters beyond the area of the conflict. A product of the
continuing war, the recent deplorable developments of
the conflict in the region pose a danger to the security
and other interests of countries in the region in particular and, indeed, to the countries of the entire world
in general.

71. The PRESIDENT
[interprehztion from Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of the United
Arab Emirates. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
72. Mr. AL-QASIMI
(United Arab Emirates) [interpretation from Arabic]: May I congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. Your great political and diplomatic experience, as well as the wisdom and competence you have
demonstrated both within and outside the United Nations, are our best guarantees that the Council’s discussion and decisions will be marked by objectivity and a
sense of responsibility.
My congratulations go also to
your predecessor, Mr. Vladimir Kravets the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, for
the constructive manneiin which he presided over the
work of the Council last month.

77. My delegation considers that the Council today
must shoulder its responsibilities and take up this chal7

lenge in a serious and decisive manner in order to
ensure the credibility of its resolutions and their implementation so as to avoid any further deterioration of the
situation, prevent spreading the conflict to other countries in the region and using war to justify any foreign
intervention.

84. Iraq, being in a declared state of war with Iran,
blockaded Iranian ports and attacked vessels and tankers sailing to and from Iranian ports. However, this in
no way justifies Iran’s attacks on tankers and vessels
proceeding to and from the ports of the Arab States
members of the Gulf Co-operation Council, which do
not wish to be dragged into the conflict.

78. Because my country borders on the Gulf, it must
safeguard the security of the Gulf and condemn attacks
detrimental to its security. The economy and the development of the United Arab Emirates and of other Gulf
countries require them to maintain freedom of navigation in the waters of the Gulf. That is why these countries must do their utmost to ensure freedom of navigation and find ways to protect the Gulf from danger.

85. The Sultanate of Oman enjoys ties of religion,
tradition and a long history with both Iraq and Iran. It
wishes to maintain good-neighbourly
and friendly relations with the Islamic Republic of Iran. This wish does
not stem from weakness or from fear of a stronger and
more populous neighbour, because our national capabilities and our relations with friendly countries are
enough to deter any attack on our territory or national
interests; rather our position is based on a sincere belief
in respect for the rights of national sovereignty and in
the principles of non-interference in the internal affairs
of other States and the settlement of all disputes by
peaceful means. We also believe in the inadmissibility
of major-Power hegemony over smaller States; we believe that the power of smaller States derives from their
adherence to and respect for the Charter.

79. Accordingly, the Government of my country and
the other States members of the Gulf Co-operation
Council have submitted a complaint to the Security
Council calling on it to condemn Iranian aggression
against the ships of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait in the
territorial waters of those two countries and in the
adjacent maritime passages, and to put an end to that
aggression, which is detrimental to the interests of the
members of the GulfCo:operation
Council and, indeed,
of all countries of the world. Proceeding from this principle, we would appeal to the Security Council resolutely to shoulder its responsibilities
under the Charter
of the United Nations in order to avoid any repetition of
such violations of law and acts of aggression and to urge
all Member States to do their utmost to put an end to
this situation.

86. The Sultanate of Oman has participated in the
many efforts to put an end to the tragic conflict between
the two sister countries of Iraq and Iran. It will continue
to make such efforts. We shall endeavour, by all the
means at our disposal and in co-operation with the Arab
States members of the Gulf Co-operation Council, to
avoid any further complication of the situation. We also
call upon the belligerents to heed the principles of peace
and to respect the interests of neighbouring countries.

80. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Oman. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

87. The events of the past few days have affirmed the
concern of the international
community as expressed
by the Security Council in its resolution 540 (1983).
That resolution affirmed the right of free navigation and
commerce in international waters, called for the cessation of hostilities in the region of the Gulf and for
respect for the integrity of the littoral States; it also
called upon States to refrain from any act which might
lead to a further escalation and widening of the conflict.

81. Mr. AL1 (Oman) [interpretation
from Arabic]:
Sir, at the outset I should like to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council. We
hope that your efforts will be crowned with success.
82. The Iran-Iraq war has taken a new and dangerous
turn, threatening peace and security in one of the most
sensitive regions of the world. On 13 May, the Air
Force of the Islamic Republic of Iran launched a direct
attack on the Kuwaiti oil-tanker
Urn Kussubu; on
14 May, it attacked the Kuwaiti oil-tanker Buhru; it
continued on 16 May with an attack on the Saudi oiltanker Yunbu. These attacks, carried out by Iran on oiltankers of Arab States members of the Gulf Co-operation Council, were a materialization
of Iran’s threats to
expand the scope of the war to include the Gulf States
not parties to the Iran-Iraq conflict.

88. We now call upon the Council, as the organ entrusted with responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, to reaffirm the inviolability
and freedom of navigation to and from the ports of Arab
States members of the Gulf Co-operation Council, as
those ports belong to States that are neutral in the IraqIran conflict.
The meeting

rose at 12.40 p.m.

NOTES

83. The Sultanate of Oman approves neither of
threats nor of the obstruction of navigation. It considers
any such act a dangerous precedent, contrary to the
laws of navigation and a flagrant violation of the principles of international
law and of the Charter of the
United Nations.

’ See United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 450, No. 6465.
* Co& Chunnel case, Judgment ofApril 9th, 1949: I.C.J. Reports
1949, p. 4.
’ United Nations, Trenty Series, vol. 516, No. 7477.
’ Official Records of the Third United Nations Cor$erence on the
Law of the Sea, vol. XVII, document A/CONF.62/122.

8

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Units sont en vente dans la librairia
et les agences dipositaires
du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adrcssez-vous A : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gcntvc.

W3nannfl
Oprafrn3aunn
3xnax
H aretiTcruax
aamerd

KHllmnor4

Haud.Ce~uwi
COMO

06’beAHHeHHblS

80 ncex

panonax

HauHR
mmno
rqm4rb
r4npa. HaBOAHTe
cnpaaw
Opranu3auHR
no anpecy:

B wikix(nbrs

Maramm
tins4 ntimme
no npo~alctenJ~aHHZI.Hb~-YIOpKH.IH)Kenesa.

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

06

swxamm

naraa

06%3tnHeHHbls

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en vcnta en iibrerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o ditijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00300

90-61313-Jannmy

1993-2.050
