S/2016/145

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 February 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 21 December 2015 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2149 (2014), by
which the Council established the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), and Security
Council resolution 2217 (2015), by which the Council decided that MINUSCA
would include 2,080 authorized police personnel, including 40 corrections officers.
As you are aware, I am deeply concerned by the volatile security situation in
Bangui. The lack of national capacity to manage and secure prisons adequately is an
area of critical concern. During the violent incidents that took place in Bangui in
September 2015, 689 prisoners, including some high -profile individuals, escaped
from Bangui Central Prison with the complicity of the Forces armées centrafricaines
(FACA), who were in charge of controlling access to the prison. The prison suffered
major infrastructure damage as a result. This incident, along with other prison
escapes, has undermined security and the fight against impuni ty.
Currently, the transitional authorities are detaining 12 high -profile individuals
in the Camp de Roux detention facility located in the FACA military camp in
Bangui. Among them are leaders of the anti-Balaka and ex-Séléka armed groups. In
the absence of national corrections officers, untrained FACA elements are currently
securing these detainees, with limited support from a small number of MINUSCA
corrections officers and other United Nations peacekeepers from the MINUSCA
task force deployed to secure the external perimeter of the premises.
It is anticipated that the security situation in Bangui will continue to be very
fragile, following the referendum on 13 December 2015. More arrests should be
expected, including as a result of the implementation of the mandate of MINUSCA
with regard to urgent temporary measures. Since the reopening of Bangui Central
Prison on 12 December 2015, 89 detainees have been transferred to it. There
continues to be an inadequate number of trained national prison personnel to
manage security. MINUSCA is therefore working with the transitional authorities to
increase the number of qualified prison personnel deployed both at the prison and at
Camp de Roux.
Holding perpetrators and instigators of serious crimes accountable and
recapturing those who escaped from Bangui Central Prison remain key priorities
and should help to deter spoilers attempting to derail the elections and the peace
process. An additional deployment of qualified, government-provided corrections
personnel is critical to supporting the efforts of MINUSCA in fighting impunity, in
16-02068 (E)

150216

*1602068*

S/2016/145

conjunction with the expected establishment of the Special Criminal Court and the
implementation of its mandate on urgent temporary measures.
Sixty-eight additional government-provided corrections personnel with the
requisite skill set are needed to support security management at Camp de Roux and
Bangui Central Prison. I would therefore be grateful if the Council would authorize
an increase in the current strength of MINUSCA corrections officers from 40 to 108.
To lessen the likelihood of prison incidents, including escapes, these additional
officers will mentor, train and build the capacity of national uniformed personnel
and/or national corrections personnel in security management, 24 hours per day,
seven days per week. They will help to address the current limitations of the
Government in securing the high-profile detainees at Camp de Roux, while ensuring
the security and safety of United Nations personnel.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2/2

16-02068
