VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session, through
the Economic and Social Council;
3. Decides to resume consideration of this question at
its thirty-seventh session, also taking into account the report
of the Commission on Human Rights on its thirty-eighth
session and the views expressed by Member States at the
thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly under the item
entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms" and
to examine what steps may be taken in this regard.
97th plenary meeting
14 December 1981

36/136.

New international humanitarian order

The General Assembly,
Noting with interest the proposal for the promotion of a
new international humanitarian order, 119
Recognizing the importance of further improving a comprehensive international framework which takes fully into
account existing instruments relating to humanitarian questions as well as the need for addressing those aspects which
are not yet adequately covered,
Bearing in mind that institutional arrangements and action
of governmental and non-governmental bodies might need
to be further strengthened to respond effectively in situations
requiring humanitarian action,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of
Governments on the proposal for the promotion of a new
international humanitarian order;
2. Decides to consider the question at its thirty-seventh
session on the basis of the report of the Secretary-General.
97th plenary meeting
14 December 1981

United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of
Torture
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/174 of 20 December 1978, by
which it established a United Nations Trust Fund for Chile

185

Recognizing the need to provide assistance to the victims
of torture in a purely humanitarian spirit,
I. Decides:
(a) To extend the mandate of the United Nations Trust
Fund for Chile, established by General Assembly resolution
33/ I 74, in order to make it capable of receiving voluntary
contributions for distribution, through established channels
of assistance, as humanitarian, legal and financial aid to
individuals whose human rights have been severely violated
as a result of torture and to relatives of such victims, priority
being given to aid to victims of violations by States in which
the human rights situation has been the subject of resolutions
or decisions adopted by either the Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council or the Commission on Human Rights;
(b) To redesignate the United Nations Trust Fund for
Chile as United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of
Torture;
(c) That the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims
of Torture shall be administered in accordance with the
Financial Regulations of the United Nations by the Secretary-General, with the advice of a Board of Trustees of the
Fund, composed of a chairman and four members with wide
experience in the field of human rights, acting in their personal capacity, to be appointed by the Secretary-General
with due regard to equitable geographical distribution and
in consultation with their Governments;
(d) To adopt the arrangements for the management of
the Fund set forth in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral; 121
(e) To authorize the Board of Trustees of the Fund to
promote and solicit contributions and pledges;
(j) To request the Secretary-General to give the Board
of Trustees of the Fund all the assistance it may require;
2. Appeals to all Governments to respond favourably
to requests for contributions to the Fund,
101 st plenary meeting
16 December 198/

36/151.

as a voluntary fund to receive contributions and distribute
humanitarian, legal and financial aid to persons whose human rights had been violated by detention or imprisonment
in Chile,
Recalling also its resolution 35/ 190 of 15 December 1980,
by which it requested the Commission on Human Rights
to study the possibility of extending the mandate of the
United Nations Trust Fund for Chile,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/39 of 8 May 1981 and Commission on Human Rights
resolution 35 (XXXVII) of 11 March 1981, 120
Noting that all Governments have an obligation to respect
and promote human rights in accordance with the responsibilities they have undertaken under various international
instruments,
Noting with deep concern that acts of torture take place
in various countries,
Considering the plight of victims of torture wherever it
takes place,
119
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 138, document A/36/245.
120
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, /981.
Supplement No. 5 (E/1981/25 and Corr. I), chap. XXVIIL sect. A.

36/152.

The right to education

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/ I 70 of 17 December 1979
and 35/191 of 15 December 1980 on the right to education,
Recalling the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, adopted by its resolution 2200 A (XXI)
of 16 December I 966, which recognizes the right of everyone to education,
Bearing in mind the importance of the Convention against
Discrimination in Education, 122 adopted on 14 December
1960 by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Reaffirming the paramount importance of the implementation of the right to education for the full development of
the human personality and for the enjoyment of other fundamental human rights and freedoms,
Recognizing that for the effective implementation of the
right to education the eradication of illiteracy has a particular
priority and urgency,
Convinced that the educational process could bring a substantial contribution to social progress, national development, mutual understanding and co-operation among peoples
and to strengthening peace and international security,

121
A/36/540.
"'United Nations, Trearv Series. vol. 429, No. 6193, p. 93.

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

1116

Recalling that the establishment of the new international
economic order requires effective support for t~e 1mpro~ement and expansion of educational syste~s and tor the traming of specialized personnel and qua!tfted cadres for the
economic development of the developmg countnes.
Convinced of the topicality and urgency of the provisions
on education contained in the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, 123
Recalling that, since its establishment, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orgamzat1on has constantly striven for the effective _realization of !he right to
education and equality of educational opportumt1es f~lr_ all,
without distinction as to race, color, sex, language, rehg1on,
political or other opinion, national or social origin_, ~~onomic status or birth and that, for many years past, act1v1t1es
directed to securing the right to education and the extension
and improvement of educational and training systems in
member States, more particularly in _the developmg cou~tries, have occupied a central place m that organization s
programme,
Taking note with satisfaction of the interest sh(_)wn by th_e
Executive Board of the United Nations Educat10nal, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the implementation of
General Assembly resolutions 34/ 170 and 35/ 191 .
I. Invites again all States to consider the adoption of
appropriate legislative, adminis~rative and other measures.
including material guarantees. m order to ensure the full
implementation of the right to universal education th:ough.
inter alia, free and compulsory pnmary education_. umversal
and gradually free-of-charge secondary education, equal
access to all educational facilities and the access of the
young generation to science and culture:
2. Invites all States to give all necessary attention to
defining and determining in a more precise i_nanner the
means for implementing the provisions concemmg the role
of education in the International Development Strategy for
the Third United Nations Development Decade:
3. Invites all specialized agencies to co-operate with the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to ensure education a high priority in the implementation of various programmes and projects within the
framework of the International Development Strategy for
the Third United Nations Development Decade;
4. Appeals again to all States. in partie_ular the_ developed countries, to support actively through _1ellowshtps and
other means, including the general mcreasmg of resources
for education and training. the efforts of the developing
countries in the education and training of national personnel
needed in industry. agriculture and other economic and social sectors;
5. Expresses its thanks to the Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for the report on the right to education, 124 prepared
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 35/ 191;
6. Requests the Director-General of th~ U~ited Natio~s
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orgamzat1on to submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report
dealing with the questions raised in resolution 35/191 and
also in the present resolution, on the basis of the broad lines
of approach established in the draft medium-term plan of
the United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural
Organization for 1984-1989, with a view to fostering the
full implementation of the right to education.
JO 1st plenary meeting
16 December 198!

36/153.

Assistance to refugees in Somalia

The General Assemblv,
Recalling its resoluti(;n 35/ 180 of I~ Decem~er 1980 on
the question of assistance to refugees m Samaha,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/31 of 6 May 1981.
Taking note of the report of the ~e~retary-Gene~al transmitting the report of the review m1s~10n to Sor~al~a 125 and
the report of the United Nations High Comm1~s10ner f(_)r
Refugees 126 on the conditions of th~ refugees m Somalia
and containing an assessment of their over-all needs,
Having heard the statement of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, 1 ~ 7
Deeply rnncerned at the need to continue to provide assistance to the refugees in Somalia,
I. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General
and of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
on the situation of refugees in Somalia;
2. Expresses its appreciation to_ the Se_cretary-General
and the High Commissioner for thetr contmued efforts to
mobilize international assistance on behalf of the refugees
in Somalia:
3. Takes note with satisfaction of the assistance rendered to refugees in Somalia by various Member States, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food Programme_. the United Nations
Children's Fund and other concerned mtergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations;
4. Appeals to Member States, internat~onal organi_zations and voluntary agencies to render maximum matenal,
financial and technical assistance to the Government of Somalia in its efforts to provide all necessary assistance to the
refugees;
5. Requests the Secretary-General. in co-operation wi~h
the High Commissioner, to dispatch a mission to Somalia
early in 1982 to make a comprehensive review of the ov_erall needs of the refugees, including those aspects relating
to their settlement and rehabilitation;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the High Commissioner, to submi~ the_ rel?°rt of t~e
proposed review mission on the refugee situation m Somalia
to the Economic and Social Council at its first regular sess10n
of 1982;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation with the High Commissioner, to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the progress achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
/01 st plenary meeting
16 December 1981

36/154.

Regional arrangements for the promotion and
protection of human rights

The General Assemblv,
Recalling its resolution 34/171 of 17 December 1979, in
which it reiterated its appeal to States in areas where regional
arrangements in the field of human rights do not yet exist
to consider agreements with a view to the establishment
within their respective regions of suitable regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights,

' ., Ai.'\6/ I 36

"'Resolution 35156. annex, sec! 0.
124

See A/36/524.

"" A/36/136/Add. l and Corr. I, annex.

'_._. O.fficial Records o(rhe General Assemb/_y. Thirty-sixth Ses.,·ion, Third
Committee, 56th meetin)!. paras. 1-3.
