NATIONS

THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING:

25 OCTOBER 1977

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Rgenda/2037)

Page

.....

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12420) . . , . . , . , . . , . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

1

4

.
46

\

SC

e

SIPV.2037

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of tile Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

eld in New York

25 October

011 Tuesday,

President: Mr. Rikhi JAIPAL (India).

1977, at 10.30 a.m.

3. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite the representatives of Saudi Arabia
and Togo to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber on the usual understanding that they
will be invited to take a place at the Council table when
they wish to address the Council.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia) and Mr. Kodjovi (Togo) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2037)

4. The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw the Council’s
attention to document S/12424, which contains the text of
a letter dated 24 October from the Permanent Representative of Finland to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General.

I. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October I977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12420)

5. The first speaker is the Commissioner for External
Affairs of Nigeria. I welcome the distinguished Commissioner and invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.

TIze meeting was called to order at 1 I.20 a.m.

6. Mr. CARBA (Nigeria): Mr. President, first of all, I
should Iike to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, particularly at a period when we are discussing such a serious
problem, which affects world peace and security. There is
no doubt in my mind that, under your wise guidance, the
Council will achieve the purpose for which it has been
summoned.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12420)

7. Last week, the international community learnt with
great horror of a new wave of political and criminal
repression by the racist minority Government of Vorster.
Judged by the level of its brutality, the unprovoked
crackdown on defenceless Africans, and even white liberals,
in South Africa is not without parallel in South Africa’s
chequered history. This is, however, another retrogressive
step by the Vorster regime on the dangerous road towards a
racial war in southern Africa.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken by the Council at the last meeting, I invite the
representatives of Nigeria and Tunisia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Garba (Nigeria)
and Mr. Mestiri (Tunisia) took the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.

8. My delegation contends that this crackdown is an
embarrassment even to the fanatical supporters of the
racists. It has been detiberately timed to further compound
Pretoria’s ugly record of affront to the United Nations, of
which South Africa claims to be a Member. The crackdown
is an insult to the Charter of the United Nations, the
principles of which the racists once committed themselves
to uphold. Finally, these latest repressive acts represent a
brazen contempt for the Security Council, which has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the rcpresentatives of Saudi Arabia and Togo, requesting that they
should be invited to participate in the discussion of the
question on the agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Cound, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
1

9. The Nigerian delegation finds the present acts of
repression indefensible, particularly at a time when Vorster
is reportedly negotiating with five Western members of the
Security Council on the modalities of Namibian independence. There is only one rational explanation for this
obnoxious behaviour. Vorster and his henchmen in Pre.
toria, like the proverbial leopard which cannot change its
spots, are fundamentally opposed to the prospect of
Africans being treated with basic dignity and consideration,
as is normahy expected in any civilized society.

IS. Barely one week ago, during the debate in the General
Assembly on the question of Namibia, I reiterated’ my
delegation’s scepticism about the good intentions of the
South African regime with respect to the unfolding events
in southern Africa. Little did we think that the racists
would choose the current session of the General Assembly,
as well as the time when negotiations were going on
between them and five members of this body towards
resolving the Namibian question, to prove us right, If this
noble Organization-and
indeed the Security Council-is
not to lose its credibility, then it is time this effrontery was
rebuffed with appropriate measures under the Charter of
the United Nations.

10. The details of this blind crackdown on the African
population are clear to everyone: the racist regime is not
prepared to tolerate the slightest expression of opposition
to apartheid. It is disturbing that some 150 blacks were
arrested, among them Mr. Percy Qoboza, the black editor
of The World newspaper, a paper which has the second
largest circulation among Africans. Mr. Qoboza was re.
portedly haled off to the same detention camp where Steve
Biko was murdered in cold blood last month. We are
equally appalled to learn that the white editor of the Daily
Dispatch, Mr. Donald Woods, was also banned for five
years. An undisclosed number of other blacks and whites
were also banned and, in the absence of an official list, the
figure for this category of victims may well be staggering.
Both Mr. Qoboza and Mr. Woods have a reputation for fair
reporting. In the case of Mr. Qoboza, this could not have
been better demonstrated than by the relatively restrained
manner in which his paper handled the tragic affair of Steve
Biko. By arresting Mr. Qoboza and banning Mr. Woods, the
racists have betrayed their inner instinct for vindictiveness
and callousness against all semblances of opposition, for, in
racist South Africa, a reputation for fair reporting auto.
matically confers on the reporter the tag of communist
agent or a subversive element.

14. I wish to reiterate that it is unacceptable that the
racist regime in Pretoria should continue to hold the world
to ransom. Fortunately, in spite of some of its inherent
inadequacies, the Charter contains provisions which deal
firmly with such an explosive situation as obtains at present
in South Africa, a situation which constitutes a veritable
threat to international peace and security. The Security
Council has a special responsibility to humanity and should
take prompt and concrete measures to arrest the present
deterioration of the state of affairs in South Africa.
15. My delegation therefore will not be satisfied with a
mere condemnation of the racists for their acts of brutality,
repression and terrorism. This has been done several times
before without any satisfactory effects on the racists at
Pretoria. The Council should now move forward by
imposing, particularly, an oil and arms embargo under
Chapter VII of the Charter. All Member States, particularly
friends of South Africa, should reinforce this measure by
promptly halting new investments in South Africa and
taking steps to dismantle their existing investments in that
country. The situation in South Africa has assumed such
serious dimensions as to make the mere act of recalling
ambassadors inadequate. It is now incumbent on the
Western Powers to take up Vorster’s challenge to their
cherished principles and ideals. Indeed, it is time for all the
big Powers to co-ordinate action designed to deal ade.
quately with this deteriorating situation, if a racial conflagration is to be avoided. This is perhaps the last opportunity we have to prevent a racial war in that part of the
world. We believe that, with the imposition of mandatory
sanctions and strict adherence thereto, apartheid will be
abolished in South Africa.

11. The English-speaking newspapers have always been
regarded as enemies by the so-called Nationalist Party since
it assumed power in 1948. Then, as the new Government
began to extend racial subordination, it assumed powers
that restrained the potential for press opposition. Thirty
years later, editors and reporters must constantly resort to
legal advice to determine whom they can quote, what they
can photograph and whether they are likely to invite
indictment for any one of a dozen offences: from what has
been blandly categorized as “promoting hostility between
whites and blacks” to the now-familiar bogy of “furthering
the objectives of communism”.

16. The Nigerian delegation hopes that all nations will
perceive the danger signals and take appropriate measures.
All nations that have been collaborating with the racists
either in terms of trade or in the exchange of nuclear
technology must review these relations. They must join in
the concerted efforts of the international community to
isolate South Africa. I sincerely hope that they realize how
much their collaboration has helped to prop up the
inhuman system of upartheid. We expect them also, apart
from terminating all their links with the racists,to grant
moral and material assistance
to the liberation movements
in their legitimate struggleto bring down the obnoxious
system of apartheid and create an atmosphereof equality,
freedom and humandignity for all racesin the area.

12. In the case of journals or organizations, banning means
depriving so many people of their means of livelihood, That
is what has happened to The World, the major black
newspaper in circulation until last week. In the case of
individuals, it amounts to a form of quasi-imprisonment.
That is the fate being suffered by Mr. Woods and countless
others. Formal arrest, which is what has happened to
Mr. Qoboza, is infinitely worse since it means that he can
be detained indefinitely without trial. In a characteristic
display of arrogance, the Pretoria regime claims it is acting
in the interest of the West and of the so-called free world.
Ironically, the racist rCgime constitutes everything that can
be described as the opposite of Western principles and
ideals of civilized conduct in human relations.

1 See Official
Session, Plenary
2

Records
Meetings,

of the General Assembly,
36th meeting.

ThiW-seco?rd

17. On our part, as my head of State declared at Lagos
during the World Conference for Action against Apartheid, Nigeria is taking appropriate steps to identify those
transnationals that are doing business with us in Nigeria
while giving support to the apartheid system in South
Africa. We sincerely hope they will heed this warning and
act accordingly. We have also pledged our continued moral
and material support to all freedom fighters committed to
the achievement of freedom, social justice and self-determination in that unhappy country, In doing this, we are
convinced that we are making our small contribution
towards humanity. The oppressed and suffering masses of
South Africa, held as hostages in their fatherland under the
most horrible conditions, in quasi-slavery, look to the
Security Council for succour, for support and even for
material assistance. If this is given now, the Council will
have succeeded in refurbishing its credibility image and
contributing to the fight against apartheid. If this is denied,
the road to freedom and self-determination will be Iong,
agonizing and even bloody. But the advent of final triumph
is merely a question of time.

through OAU, remainsstaunch. The African group hasnot
succumbedto the honeyed words which prove to be mere
empty blandishments.We are proud of that. It provesthe
failure of imperialism, which is widely representedwithin
the Council. It is our hope that total victory over
imperialismin Africa is possible,andthat the eliminationof
these inhuman regimesin southernAfrica is inevitable.The
People’sRepublic of Benin and the whole of Africa do not
want a patched-up job of a neo-colonialist type in
resolving the problem of southern Africa, We want the
dignity of free men for all the peoplesof southernAfrica.
24. For the time being, Africa is not wagingopen war
against the regimesof Vorster and Smith. The four draft
resolutionswhich the three African membersof the Council
have submitted (S/12309 to S/12312] and which some
have tried in vain to “kill” are not a declarationof open
war againstVorster’s regime, but thosefour drafts advocate
very simplemeasureswhich to our mindhave the advantage
of demonstrating our firm solidarity with the oppressed
peopleof South Africa.
25. Measuressuch as the arms embargo,the cessationof
nuclear co-operation with the Pretoria regime and the
ending of investment or any economiccollaborationwhich
strengthens the offensive potential of Pretoria are classic
measuresin line with the provisions of the Charter. We
consider that all those measureswould create an atmosphere of effective collective pressureon the racistregimeof
Pretoria.

18. Mr. I-IOUNGAVOU
(Benin) (interpretation
from
French): The delegation of the People’s Republic of Benin
sees nothing new in the present debate; it is merely a
follow-up to the debate which took place in March 1977
and which was interrupted in conditions of which everyone
is aware.
19. The African Group, faced with the most recent
repressive measures adopted by the racist Vorster regime
against the black African population of South Africa,
wished to shake the Security Council out of the immoral
inertia and unpardonable negligence that those who are
supporting the racist regimesof southern Africa are trying
to impose on it. That immoral inertia and that unpardonablenegligencewithout doubt reflect the collaboration of the Western Powerswith the regimeswhose daily
acts represent a serious threat to Africa and the internationalcommunity.
20. The racist and minority regimes of southern Africa
play a specific role in the machiavellian plan for the
imperialistic encirclement of our continent, designedto
bring our peoplesto their kneesand exploit our resources.
21. The truth is harsh, and the imperialists and their
championsof all sorts do not-quite understandably-want
usto unmaskit.
22. What is the essenceof the matter? I should like to
recall the behind-the-scenesdealings, the dishonest manoeuvresand all the plots directed at the African Group in
connexion with this question last March. The enemiesof
Africa stoppedat nothing. They played their usualgameof
division in an attempt to pit Africans against Africans or
againstothers, in order to prevent the Council, at the end
of a very thorough debate,from taking measures
againstthe
racist Vorster regime that would be inconvenient to our
enemies.

27. Africa wants peace. The resumptionof this debateis
proof that Africa wants a peaceful settlementof all the
questions of southern Africa and will support unhesitatingly al honest initiatives. But Benin will denounceand
fight, both within and outside the Council, againstany
plans designedto create a safety belt for the protection of
the racist regimeof Pretoria.
28. For the whole of Africa, the independenceof Zimbabwe and Namibia is an essentialpreludeto the downfall
of the Vorster regime.That is dialecticallogic.
29. The delegation of the People’sRepublicof Benindoes
not regard the present debateashamperinghonestattempts
to find just and satisfactory solutionsto the problemsof
southern Africa. The friends of Africa will have no
difficulty in understanding that. It is not in anybody’s
interest to prolong the sufferingsof the oppressed
peoples
of southern Africa.

23. It is fortunate and even encouragingto seetoday that
the African group, duly mandated by the whole of Africa
2 UnitedNations publication, Sales No. L77.XIV.3,

26. My delegation believesthat thosemeasures
asa whole,
far from proving embarrassingto any party, canonly hasten
the peaceful and rapid settlement of the question of
southern Africa. If someinterpret thosemeasures
andtheir
scope in a different way, that is clear proof that all the
current negotiations run counter to the interestsof Africa
and are neither more nor lessthan a huge swindle, an
imperialist sabotageoperation, deliberately undertakenin
order to divide Africa and dismantlethe progressiveforces
of our continent. The People’sRepublicof Benin and the
people of Benin will never be partiesto suchmachinations.

30. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interpretation frntn Chinese):
Since the Security Council consideredthe question of

annex IV.

3

authorities.In their tcrmincllo$y.tilt! St)-c;lllrd iniprc)vclnent
of interracialrcbtions ac:tUdly
IllrWi~
tlli: illtkxsithti~jll
of
racj{ll
perSeclltioI1
;lIld 0pprMon.

South Africa last March, the South African racist author.
ities have not shown the slightest I’eStraiIlt in theh
reactionary arrogance; instead, they remain impenitent and
have intensified their brutal suppression of the Azanian
people’s just struggle against racist domination and for
national liberation.
31. Not long ago, a horrible incident took place, in which
Steve Bike, a South African black leader, was subjected to
all kinds of brutal persecution in gaol by the South African
authorities and tortured to death. 011 19 October, afm
careful planning, the Vorster racistrCgimeflagrantly closed
down two newspapersof the blacks,bannedthe activities
of 18 anti-apartheid organizations and arrested a large
number of leaders of black people’smassitWVeZrKmts all
over the country in persecution ,and repressionof the
Azanian people. This is another grave, savagecrime corn
mitted by the South African authoritiesagainstthe Azanian
people since the Soweto massacreiast year. This 1~sbeen
strongly condemnedby a largenumberof African countries
and their people as well as all the justice-uphoh.ling
countries and people of the world, who are extremely
indignant.
32. In recent years, with the powerful support of the
entire African people and the people of the rest of the
world, there has been a new upsurgein the struggleof the
peopleof southern Africa againstcolonialismand racism.
Under difficult and complicated conditions, the peopleof
Zimbabwe and Namibia have perseveredin armedstruggle
againstcolonialism and racism and for national independence and liberation, and have won continual victories.
Defying brute force, the valiant Azanian people have
unfolded a seriesof strugglesagainstviolent repression
and
againstapartheid and racial discrimination. Recently, the
black students’ campaign againstthe apartheid systemof
“Bantu education” has swept over the whole nation. The
Vorster and Smith reactionary rdgimeshave found themselvesbesiegedon all sides and bogged down in great
isolation and desperation. Under these circumstances,
the
handful of racists,with the support of the imperialists,are
steppingup their counter-revolutionary dual tactics in nn
attempt to savethemselvesfrom their imminent doom.

36. The ChincscGt~vt:rnnic~it;nid puclplt! firmly supjIM
the peopleof Azania, Naniihia and %irnhallwcin theirjust
struggle ilg9iIlSt
iInpt’ri;llisIll.
ucdorlialisln.
rilcisln
alld
hegcmonism
and for ~lillill~l~ll
lil~rr~lli~ui
:lrld
illilcpcndetlcc.
The Chiiiesc ilcle~:;ition stroii~!1y ~~ond~~n~~~s
the South
African racist rt$imc l”or tllc 1l0v suit5
(11‘ Krwc
criacs
it
has conunittcd recently :l[!iliIlSt
tllc
A/Man [“ople. WC
firmly support the just positionsexpr~~ssc~tl
1,~.the Africen
States.WChold tll:rt tllc Srcurity (‘~,uncil slrciultladOptII
resolutionto condeinnstrrm$y
tllc iltrOLZitiC%
ciuninittcdbY
tllc
South African ;lutlloritics,
impose;I m;niil:~toryarms
embargoillltl ccoiiomi~
silll~tio~ls
ii!:ilillSt
SoUtll
Africu,
fllld
call 011 illl (;ovcrnmcnls and pt:oplcs to rcndcr p0wcrfill
supportLlld &WiStilllfX
to tllL1 pCop1C
of’ AL;llliil
:lIltl thC rest
of soiithcrn A.l‘liCil in their ius slru!y;lc for iidopc~ltlCllC~
andlilxx:itim~.

33. In Namibia, while declaring its “readiness”to settle 37. III tllC final analysis,the ;ltrclt;itiCS comniittctl bY
the Namibianquestion through “negotiations”, the Vorstel Vorstcr illlll company ;lrc bound to serve ilS ;I ncgtltive
racist rCgime is adamantly refusing to withdraw all its
example,which will further cnh:inse rlic political COll.
armedforcesfrom the Territory in an attempt to force the
sciousness
Of tllc pooplc
of Az;llli;l
ilIl(l
tllc rest ol’SWlthCrI1
Namibian people to lay down their armsand acceptthe
Africa and enablethem to r<alizc more clearly that there
so-called“free elections” at the point of the bayonet. 111
ShOllld
bc no illusionsahout the most reactionary COI@
Zimbabwe,Vorster has kept on giving blood transfusions
to
nialistsandIWiStS and tllilt indcpendeilccilIl(l M~cratiollCOI1
Ian Smith, supporting the Smith r6gimein maintainingits
be won only by strcngthcning unity alItI persevering
in
tottering reactionary rule. In South Africa, while trulystruggle.
peting the “improvement of the inter-racial relations”and
“the grantingof greater power to the urbanblack lleople”, 38. AS pointed out in :I resolution ildt\lTtcd at its ti+‘elltY
Vorster and his ilk have been speedingup their bantustan seventhsessionby tlic (“o~lncil 01 Mijlistcrs of the Owni.
plan and reinforcing their apparatusfor violent repression zation of Africotz [J&y:
in a redoubledeffort to persecuteand suppress
the ALanian
people.
‘%c Only cffectivc guaranteefi)r tllc African people0f
South Africa againstthe repetili(n~of t[lc ~YulSSilCWS isthe
34. Eventhe Vorster racist r@gimeitself hasto admitthat
~aunclhgof the armedstrugglefor the seizureof power
its recent large-scalebrutal repressionis a carefully pre.
by the pcop~c”.
meditated action taken after severalweeksof preparation.
All this has belied the so-calledracial reconciliation and On 21 October,OAtJ issuediI pressrclcaseon the atrocities
negotiated settlement advertised by the South African
~O~~~~itted hy the South Afric;ln ;l~~tjl()ritics in which it
4

reiterated the above position and called upon the people of
South Africa to “rise up in arms at this crucial hour to meet
the challenge and free themselves from the racist yoke”.
Using revolutionary violence to fight against counterrevolutionary violence-such is the best reply of the great
African people to Vorster and his ilk.

Union, but on behalf of the United Nations, which has to
live by its Charter.
44. And where have we got to? Year in, year out, we have
paraphrased ideas that are identical, with no result. Shall we
be smug and let this question trail on without any result, or
shall we do something drastic? When I say “something
drastic” I mean “military intervention”, and I do not think
it would be wise for the United Nations to embark on a
project whereby it would actually be fighting the South
African rkgime. After all, we are committed to peace. Of
course, we may send troops to see that no clashes take
place in spots where there is trouble-“peace-keeping
operations” we call this. But the United Nations cannot
take the decision to send an army to South Africa to
overthrow the regime because, year in, year out, they seem
to be recalcitrant, stubborn, inflexible, not open to reason.

39. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
40. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): In congratulating you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council, I would indeed be congratulating myself. You are
such a close friend that it would be superfluous and
embarrassing to you to tell you not only how much I
esteem you but also how much affection I have for you.
Not because you belong to Asia-for, after all, there may be
others who are as close to me who do not come from that
continent-but indeed because an Arabic proverb applies to
our relationship. That proverb says: “How many a good
brother I have who was not born of my mother”. You are
one of those brothers. Whenever 1 want, to seek advice I
exchange views with you and I always benefit. You are
younger than I in years but undoubtedly much more
mature in wisdom.

4.5. What shall we do’! A lot can be done, provided there
is goodwill and the pursuit of a plan-not that I have
discovered one; not that I have a copyright on one, but
because I think one might work, with goodwill, taking into
account Vorster and, as our colleague from China mentioned, “his ilk”. I will come to that.
46. Having given you a preface to the effect that it is futile
to go on meeting like this without any result, I say that we
have to have a big breakthrough. Here I have before me-1
have read them very carefully-four
of what I would call
factual draft resolutions that were submitted last March by
none other than my friends from Benin, Libya and
Mauritius [S/12309 to S/12312]. And, I must say, they
were wise in breaking down the whole subject into four
different sections: the first deals with the release of
prisoners; the second with the threat to international peace;
the third with the arms embargo; the fourth with the
economic aspect-how
to apply sanctions. I think those
delegations were wise, instead of putting those elements
into one draft resolution, to see what could be done
separately under each of the titles that are presumed to sum
up the substance of these draft resolutions.

41. Having said that, I believe it is incumbent upon me to
speak on the question of South Africa, because we have
been seized of this question since the days of Lake Success,
but more intensely during the 1950s when we started to
elaborate the principle of self-determination into a fullfledged right. It took some of us about seven or eight years
to do so and, fortunately for us, we succeeded, because the
right of self-determination appears as the first article in
both the International Covenants on Human Rights.
42. But what is the use of having covenants on human and
other rights if a Member State like South Africa does not
observe the right of people, the right of the majority, the
right of those who are really the indigenous people of that
part of Africa? It is superfluous to come here, year in and
year out, to talk about South Africa and to condemn it, as
if to get things off our chest, and then do nothing.

47. But even then, let us examine what is being done
today. Taking them at random, here I have the draft
resolution on the financial, or economic, question. Now,
dispassionately and objectively, I want to tell my African
friends that certain Powers-without
naming them-have
economic interests in South Africa, and, as you know, we
are now confronted not perhaps with a recession but with
quite a depression in this, the host country, as weI as in
Europe. Except in the case of our Japanese and German
friends, I think the world is in economic disarray. They
seem to know how to balance their budgets and tighten
their belts.

43. One could say: “Well, it is better to talk than go to
war”. That is true in the field of disarmament and in many
other fields of the United Nations. But here we are
accomplishing nothing with regard to South Africa. No
doubt there were earnest efforts on the part of the
Secretary-General and previous Secretaries-General to
handle the matter discreetly, and there is no doubt that the
Governments of the major Powers have taken the initiative
to do something about it. I do not say they have done so
“half-heartedly”.
Take, for example, the United States,
which recently sent our brother and colleague, its United
Nations Ambassador, to talk to Mr. Vorster. Of course,
they are a major Power. I do not think Mr. Vorster would
be on speaking terms with the Soviets, because, after all, he
is frightened that the Communists will pervade his country.
That is understandable, but those who more or less have
direct financial interests with Russia have, no doubt, been
bringing laudable pressure and have been making praiseworthy interventions-not
in the affairs of the Soviet

48. Incidentally, I must say here parenthetically that what
I said about you, Mr. President, applies also to Baron von
Wechmar in having served the Council last month very
efficiently, and in the best German manner. So better Iate
than never in extending my thanks.
49. Without breaking the thread of my thought, I might
add that the so-called democracies-although many of them
are democracies by subscription and contributions, since
5

53. Remember that politics revolves around economics.
One day I was saying this in another statement and my
good friend Yakov Malik said “This is Marxism”. I said
“No, before Adam and Eve it has been so; it is not
Marxism”. We, the Arabs, 2,000 years or so ago, said it in
two words: “Interests must be served”. Palmerston had to
say it in Parliament: “Let it be known that this country has
no eternal enemy or perpetual allies; only her interests are
eternal and perpetual”. Whether in politics or whether in
social matters or in any field of human endeavour,
“interests must be served”.

democracy is not as it use+ to be-have to serve the interests
of various factions inside the State. Let us be practical: do
we for a moment think that those who have interests in
South Africa will not bring pressure to bear on their
Governments by saying to them: “Look, we will not vote
for you next time”. The politicians are there to perpetuate
themselves if they can, or, if they are selfless, to perpetuate
their parties in power. Therefore, my African brothers-and
we Asians and Latin Americans, for that matter-let us
analyse it a little bit: let us not think for a moment that
pressure will not be brought to bear on Governments to
maintain their economic ties with South Africa, unless
things get out of hand, unless there are riots here and not
necessarily by blacks. There are 30 million blacks in the
United States; there are I do not know how many blacks or
Coloured people in the United Kingdom. If somebody
organizes them and makes it difficult for the Governments,
it will not be wise, because it will bring a sort of rupture of
the social order, and I do not think we are committed to
such methods.

54. Now the third subject dealt with in these draft
resolutions is the disturbing of the peace in the region. This
is factual; this is taking place. Look at what is happening in
Rhodesia. Look at what is happening in South West Africa,
Namibia; look at what is happening in neighbouring
countries. The people are all longing to do something for
the blacks in South Africa. Can we quiet these things by
resolution? I submit that we have been trying to do that,
but we have not yet succeeded.

50. Then, what is the answer to this financial question?
Do not attach too much importance to it. That is why I
said that, although the intent of the four draft resolutions
before me is iaudable in that they represent an attempt to
grapple with the issues to see what can be done, I did not
think that from the economic and financial point of view
much could be done, except perhaps very gradually. And,
frankly, I am sick of this gradual, step-by-step diplomacy.
As I mentioned, if we were to go to the door step by step,
and each step took five years, good Lord, in 30 years we
would not have finished with this problem which is
before us.

55. Last but not least is the arms embargo. I have lived
through two world wars and I remember how I used to read
about a certain gentleman-considered as such because our
British friends knighted him-called Basil Zaharoff, who
became Sir Basil Zaharoff. He was of Greek origin and lived
on the Riviera. He manipulated the arms trade, not only in
Europe but anywhere where filthy lucre was to be had from
that trade. Someone wrote a book about Zaharoff in the
193Os, entitled Les marchands de mart. He is gone now,
but there are others who are merchants of death. There are
hundreds of Zaharoffs today. Zaharoffs activities were
negligible in comparison with what we are witnessing today
in arms smuggling, arms peddling, sometimes covertly, but
most often overtly. Anyone who wants to buy arms only
has to read Anthony Sampson’s latest book, The Arms
Bazaar,3
with the subtitle: “From Lebanon to Lockheed”.
I read it two months ago, the same week it appeared, to
refresh my memory, and I learned a lot of what goes on.
So, without going into further details, I can say that the
arms embargo will not work out, because there will always
be smuggling.

51. Now we come to the release of prisoners. One of those
draft resolutions deals with that. Of course, they should be
released by the South African r6gime. But is it reasonable
for the Government of South Africa, misguided as it is, to
release those prisoners and leave them at large to work
there against the rCgime? It is unthinkable that they would;
not only they, but any country that thought such prisoners
were dangerous would not set them free.
52. Therefore, what shall we do about them? Did the
United Nations think for a moment that it might perhaps
be wise-of course it would be wise-or possible to have
those prisoners released and to find asylum for them to
continue their work for liberation, especially in the
countries where financial and economic aid is being
extended to the South African regime? They would be the
torch-bearers of the liberty and the freedom of their own
people. Why do we not ask our illustrious Secretary-General
to negotiate such a release by saying: “All right, you South
Africans, you are afraid that if they are released they will
create trouble. Give them to us, the United Nations, and we
will place them, some in England, some in the United States
and in other countries.” Perhaps there should be some
activism to influence the people of those countries that are
extending aid, under pressure, I must say. The Governments
are to be praised; they are extending financial and
economic aid because of pressure from certain groups. To
whom? To South Africa. They can discontinue it if they
want to maintain their political positions in their own
respective countries.

56. In 1929, when I was a young man of 24, I learned
from my French, German and English friends in Europe
that a small State, in fact Luxembourg, or rather not the
State as such but the people in the State, were selling not
arms but the raw material of armaments, steel, to both the
central Powers on the one hand, that is, the Germans and
Austrians and so forth, and the so-called Allies, meaning
France and Britain, on the other. So how can we hope for
any results from embargoes?
57. I said that we might get results if our Secretary.
General were to negotiate the release of those who are in
prison. All right, then we are where we started. How can we
solve the problem? Now I am going to suggest something
radical, from my humble experience about these matters. It
may be that some of my ideas will be deemed unpopular,
especially with some of the intransigent African groups. If
intransigence brings any results, I will, at my advanced age,
3 The Viking

6

Press, New York,

1977.

carry the flag and march in front of them. But intransigence
under those circumstances will be of no avail. No, but the
zeal must remain. And in the long run the South African
regime has no chance whatsoever, because we know how
empires have tottered and fallen, in my life time, empires
which had mandates in the Middle East. And sometimes I
tell our Arab people: “Do not think it is through our
efforts that those mandates dissolved, because those
empires dissolved themselves”. Of course, we did our little
bit. And the regime in South Africa cannot survive forever.
Things are happening in the world over which the industrial
Powers in Europe and others have no control. But shall we
in the United Nations wait for so long, until these things
develop? I submit that something can be done to put
Vorster and his ilk-as my Chinese friend said-on the spot,
time and time again.

not duplicate here what we say in the General Assembly, or
repeat here what we say in other bodies dealing with the
question. Say “All right, you want to preserve your white
colour. All right. Geographically, let us see: Taking into
account your numbers, taking into account your needs and
your standard of living, carve for yourselves a state in South
Africa, and the other part will be independent under the
blacks, either totally independent or, if the whites listen to
reason, federalized with a common foreign policy”.
62. These are what I consider to be practical solutions.
But if you want to spin in circles, then I think next year at
about this time we shall be having another set of draft
resolutions which, however constructive, are inoperable
when they are adopted, because there is a lot of talk but
little action on the part of those who wield world power.
Those who wield world power do not want a confrontation.
I am sure there is a sense of justice on the part of the
Americans and I am sure-although I am a monarchist-that
the Russians are committed to support anyone who is
oppressed. They did it in their own country, so why should
it not spill over into Africa? But they do not want any
confrontation, those two super-Powers. They do not want
confrontation because something might get out of hand and
they would destroy themselves and us, who are on the
periphery. Therefore, instead of amicably trying to do
things which will bear fruit, jointly, what do they do?
They have wars in their spheres of influence and small
countries are the victims. It is nauseating even to mention
it, but that is what is taking place. Let us appeal to the
super-Powers to see what can be done, drastically, in order
to liberate the blacks in South Africa. Forget your SALT4
talks!

58. First of all, Namibia should be declared free, so that
any black who is disgruntled can go and live freely in
Namibia. I hear that it has a lot of resources and a sparse
population. What is the idea of maintaining that Mandate?
There are no mandates any more. We should impress on
Vorster and on those who have the same views that they
cannot keep Namibia under their rule and that it should
have an open door; but those who support him should be
assured-those
whites who have certain economic interests--that those interests will not be jeopardized. It is for
the benefit of the blacks that it should be so because, until
the blacks can establish themselves there, they must learn
from the whites. The blacks have had no chance to develop
industry like the whites. So they should learn from them. If
the whites want to live in peace, what is wrong? Leave
them, let them live there, but in an independent Namibia.
That is the first step, to work on the independence of
Namibia right away and to open the doors of Namibia to all
blacks who do not wish under any circumstances to live in
South Africa. That is the first step to be taken.

63. We want results, otherwise you blacks will say that we
are full of hot air. We are not full of hot air, but do not
believe that what is being told you by the major Powers
-not wilfully on their part but as Governments-isnot
hot
air itself. We want action and fewer resolutions.

59. I do not watch television, but somebody has told me
that Vorster is going to appear on television here in the
United States. Somebody went out to South Africa and he
was interviewed on television. I watched the man and his
interlocutors very carefully. Vorster and his people are
frightened people, and they are so self-righteous that they
will fight with their backs to the wall if need be, and the
fight will be protracted because we cannot enforce any
arms embargo. Do you know what it will mean? They will
sacrifice their own people, the whites and many innocent
blacks. Many of the whites are innocent, but have been
brainwashed, like other people can be brainwashed.

64. I should like to reserve my right to continue-not
today, because one of my African brothers, who asked me
if I would speak before he did and who is one of the
freedom fighters, wants to address the Council. I do not
think that he will take more than half an hour, and, after
all, members should use the time of the Council and of the
General Assembly profitably lest our Secretary-General
should have to act with regard to the budget. We are
wasting a lot of time.
65. Having spoken thus, I hope, should I see fit, to resume
the discussion, not with a prefabricated speech but with
what comes from my humble experience.

60. I wish Gandhi could be resuscitated. If only the
blacks, instead of boycotts and arms, could use non-violent
resistance. Then the whites would give in, because it would
be an economic question. But we do not have a Gandhi
there, although he used to be there in his early days.

66. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. M. J.
Makatini, to whom the Council extended an invitation at its
last meeting under the terms of rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure. Accordingly, 1 invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.

61. Therefore, we must remember that they will fight with
their backs to the wall, it will be a protracted tight because
they will be receiving surreptitious aid, financial as well as
arms aid from abroad, The thing to do would be to talk on
the following basis with them. Leave aside apartheid; we
talk about apartheid, racial discrimination and all other
forms of discrimination in the Third Committee. We should

67. Mr, MAKATINI:
Mr. President, our delegation
attaches a great deal of importance to the fact that this
4 Stratedc Arms Limitation Talks.
7

session, whose historic task is to choose between action
against apartheid, on the one hand, and inaction in favour
of that inhuman system, on the other, meets under Your
presidency.
68. The strong ties that bind the peoples of South Africa
and India are well known to historians and international
statesmen. Our two peoples have for centuries f0ught
against a common enemy and for a common goal-the right
to self-determination,
As part of the British imperialist
exploitation, at some stage, between 1860 and 1866, about
6,300 indentured Indians were transported to Natal, South
Africa, from Madras and Calcutta, Little did the British
colonialists realize that they were forging a situation that
has resuhed in the celnenting of unbreakable brotherhood
and solidarity between our two peoples. This has manifested itself in various forms, especially in the active role
played by Mahatma Gandhi in the struggle against racial
discrimination in South Africa, as well as in the fact that, at
the very inception of the United Nations, India requested
the inscription on the agenda of the problem of white
supremacy in South Africa.
69. I am pleased to say that the oppressed South African
people of Indian origin have remained loyal to this
tradition. Under the leadership of the African National
Congress, they continue to fight shoulder to shoulder with
the African and Coloured peoples, as well with a steadily
growing number of white democrats. One of them, Mat
Maharaj, a well-known veteran of this struggle, a few days
ago had the opportunity to petition the Special Committee
against Apartheid on the occasion of the Day of Solidarity
with the South African Political Prisoners.5 This was after
his recent escape from restriction following the termination
of 12 years of imprisonment on Robben Island, in the same
section as such of our illustrious leaders as Nelson Mandela,
Walter Sisulu, Govan Mbeki, Ahmed Kathrada, the latter
also of Indian origin, and Arthur Goldberg, a white, for
whom the beginning of the forthcoming General Assembly
debate on the question of apartheid on 7 November will
mark the fifteenth anniversary of their condemnation to
life imprisonment on Robben Island.
70. Mr. President, because of your country’s resolute and
unrelenting fight against upartheid, as well as your personal
commitment and experience, we are confident that, under
your presidency, the Council will adopt prompt and
far-reaching punitive measures commensurate with the
challenge before the international community today, thereby restoring the waning credibility of the Organization.
71. At this stage, I should like to depart briefly from my
prepared statement. In keeping with African tradition, we
have always been brought up to respect our elders. I speak
following the representative of Saudi Arabia, who has, 1
believe, in good faith put before the Council what he
considers pragmatic resolutions of the problem. l should be
failing in my duty if I did not state that for the blacks in
South Africa the principle of the right to self-determination
was as precious as it is all over the world, and if I did not
also recall that this principle of the right to self-determlnation of the South African people had been endorsed by
5 A/AC.lIS/SR.353.

the Organization on severaloccasions,in particular bY the
Council,and,fiI&ly, if I did not state that the organization
Ilad correctly rejected the policy of bantustims.TO advocatethe transferof blacksfrom South Africa to Namibia
would be tantamount to supp0rting bnntustanization,
which we reject since that policy is the cornerstoneof
apart/Ieid. lt seeksto deprive the African people 0f their
birthr@It, and I will seizethe first availableopportunity to
recommendto my leadershipthat WC discussthis problem
with the friendly country that His l~xcell~ncYrepresents.I
havebadoccasionin the past0f beiIlg pitrt of a delegation
that Inet with the late King Faisal, WOO assuredIIS0f his
support; l aIn therefore convinced that the remarksmade
by the representativeof SaudiArabia today were Inadein a
goodspirit, but we shouldalwaysensurethat our positions
hannonize.
72. This seriesof Security Council Incetings has been
convenedat the requestof the 49 African Member States.
We sincerely appreciate this swift action which undoubtedly is hailed throughout the length anti breadth of
the African continent and welcomed by the justice-loving
forces in the capitalist countries, and which enjoys the
active support of the peoplesillld Governtnents of the
non-alignedand socialist countries. The African National
Congress
seesit as proof of Africa’s detenninatiun, at this
decisivestageof our struggle,not t0 rcmnin idle in the face
of Vorster’s unfolding programmeof repressionin South
Africa and aggression
beyond its borders,in preparationfor
what he describedin the ultimatum he put in 1974 to the
international community to accept Pretoria’sqxuT/lcid or
face an alternative “too ghastly to contemplate”, aswell as
what he threatened in the wake of the 1067 Israeli
aggression,when he declared: “Israel ate up the Arabs
beforebreakfast;we caneat up black Africa before lunch”.
73. The gravity 0f the subject before the Council today is
without parallel.The closestcxa~~q~le one cat1 think of can
only beof a hypothetical nature: humanity would probably
have been saved from the holocaust into which it was
plungedduring the last world war if, in the 193Os,Adolph
Hitler had daredto throw down so open a challengeto the
international community as John NdthaLar Vorster has
done. For the benefit of those who might be inclined to
find this equation an exaggeratinn,it is important to recall
not only the ideologicalaffinity and allianceof theseracial
bigots,but alsothat, if Hitler wasbetter armed,his arsenal
was not half as sophisticatedas Vorster’s and definitely
excludednuclearweapons.Vorster’s internment for hispart
as the Generalof the OsscwaBrandwaag,a secret fifthc0lumnorganizationwith a membershipof 250,000, aswell
as his statementin 1942 that his organizatian stood for
Christian nationalism-called fascism in Mussolini’sItaly
and nationalsocialismin Hitler’s Germany--must be borne
in mind in consideringthe urgency of the action to be
taken by the Council.
74. Like AmbassadorMahmoudMestiri, the representative
of Tunisiaand spokesmanof the African Graup, I do not
intend to dwellon the countlessbarbaruuscriInesthat have
been committed and continue to be committed by the
V0rster r&me in the allegeddefence of Christha&Western
and white civilization andasthe allegedbulwark againstthe
so-calledpenetration of communismin Africa, asVorster

never tires of claiming. However, it is important to note
that this series of Security Council meetings provides the
opportunity
to those countries-especially
the United
States, France, Great Britain, the Federal Republic of
Germany, Japan, Israel and others whose record of collaboration with the apurfheid regime is well known-to
abandon this policy instantly and make common cause with
the peoples and Governments of the world, in order to
complement the efforts of the liberation movement to
crush this cancerous system of apartheid and thus help
prevent the poisoning of race relations for decades to come.
The time is long overdue for them to demonstrate-not in
words, not in rhetorical declarations intended as opium,
perhaps, for the exploited, but by immediate and concrete
action-that Hitler’s erstwhile disciple, today the hangman
of the South African and the Namibian people, the
co-oppressor of the people of Zimbabwe, the aggressor of
the Angolan and other States in the subcontinent, is not
their regional gendarme. It is time to renounce by deeds
statements made by some Western statesmen and strategists
that the West cannot afford to go beyond verbal condemnation of npurtheid because it is dependent on South Africa
for trade, raw materials and strategic arrangements.

according to the regime’s legislation, any person who strives
for social, political and economic change is a Communist.
78. The United Nations has been paving the way for
action against the apartheid regime since 1960 when, in the
wake of the Sharpeville massacre, the Security Council
called upon the South African r6gime
“to initiate measuresaimed at bringing about racial
harmony basedon equality in order to ensure that the
present situation does not continue or recur, and to
abandon its policies of apartheid and racial discrimination”. /Resolution 134 (1960).]
79. In 1963, in its resolution 181 (1963), the Council did
not stop at strongly deprecating the poIicies of South
Africa in its perpetuation of racial discrimination but went
further and called upon it to liberate all persons imprisoned, interned or subjected to other restrictions for
having opposed the policy of apartheid. It also solemnly
called upon all States to cease forthwith the sale and
shipment of arms, ammunition of all types and military
vehiclesto South Africa.
80. In the sameyear, in its resolution 182 (1963), the
Council expressed the conviction that the situation in
South Africa seriously disturbed international peace and
security.

75. In sounding a warning to the Western countries that to
this day are still tlying to adjust to the situation in Angola
and Mozambique, where they backed the losing horses by
supporting Portuguese colonialism and later the puppet
organizations, I shall quote our President, Oliver Tambo.
Addressing the World Conference for Action against Apartheid held at Lagos, he declared:

81. In its resolution 282 (1970), after recalling its resolutions on the arms embargo, the Council expressedthe
conviction that the situation resulting from the continued
application of the policies of apartheid and the continued
South African acquisition of arms and military equipment
from a number of Member Statesand by local manufacture
of arms and ammunition under licences constituted a
potential threat to international peace and security.
Further, it recognized that the extensive armsbuild-up of
the military forces of South Africa poseda real threat to
the security and sovereignty of independent African States
opposedto the racial policies of the South African regime,
in particular the neighbouring States.

“The racists and Fascists in southern Africa for the time
being enjoy the support of what they regard as powerful
forces. However, we are armed with a just cause and a will
to be free. Behind the struggle of our people for the
seizure of power we have the peoples of the world
represented at this Conference, the invincible concerted
international support of the anti-racist, anti-imperialist
and anti-Fascist forces of the world, composed of the
democratic, socialist and progressive peoples and States.”
76. 1 should like at this stage to affirm, in the name of the
African National Congress, that support of our organization
is support for the establishment of a democratic and
non-racial South Africa, as enshrined in the Freedom
Charter. The Freedom Charter, which I request the permission of the President to circulate to members of the Council
(see S/12425], was adopted by the oppressed people for
the establishment of a just and equitable society. It states,
among other things, that South Africa belongs to all those
who live in it and that no government can justly claim
authority unless it is based on the will of all the people.

82. In its resolution 3 11 (1972), the Council recognized
the legitimacy of the struggle of the oppressedpeople of
South Africa in pursuanceof their human rights assetforth
in the Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and called upon
all States to observe strictly the
armsembargoagainstSouth Africa.
83. Finally, in its resolution 392 (1976), the Council
strongly condemnedthe South African regimefor its resort
to massiveviolence against and killings of the African
people including schoolchildren and students and others
opposing racial discrimination, and reaffirmed that the
policy of apartheid was a crime againstthe conscienceand
dignity of mankind and seriously disturbed international
peaceandsecurity.

77. If the murder of Steve Biko, the detention of Percy
Qoboza and Donald Woods and the banning of all nonviolent organizations known to some leading Western
diplomats do not prove the Fascist character of the Vorster
regime, I can only repeat what I once said to Ambassador
Andrew Young, that is, that if his activities as a civil rights
leader in the South had been carried out in South Africa
against apartheid he would have been incarcerated in
Robben Island, convicted under either the Suppression of
Communism Act or some other Draconian legislation. For.

84. The countless condemnations of and appealsto the
South African regime by the international community
through the United Nations have been ignored with
impunity, The same goes for the appealsto some States
which have continued their economic, diplomatic and
9

military collaboration with the Pretoria rkgime. The result
has beea the intensification of repression and repeated
massacres, as well as the aggression against Angola, the
continued occupation of Namibia, economic and military
support for the Smith rdgime, economic aggression against
Lesotho, the repeated violation of the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of land-locked States such as Botswana,
Lesotho and Swaziland, and the blessing of the repeated
acts of aggression committed by the Ian Smith regime
against Mozambique and Zambia.

Saudi Arabia whom I have always considered to be my
mentor. However, I did not quite grasp exactly what he
proposed regarding a transfer of population from South
Africa to Namibia. Was he referring only to political
prisoners held by the racist rkgime of Pretoria, or was he
referring to the 20 million indigenous and other non-white
people of South Africa? In any case, I do not believe that
the Charter of the United Nations provides for any such
solution as that suggested by Ambassador Baroody. On the
other hand, the four draft resolutions submitted by the
African members of the Council do fall within the
provisions of the Charter; they contain peaceful measures.

85. To the overwhelming majority of Member States
-except for the major trading partners, some of whom have
increased their military collaboration with the Pretoria
r6gime by furnishing it with licences which enable it to be
virtually self-sufficient in the production of war equipment
and supplying it with the technological know-how
for
producing atomic weapons-the
South African rdgime
constitutes a threat to peace and international security.
This position of the Western countries has become indefensible in the light of the rbgime’s new Defence Act, in
terms of which it arrogates to itself the right to intervene
militarily in all African countries south of the equator. Its
bellicose position, which went to the extent of dismissing
the President of the United States as irrelevant, and indeed
saying this of all the countries that have hitherto delayed
action by the international community on the basis that
they have the collective leverage to exert pressure on
Vorster, must be seen against the background of its nuclear
capability. It is now up to the Western countries to take the
initiative by expanding the punitive measures provided for
in the four draft resolutions submitted by Benin, Libya and
Mauritius on 29 March this year /S/12309 to S/12312/.

89. Incidentally, I wonder why Saudi Arabia, whose
wealth, resources and size are not by any means unequal to
those of Namibia, has not yet offered a homeland to the
Palestinians? Such an offer would perhaps solve a rather
thorny problem. Perhaps, also, overpopulated areas of the
world, like India for example, could be relieved by
installing Indians in larger, wealthier and less populous
countries like the United States, for example.
90. I agree that there is a maldistribution of wealth, land
and population in the world. In that respect the proposal
made by Ambassador Baroody-if I understood him correctly-makes some sense. But I wonder whether the United
States and European countries would wish to harbour
indefinitely in their respective territories an army of
African liberation fighters determined to topple the racist
regime of Vorster and to regain possession of political
power in their native homeland?
91. I believe that Ambassador Baroody’s proposals are
wise but, to my mind, they are far from practical. I would
welcome an opportunity to discuss this matter privately
with him.

86. We welcome the proposals made by Ambassador
Mahmoud Mestiri and other speakers, such as the representative of Benin, that nothing less than the immediate
imposition of economic sanctions and a mandatory arms
embargo, as well as the oil embargo, would be an adequate
response to the challenge facing the international community. As Ambassador Mestiri has correctly pointed out,
despite the fact that the Vorster rdgime has launched a war
of aggression against the oppressed South African people,
relying upon weapons from the West, we are not asking the
Western countries to send troops to South Africa. As our
President said at Lagos:

92. The PRESIDENT: As members of the Council are
aware, Ambassador Baroody did reserve his right to make a
further statement. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table to address us in continuation of his earlier
statement.
93. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I have asked to be
allowed to exercise my right of reply because certain things
have been attributed to me that I did not say.
94. 1 am addressing myself to the gentleman, the freedom
fighter, from South Africa and to my good friend Ambassador Ramphul.

“Our people, under the leadership of the African
National Congress, recognize and accept the challenge
with which history has confronted us. Our revolution can
only be the product of our own efforts and we shall not
shirk our duty. The assistance and support we ask of the
world, by implementing these proposals, can help create
more favourable conditions for victory which cannot be
denied our people,”

95. I said that there should be an independent black
African State inside South Africa and that we should start
with Namibia, because some people would want to seek
their fortune in Namibia. I did not say that all the blacks in
South Africa should go to Namibia. I said anyone who was
disgruntled in the meantime could go there.

87. In conclusion, I wish to say that today the attention
of the world is focused on the deliberations at this meeting,
and we are confident that the Council will rise to the
expectations of progressive mankind.

96. If Ambassador Ramplzul read the record he would not
be so sarcastic as to mention the Palestinians, nor should
the other gentleman have spoken as if I were taking
Vorster’s side. On the contrary, I said that, as a first step to
show its goodwill, the Vorster regime should liberate
Namibia and that if anybody was disgruntled he could go
there and perhaps work for the liberation of the other

88. Mr, RAMPHUL (Mauritius):
I had not planned to
speak this morning, but I listened very attentively-as
I
always do-to the statement of Ambassador Baroody of
10
!

blacks. I did not say exactly that. I did not say that he
should go and work, lest I frighten Vorster and his ilk more
than they are frightened already.

Africa. He refused,and I said“You are right to refuse; they
could get their visas somewhere else,” Why drag my
Government, why drag a torch-bearer of liberty, the late
King Faisal into this? Why drag the Palestiniansinto this?
I will settle scoreswith you outside. You will still be my
friend, but I will settle scores with you. And I reject
vehemently any insinuation that I said that Namibia could
take all the South Africans. If you do not take this as my
answer,God help you.

97. Ambassador Ramphul, show me where I said that the
blacks in South Africa should all go to Namibia. My dear
friend, you are just playing politics with that gentleman
who addressed us before you and who spoke as if I wanted
to see all the blacks sent to Namibia. I never said that. Why
have you attributed that to me? I am not that simple. I
know that there are millions and millions of blacks who
would not want to leave South Africa, and they have a right
to stay there.

104. The PRESIDENT: I think it might be desirablefor all
of us to readthe verbatim record of the statement madeby
the representative of Saudi Arabia before rushing in to
reply to him.

98. But what about 1848 in Europe? Many in Europe
were disgruntled and came to the United States. Does that
mean that everybody who was disgruntled should have
come to the United States?

10.5. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): I can assureAmbassador
Baroody that I meant no sarcasm,becauseI feel for the
Palestiniansasstrongly as doesAmbassadorBaroody. I am
relieved that my misgivingshave been dispelled.As I saidat
the beginningof my statement, I did not quite graspwhat
AmbassadorBaroody wasactually expressing.I am grateful
to him for having clarified the point.

99. Incidentally, between 1815 and 1848 there was
detente, a bogus detente; things were brewing in the United
States. TaJIeyrand and Metternich created a sort of detente
and many people thought it was just to calm them down.
They had a series of revolts, and many Europeans left for
the United States. Does that mean that they should not
have left? Does that mean that, once Namibia has been
granted independence, if some in South Africa want to go
to Namibia, they should not be allowed to go there if they
find that the white regime still lords it over them? Why
distort the facts-just because you want the situation to
continue? But with what result? With your resolutions,
with all due respect?

106. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Saudi Arabia.
107. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I think, Sir, besides
your being President-and a wiseone at that-your adviceis
the best: peopleshouldnot rush to conclusionsbefore they
read the verbatim record. But I must repeat againand again
and again that I never insinuated or intimated that the
South African blacks should be herded into Namibia,
accordingto the impressionthat wasformed by some.I was
thinking of the freedom fighters, but I do not have to
mention everything that they could do in Namibia. They
could work, and they could alsofight for thosecompatriots
of theirs who are still there clinging to their rights.

100. Why does my good friend from Mauritius of all
people say that I implied that all the blacks from South
Africa-as though I said all the blacks-should emigrate to
Namibia? I said that, to show the regime’s goodwill, the
first thing we should now do is liberate Namibia and that
anyone who is disgruntled should go there and work for the
liberation of the blacks who are there.

108. If I spokein an unorthodox fashion, it is becausethe
orthodox fashion has not got us anywhere. I wastrying to
make a breakthrough. And remember that we are aI1
committed to the Charter; we are not merely representatives of our respective countries. We should be loyal to
the Charter. I spoke as a Member of the United Nations,
not only as the representativeof Saudi Arabia. J guessthis
is why we applaudAmbassadorYoung wheneverhe givesus
a piece of his mind that may not perhapsconform to the
well-tailored sartorial fashions of his Government. We
applaud him. And now I am not imitating Ambassador
Young: J precededhim in giving my views, long before he
was appointed Ambassador. But because Ambassador
Young representsa big country, you only whisper.Why do
you not take issue with AmbassadorYoung? You take
issuewith a friend of yours. “I put you behind me on the
horse.” That is an Arabic proverb. If YOU want, you can see
what there is in the saddleand take whatever you want, but
do not throw me from the horse. You cannot do that, any
one of you, even Mr. Ramphul: I know how to ride the
horse. I knew what I wastalking about, so do not insinuate.
J am for the freedom of the blacks of South Africa, but I
have been trying to “break the ice”; I have the right to do
so as a representative of a State Member of the United
Nations. And no hard feelings:1 forgive you.

101. Will you take the blacks in Mauritius if we try to
liberate them’? I do not think you would dare, because you
are afraid they would upset your regime.
102. Why drag in the Palestinians? That was an ill-chosen
illustration. The Palestinians had a home and a State, and
they will fight for it till doomsday. If I “got hooked” on
the United Nations-I came only to organize the Mission of
Saudi Arabia, after which I was to go back to my m&‘erthe thing that “hooked” me wasthe Palestinianquestion,
becauseJ thought it was an unjust situation. And you say
Saudi Arabia shouldopen its doors. Openyour doorsto the
freedom fighters of South Africa. No, you do not dare.
Please,next time-all of you-take carewhat you say when
I make a statement, You cannot take it out of context.
Although you are my friend-even if you weremy brother,
from my own mother-I would take issuewith you. Who
do you think you are?
103. J knew King Faisal for 42 years. He was a torchbearerof black African freedom.The white South Africans
wanted to have an office for the pilgrims in Juddah, and
they pleadedwith me to tell King Faisalto have Moslem
blacksopen an office-under the aegis,of course,of South

Ti?emeetingroseat I. 15 p.m.
11

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world,
Consult
Sectian,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

i
,F
r
i
!
1
r

PUBLICATtONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nntions
Unies, Se&ion des ventes, New York ou Genbve.
KAK

I-tOJIY’IHTb

%bAaHHS

HB~AWHR

Qpranu3aLutu

SWHQX

N

saurem
Hauwk,

K~amnom

areHTCTBaX

COMO

CONSEGUlR

Celtq~~

BO

scex

~wa?,me
no

OPI’AWW%4l&dH

065eAHHeHHblX

npo~axce

OG’bE~HHEH?thIX
HaqnR

momHO

HAIWR

lcynmb

HaaoaHTe
CnpaBXH
unw nnwHTe
no aapecy : Oprannsann~
H~&UIHR,
Hsro-Fiopr:
WIH Wenesa.
pairOHaX

PUBLICACIONES

mepa.

DE LAS

NAClONES

Mara06 H3AaHnffX
B
06neA~neHna1x

B KHHXHMX

UNIDAS

Las publicacioncs
de las Naciones
IJnidas
eatin en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas pa&s
de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librcro
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas:Seccirjn
de Ventas.
Nueva
York o Ginehra.

Litbo

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-October

1978-2,200
