S/2014/956

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 December 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 39 of Security Council
resolution 2147 (2014). It covers major developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo since my report of 25 September 2014 (S/2014/698), including with
regard to the implementation of national commitments under the Peace, S ecurity
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region and progress made by the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in implementing its
mandate. It also provides an update on the transfer of tasks to the United Nations
country team.

II. Major developments
Political developments
2.
On 7 December, in follow-up to one of the recommendations of the national
dialogue held from 9 September to 5 October 2013, President Joseph Kabila
appointed a Government of “national cohesion” comprising 47 members from the
ruling coalition and the political opposition. The long-awaited cabinet reshuffle
marked the return of leaders of key political parties from within the ru ling coalition.
Evariste Boshab, the Secretary-General of President Kabila’s Parti du peuple pour la
reconstruction et le développement, was appointed Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Security and the Interior. In this capacity, he will oversee, in pa rticular
security arrangements for elections. The new cabinet includes seven women
Ministers and Deputy Ministers, representing 14 per cent of the posts. Ten members
of the opposition joined the new Government, including the Secretary-General of
the Mouvement pour la libération du Congo, Thomas Luhaka, who was appointed
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Post and Telecommunications, and Willy
Makiashi of the Parti lumumbiste unifié, appointed Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Labour. On 8 December, the Mouvement pour la libération du Congo
excluded Thomas Luhaka and two other party members for having joined the new
Government.

14-67937 (E)

090115

*1467937*

S/2014/956

3.
On 15 December, in his annual state of the nation address, President Kabila
laid out some of the objectives of the new Government, including the
implementation of the decentralization process and socioeconomic reforms. He
indicated that the country would not bow to “foreign orders” concerning the 2016
presidential elections. President Kabila also stated that the current securi ty situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo did not justify the presence of a large
MONUSCO Force and that the time had come to discuss its reduction.
4.
The debate on a potential third term for President Kabila dominated the
political scene and triggered various, and sometimes violent, reactions. On 12 October
in Lodja, Kasai oriental, two Catholic priests and one nun were physically attacked
by young men, reportedly because of the opposition of the Catholic Church in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to any constitutional change. On 20 October, a
coalition of opposition parties, composed mainly of the Union pour la démocratie et
le progrès social and the Union pour la nation congolaise, addressed a letter to my
Special Representative, calling for MONUSCO’s support to ensure the full
implementation by the Government of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, notably with regard to commitments on national reconciliation,
tolerance and democratization.
5.
There were continued reports of restriction of the activities of some political
opposition parties. On 24 October, the Mayor of Goma banned a march planned by
opposition political parties, the fifth such opposition activity of this sort outlawed in
Goma over the past several months. On 3 November, the Congolese National Police
briefly arrested 50 opposition supporters staging a sit -in near MONUSCO
headquarters in Kinshasa to request a national dialogue, the full implementation of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and an end to the violence in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, which had been prohibited by the
Governor of Kinshasa.
6.
On 21 November, the Minister of Security and the Interior, Richard Muyej,
inaugurated the Office national d’identification de la population. That Office will be
in charge of issuing biometric identity cards and conducting the population census.
Some Government representatives want the census to form the basis for the voter
register in the 2016 presidential and legislative polls. Some members of the
opposition and civil society denounced this as a move by the Government to delay
the holding of presidential elections in 2016.
7.
The Commission électorale nationale indépendante continued the update of the
voter register and mapping of voting sites. Partners and donor countries continued
to condition their support on the publication of a global calendar and budget for the
elections.
8.
On the economic front, the Democratic Republic of the Congo continued to
enjoy relative macroeconomic stability. In October, the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) in the World Economic Outlook estimated the 2014 real gross national
product growth at 8.6 per cent. On 10 December, the fiscal law was adopted for a
2015 budget of $8.9 billion, an increase of 8.9 per cent over the 2014 budget.
Human rights situation
9.
MONUSCO continued to document human rights violations against political
actors, journalists and human rights defenders. On 20 October, the national Vice -

2/15

14-67937

S/2014/956

President of the Parti libéral pour le développement was arrested by agents of the
Agence nationale de reseignements outside a television station in Go ma after having
criticized the response of the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC)) to the
massacres of civilians in Beni territory.
10. During the reporting period, the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office
released two public reports. On 9 October, it released a report noting that during the
occupation by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M23) of certain parts of Nyiragongo and
Rutshuru territories in North Kivu from mid-April to 4 November 2013, more than
116 individuals were victims of the violation of the right to life, 351 of the violation
of the right to physical integrity, including 161 victims of rape and 296 victims of
the violation of the right to the liberty and security of the person, including many
cases of abduction and forced recruitment. On 15 October, the United Nations Joint
Human Rights Office also released a report documenting human rights violations,
namely, the summary execution of 9 civilians and the enforced disappearance of
32 others, allegedly committed by the Congolese National Police in the context of
“Operation Likofi” in Kinshasa between 15 November 2013 and 15 February 2014.
On 16 October, Minister Muyej contested the findings in the report, which he
declared partisan in nature and intended to discredit the Congolese National Police.
On 17 October, the Government declared the Director of the United Nations Joint
Human Rights Office persona non grata. Despite objections and concerted efforts by
the United Nations and a number of Member States and organizations to have the
Government reconsider its decision, the Director was requested to leave the country
within 48 hours. Furthermore, some staff members of the Joint Human Rights Office
were threatened in connection with their work. On 17 November, Human Rights
Watch released a report documenting the alleged summary execution of 51 civilians
and the enforced disappearance of 33 others during “Operation Likofi”. On
26 November, the Department for International Development of the Government of
the United Kingdom suspended its assistance programme for the reform of the
Congolese National Police over the allegations of human rights violations
committed by the Congolese National Police. The United States of America also
suspended its support to the Congolese National Police community policing
programme in Kinshasa, pending the outcome of investigations into the allegatio ns.
France, while maintaining its cooperation with the Congolese National Police,
called for investigations into the reports. The Minister of Information and
Spokesperson of the Government, Lambert Mende, expressed surprise at the
decision of the United Kingdom and the United States, noting that the Government
had already opened investigations into the reports of human rights violations
committed by the Congolese National Police.
11. On 7 November, the High Military Court convicted General Jerome Kakwavu
for his individual and command responsibility for rape and war crimes committed
by soldiers under his command as leader of the Forces armées du peuple congolais,
a militia active in Ituri district between 2003 and 2005, sentencing him to 10 years
in prison. MONUSCO noted with concern the light sentence handed down by the
Court as well as the lack of the right to appeal. Additionally, on 15 December,
Colonel “106”, charged with 14 counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity,
was sentenced by the South Kivu Military Court to life imprisonment. Both former
commanders were on the list of five senior FARDC officers accused of rape that had
been handed to President Kabila in May 2009 by a delegation of the Security

14-67937

3/15

S/2014/956

Council. Of the others, one had fled abroad after issuance of an arrest warrant in
2006, one died and the third was acquitted.
12. MONUSCO recorded 61 cases of sexual violence in conflict during the
reporting period. At least 30 women and 31 children were victims of sexual
violence, allegedly committed by armed groups and national security forces in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
13. Together with the office of my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, MONUSCO supported the Minister of Defence in developing the FARDC
action plan on sexual violence, complementing the action plan with regard to ending
and preventing recruitment and use of children and sexual violence against children.
The Mission also supports efforts under way to establish a national commission to
monitor and evaluate the implementation of the action plan.
14. Regarding child protection and armed conflict, two children formerly
associated with armed groups who had been detained by FARDC were released. The
joint FARDC and MONUSCO “Opération sauvetage” continued in Beni territory,
North Kivu, with a view to ensuring the release of children formerly associated with
ADF. As of 8 December, 60 children (36 boys and 24 girls) between the ages of
6 months and 17 years were released. Of these, 29 children were evacuated to Goma
for security considerations, following threats from the local population given their
former association with ADF. They were placed in a transit centre pending family
reunification and reintegration.
15. As of 17 December, MONUSCO documented 285 cases of children (15 girls
and 270 boys) who escaped or were separated from armed groups and 1 case of a
child who was separated from national security forces. Of those separated from
armed groups, one was Rwandan and the other Ugandan.
Humanitarian situation
16. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 7 million people require
humanitarian assistance to meet basic needs, including 2.7 million internally
displaced persons. About 85 per cent of internally displaced persons live with host
families; the rest live in camps and sites. Further to a decision of the Government to
close all internally displaced person camps in and around Goma by the end of the
year, the internally displaced person camp in Kiwanja, in Rutshuru territory, was
closed on 2 December owing to security concerns, including the alleged presence of
weapons in the camp. Some 2,300 internally displaced persons had to look for
shelter elsewhere.
17. Some 420,000 Congolese continue to live as refugees and asylum seekers in
neighbouring countries, while the Democratic Republic of the Congo hosts some
122,000 refugees, including about 68,000 from the Central African Republic, 38,800
from Rwanda, 9,000 from Burundi and 1,200 from Uganda. As of 17 December,
about 10,000 of the 37,336 Angolan refugees voluntarily returned home. From
January through 17 December, more than 3,500 Rwandan refugees also voluntarily
returned home.
18. The humanitarian appeal for the Democratic Republic of the Congo for 2014
set at $832 million was funded at only 49 per cent. To address the needs of
5.2 million people, a total amount of $692 million is requested in the 2015
Democratic Republic of the Congo Humanitarian Response Plan.

4/15

14-67937

S/2014/956

Situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
19. In North Kivu, the security situation was dominated by the sharp increase in
violence in Beni territory. Since 2 October, a spate of targeted attacks by suspected
Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and affiliated elements resulted in the brutal
killing of over 250 civilians. Attacks on 11 and 15 December in two remote villages
near Oicha resulted in the killing of some 30 civilians, including children, hacked to
death with machetes. MONUSCO reinforced its military, police and civilian
presence in the area and increased support to FARDC and the Congolese National
Police. This entailed the relocation of the headquarters of the Force Intervention
Brigade from Goma to Beni, the establishment of a Joint Intelligence and
Operations Centre in Beni and the relocation of the ground station of the unarmed
unmanned aerial vehicles from Goma to Bunia to enhance situational awareness
over Beni territory.
20. From 30 October to 1 November, President Kabila visited the area to reassure
the population and called for an increase in MONUSCO support to help to address
the threat posed by ADF. Previously, on 23 October, my Special Representative for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region together with the Special Envoy of the African Union visited Beni to
express solidarity with the population. From 3 to 4 December, my Special
Representative returned to Beni together with the Ambassadors of France, the
United Kingdom and the United States.
21. On 17 November, in a related development, in Beni territory the military
tribunal considering the case of the murder of FARDC General Mamadou Ndala,
who commanded operations against ADF and M23, sentenced an FARDC
Lieutenant-Colonel to death while three other FARDC officers received prison
terms ranging from 12 to 20 years for “treason” and “collusion with a terrorist
movement”. Jamil Mukulu, the leader of ADF, who was tried in absentia, was also
sentenced to death, while two other ADF members in detention were sentenced to
5 and 15 years, respectively.
22. In Walikale territory, from 10 to 12 October, clashes between Nduma Defence
of Congo/Cheka (NDC/Cheka) and the Forces démocratiques pour la libération du
Rwanda (FDLR) elements displaced up to 600 civilians. In addition, four civilians,
including two children, were reportedly killed during clashes between FDLR and
Nduma Defence of Congo/Guidon (NDC/Guidon) on 2 November in Kisimba.
Clashes between rival Mayi-Mayi Raia Mutomobki factions and other Mayi-Mayi
groups continued to cause insecurity in the south of the territory, result ing in the
displacement of over 800 civilians as of 17 December.
23. In late October, in Rutshuru territory, FARDC commenced operations against
Mayi-Mayi Nyatura elements. Two hundred households were displaced as a result of
the clashes between FARDC and the Mayi-Mayi elements, with the latter burning
civilian homes as they retreated. By 13 November, FARDC had re-established
control over the area.
24. In Nyiragongo territory, on 9 December, FARDC accidently fired a rocket
projectile, which landed on the territory of Rwanda. The FARDC element
responsible for the firing was arrested for negligence and indiscipline. Rwanda
requested the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism to conduct an investigation
into the incident.

14-67937

5/15

S/2014/956

25. In South Kivu, the security situation remained volatile. From 6 to 11 October,
the Forces de défense nationales du Burundi withdrew from Kiliba, in Uvira
territory, where they had been present since 2011, in accordance with an agreement
between Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to prevent incursions
into Burundi by the Forces nationales de libération du Burundi. Despite
redeployment of FARDC to the area, the withdrawal of Forces de défense nationales
du Burundi led to an increase in armed group activity.
26. In Shabunda territory, on 9 October, a reconnaissance patrol of the Expanded
Joint Verification Mechanism was ambushed by Mayi-Mayi Fudjo on the Mulungu
bridge. Two civilians and two FARDC officers were killed.
27. Mayi-Mayi Yakutumba elements remained active in southern Uvira and Fizi
territories. Although the number of clashes with FARDC decreased, the group
increased recruitment and reinforced its positions in Ngandja forest and Ubwari
peninsula.
28. Ongoing FARDC operations against Mayi-Mayi Kata-Katanga, contributed to
a relative improvement in the security situation in northern and eastern Katanga,
although most of the Mayi-Mayi elements fled to Pweto territory to remobilize. The
Twa-Luba conflict also decreased in intensity owing to mediation efforts by the
Government, provincial authorities and MONUSCO. In central and southern
Katanga, however, the situation deteriorated as attacks by Mayi -Mayi groups
against civilians and FARDC positions increased. Between 5 October and
5 November, 2,000 persons were displaced amid a series of deadly attacks by
militias. As of 17 December, there were more than 580,000 internally displaced
persons in Katanga.
29. In Ituri district, in Orientale Province, in October, Mayi-Mayi Simba carried
out attacks on four gold mining sites in southern Mambasa territory. From 19 to
24 October, the group forcibly recruited about 100 young men from Bakaiko,
180 kilometres southwest of Mambasa.
30. In Ituri district, especially in South Irumu, the Forces de résistance
patriotiques en Ituri carried out a number of attacks against the civilian population.
Between 26 and 31 October, 10 villages in the areas of Aveba and Komanda were
targeted by Forces de résistance patriotiques en Ituri elements who killed three
people, and raped three women and one girl. On 1 November, about 1,000 Forces de
résistance patriotiques en Ituri elements and 300 dependants led by their leaders
Cobra Matata and Mbadu Adirudu regrouped near Aveba to surrender. However,
negotiations between the Congolese authorities and the Forces de résistance
patriotiques en Ituri were at an impasse as the Forces de résistance patriotiques en
Ituri demanded general amnesty for any crimes committed and the integration of its
elements into FARDC with recognition of ranks. As of 9 December, only 64 Forces
de résistance patriotiques en Ituri had surrendered with 10 weapons.
31. In Haut- and Bas-Uélé, the presence of remnant elements of the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) and other unidentified armed elements continued to be
reported in the Niangara-Ngilima-Bangadi triangle, on the Dungu-Duru axis and in
the Doruma area. Elements of the armed group are reported to have continued
operating mining sites in the Central African Republic, while returning to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to replenish food supplies. From 17 to
24 October, MONUSCO forces conducted joint military operations with FARDC

6/15

14-67937

S/2014/956

and the African Union Regional Task Force, supported by the United States Africa
Command in the areas of Duru, Faradje, Kpaika and the Garamba National Park. I n
mid-October, MONUSCO established two Mobile Operational Bases in Kiliwa. No
further reports of attacks attributed to suspected LRA elements were subsequently
reported in the area.
Protection of civilians and neutralization of armed groups
32. MONUSCO supported FARDC through joint planning, situational awareness,
logistics and fire support in operations against ADF, the Alliance des patriotes pour
un Congo libre et souverain, NDC/Cheka and LRA. Joint plans with FARDC were
prepared in anticipation of military operations against FDLR, should the armed
group fail to disarm by the 2 January 2015 deadline.
33. During the reporting period, 472 early warning alerts were received by over
50 local protection committees in five provinces. The MONUSCO Force responded
in 13 per cent of the cases; 42 per cent of the alerts were conveyed to Congolese
security forces and 37 per cent to local civilian authorities. In the remaining 8 per
cent of cases, there was no action taken as the alerts were either false or received
after the incidents. In approximately 20 per cent of all the alerts received, violations
against civilians were halted, while the perpetrators were either arrested or deterred.
Safety and security of United Nations personnel within the context of operations
of MONUSCO
34. While country-wide MONUSCO operations against armed groups did not
result in any discernible increase in threats to United Nations personnel. In the Beni
area, the increasingly complex and volatile security situation had implications for
the safety and security of United Nations personnel. Attacks by ADF against the
civilian population stirred a strong anti-MONUSCO sentiment. Compounded by
political manipulation, the anti-MONUSCO sentiment led to a number of violent
demonstrations and attacks against the Mission on 22 and 29 October and on
11 November in the Beni area. Investigations are ongoing to ascertain the
circumstances surrounding the death of civilians during these violent
demonstrations. On 19 November, a MONUSCO convoy was amb ushed on the
Beni-Mavivi road by unidentified assailants. Also, on 8 December, a mob was
throwing stones in Oicha so that a MONUSCO helicopter on its way to evacuate
two Congolese children who had been critically injured in an attack by suspected
ADF elements was prevented from landing.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration/disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
35. As of 17 December, 144 members of Congolese armed groups and
60 members of foreign armed groups participated in the MONUSCO disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration programme. Of these,
124 were combatants, including 52 from FDLR, while 54 were children associated
with armed groups and 26 were dependants. A further 29 FDLR members, including
1 child associated with the armed group and 19 depend ants, were repatriated.
36. MONUSCO continued to provide logistic and political support to the FDLR
voluntary disarmament process, including through provision of special flight s, as
well as food, water, medicines and additional goods and services.

14-67937

7/15

S/2014/956

37. On 1 October, Human Rights Watch released a report denouncing the death of
over 100 demobilized combatants and their dependants from starvation and disease
in a pre-disarmament demobilization and reintegration camp established by the
Government in Kotakoli, Equateur Province. Minister Mende acknowledged deaths
at the camp but denied any negligence by the Government. MONUSCO offered to
provide food rations on an emergency basis. The Peacebuilding Fund also provided
$517,000 to fund emergency support under the third national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plan, especially with regard to the provision of
food and shelter. Discussions are ongoing with the Government regar ding the
closure of the Kotakoli pre-disarmament, demobilization and reintegration camp and
improvement of living conditions in other pre-disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration camps identified for the third national disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration plan.
38. Of the $85 million budgeted for the third national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plan, the Government pledged $10 million, while
MONUSCO indicated its readiness to contribute $8 million for the reinsertion
phase. The World Bank and other donors pledged $35 million for the reintegration
phase. The Government indicated that it could commit only the first tranche of
$2.4 million of the initially pledged amount. However, to date there has been no
disbursement of funds from the Government, which is jeopardizing the
disbursement of other donors’ contributions.
Support for the disposal of explosive ordnance
39. During the reporting period, the United Nations Mine Action Service
conducted clearance activities in support of the protection of civilians in Masisi,
Nyiragongo and Rutshuru territories in North Kivu, by destroying 152 items of
explosive remnants of war and 140 rounds of small arms ammunition. In support of
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme, the United Nations
Mine Action Service also destroyed 7 explosive remnants of war, 602 weapons and
10,725 rounds of small arms ammunition. Furthermore, the United Nations Mine
Action Service continued to support the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration programme by strengthening national capacities in
weapons and ammunition management and physical security and stockpile
management. As requested by MONUSCO, the United Nations Mine Action Service
responded to three explosive ordnance disposal tasks and conducted bulk
demolitions of 145,717 obsolete ordnance stocks from some troop -contributing
countries.
Monitoring the implementation of the arms embargo
40. FARDC, supported by MONUSCO, did not discover any new M23 -associated
arms caches during the reporting period. However, 35 automatic weapons and
1,590 rounds of 7.62 millimetre ammunition were recovered following the surrender
of some elements of Mayi-Mayi Raia Mutomboki in South Kivu and the Forces de
résistance patriotiques en Ituri in Ituri district. Additionally, North Kivu provincial
authorities launched a series of arms control initiatives, including the Masisi sans
armes initiative, to address the question of illegal weapons and criminal networks in
Masisi territory and Goma. This initiative resulted in the discovery of an arms cache
of Mayi-Mayi Kifuafua on 11 December; FARDC reported 46 automatic weapons,
1 precision-guided munition and 1 60-millimetre mortar. The majority of weapons

8/15

14-67937

S/2014/956

used by armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo were reportedly
acquired from within the country, and from weapons trafficking across the border
from Burundi, the United Republic of Tanzania and Uganda. Information related to
the identification of arms and ammunition recovered was systematically shared with
the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo for traceability
purposes. Furthermore, from 20 to 30 October, the United Nations Mine Action
Service trained 12 members of FARDC in arms cache search techniques.
Regional developments
41. The FDLR disarmament process remained stalled. Within the context of the
midterm review of the FDLR disarmament process, on 5 October, in Lusamambo,
North Kivu, a joint delegation comprising representatives of the African Union, the
Government, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, MONUSCO,
the Office of the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and
the Southern African Development Community (SADC) met the Vice President of
the Forces démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda, Victor Byiringiro. The
delegation urged the Forces démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda to comply
with the timeline for complete and unconditional disarmament set by the 2 July joint
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region-SADC ministerial meeting or face
military action. Victor Byiringiro reiterated that further progress on the disarmament
of the Forces démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda would be contingent on
political dialogue with Rwanda.
42. On 8 October, in Geneva, the team of Special Envoys, including my Special
Representative and my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region met with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Antonio Guterres, to explore
ways to resolve the issue of Rwandan Hutu refugees in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and regional and international efforts to address the threat posed by
the Forces démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda.
43. A joint International Conference on the Great Lakes Region-SADC ministerial
meeting took place on 20 October in Luanda, Angola. The final communiqué
recognized the lack of progress in the Forces démocratiques pour la libération du
Rwanda disarmament process, reiterated that military action would take place if the
Forces démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda did not comply with the six-month
timeline and called on the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and MONUSCO to create enabling conditions for the disarmament process. Also, on
1 December, in Addis Ababa, a meeting of the guarantors of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework noted with disappointment the slow pace in the
disarmament of the Forces démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda and stressed
that the 2 January 2015 deadline was binding and non-negotiable.
44. On 3 November, Victor Byiringiro, sent a letter to President Kabila, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, MONUSCO and SADC in which
he reaffirmed the willingness of FDLR to continue its disarmament process and
called for a joint Government-SADC-MONUSCO-FDLR team to conduct an
assessment visit to the transit camp in Kisangani. On 15 November, representatives
of the Government, the FDLR, the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, MONUSCO and SADC jointly assessed conditions in the transit camp in
Kisangani, in Orientale Province, and unanimously concluded that they were
generally acceptable. Between 27 November and 12 December, 820 FDLR

14-67937

9/15

S/2014/956

elements, including 190 ex-combatants were transferred on a voluntary basis from
the assembly camps in Kanyabayonga, North Kivu and in Walungu, South Kivu to
the Kisangani transit camp. One ex-combatant and one dependant returned
voluntarily, as part of the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration programme, to Rwanda instead of moving to Kisangani.
45. During the reporting period, the Coordinator of the National Oversight
Mechanism initiated an exchange of letters with the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and the ex-M23 regarding the implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations. The exchange covered modalities for the repatriation of eligible
ex-M23 elements from Rwanda and Uganda; clarification about the status of those
benefiting from the amnesty law; and arrangements for meetings to review progress
on the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations.
46. On 1 October, ex-M23 representatives met with the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and the Government of Uganda to discuss, inter alia, the
implementation of the amnesty law and the continued presence of ex -M23 elements
in Uganda. Given the continued undefined status of these elements on its territory,
Uganda gave a three-month deadline to complete their repatriation, failing which
they could apply for refugee status.
47. On 7 November, in Kinshasa, the National Oversight Mechanism convened the
second evaluation meeting to review implementation of the Nairobi Declarations to
discuss progress on its road map, including the granting of amnesty to 559 ex-M23
elements, and its intention to conclude the repatriation of ex-M23 elements from
Rwanda and Uganda by the end of December. René Abandi, the Coordinator of the
ex-M23, declined to participate in spite of security assurances provided by the
Government and MONUSCO. This was his second such refusal to take part in
evaluation meetings convened by the Government. On the same date, in Kampala,
Uganda, Bertrand Bisimwa, leader of the ex-M23, warned of the possibility of
renewed conflict owing to the armed group’s frustration at the slow progress in the
implementation of the Nairobi Declarations.
48. From 5 to 10 December, a Government delegation travelled to Kampala to
develop a plan of action with Uganda authorities for the repatriation of ex-M23
combatants, armaments and vehicles. The two Governments undertook visits and
inspections in Kampala, Bihanga and Kisoro. On 16 December, a first group of
120 former M23 elements were repatriated from Uganda to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Some 1,000 ex-M23 elements reportedly refused to be
repatriated on 16 December and fled their cantonment camp in Bihanga, from where
they reportedly moved towards Rwamwanja refugee camp.
49. In other developments, the Democratic Republic of the Congo conclu ded
bilateral agreements with some countries in the region with a view to strengthening
economic integration and regional relations. Following a high -level meeting held on
19 September between President Kabila and President Denis Sassou -Nguesso of the
Republic of the Congo, a joint commission decided on 25 September to cancel the
requirement for an entry visa for Congolese citizens trave lling to the Republic of the
Congo and vice versa. The entry visa requirement was introduced in the aftermath of
expulsions of Congolese citizens from Brazzaville, Republic of the Congo, earlier
this year. On 22 October, in Kinshasa, the Parliament passed the bill ratifying the
treaty signed by the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Africa on the
building of the Grand Inga dam.

10/15

14-67937

S/2014/956

III. Progress on implementation of national commitments under
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
Security sector reform
50. In the absence of progress towards the develop ment by the Government of a
comprehensive national security sector reform strategy, the reorganization of the
leadership structure of FARDC in October and of the Presidential Guard on
16 November was welcomed as a positive step that could facilitate the improvement
of the management and performance of the defence sector. MONUSCO pursued
consultations with the Government and key partners to develop a concrete proposal
to support the establishment of an accountable and efficient rapid reaction force, as
an entry point for broader defence sector reform.
51. The reform of the police progressed at a slow pace, owing mainly to the lack
of allocation of adequate financial resources by the Government. Nevertheless,
MONUSCO continued coordination efforts in support o f police reform. With the
support of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), MONUSCO
conducted two training programmes for the Congolese National Police during the
reporting period. The Mission trained 60 judicial police officers in Ituri district,
North Kivu and South Kivu on how to address sexual and gender-based violence
and also provided training on community policing to 245 Congolese National Police
officers in Bunia and Kisangani, in Orientale Province.
Consolidation of State authority and stabilization
52. In early October, the Minister of Planning and the Governors of North Kivu,
Orientale Province and South Kivu validated the choice of 13 priority zones for
intervention within the framework of the revised International Security and
Stabilization Support Strategy. To articulate a common government-international
partners’ vision and provide a programmatic framework for the Support Strategy,
conflict analyses and needs assessments were carried out in the priority zones. In
November, national and provincial representatives of the Government Strategy for
the Reconstruction of Areas Emerging from Conflict, with the support of
MONUSCO and the United Nations country team, initiated the development of
provincial stabilization strategies and action plans for North Kivu, Orientale
Province and South Kivu. On 1 December, the Governor of South Kivu committed
to ensuring payment of salaries for adequate levels of staffing to ensure service
delivery to the population in the areas of implementation of t he projects. Also on
1 December, the Government, supported by the United Nations, including the
Peacebuilding Fund, launched two Support Strategy projects in Kalehe, South Kivu
and Mambasa, Orientale Province. These projects address conflict transformation,
restoration of State authority and economic recovery.
53. MONUSCO established three additional islands of stability in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, bringing the total to nine islands of stability
across Katanga, North Kivu, Orientale Province and South Kivu. In these areas, the
Mission is engaging with conflict-affected populations and government officials
responsible for security, justice and civil administration to identify initiatives that
will support the restoration of State authority. As of 17 December, 24 quick-impact
projects amounting to $1.1 million were approved, with a further 25 projects

14-67937

11/15

S/2014/956

amounting to $1.4 million, under development, to support the islands of stability.
Efforts are under way to link these initiatives to International Security and
Stabilization Support Strategy projects.
Justice and corrections institutions
54. MONUSCO prosecution support cells assisted military justice authorities in
conducting investigations and convening mobile courts in at least 12 remote
locations. Cases involved members of FARDC, the Congolese National Police and
armed groups, alleged to have perpetrated war crimes and other serious crimes,
including murder and rape. During the reporting period, the prosecution support
cells assisted in five investigative missions and supported five mobile court hearings
concerning 88 cases, in which 30 decisions have been handed down, with
20 convictions, 4 acquittals and 6 cases referred back for further investigation.
55. Despite MONUSCO support to the management of the prison system,
including the rehabilitation of prisons, the separation of men and women in prisons,
prison security and the training of prison staff, the conditions in prisons across the
country remained deplorable because of the lack of a strong commitment and
allocation of adequate resources for the prison sector by the Government.
Nevertheless, MONUSCO continued to advocate with the Government for greater
national ownership of the prison sector and initiated an agreement with the national
authorities to establish a steering committee to review the prison reform plan,
develop a national strategy on justice and corrections, a road map for the corrections
sector, and a training curriculum for prison officers by June 2015. The lack of a
national vision and strategy in the areas of justice and corrections, including the
delay in the endorsement of projects under the joint justice support programme,
made it difficult to sustain the impact of the support provided by MONUSCO in
these areas.
Decentralization
56. On 26 September, in Kinshasa, the Government submitted to the National
Assembly the draft law establishing the Caisse nationale de péréquation, which
seeks to redistribute revenues and investments among all the provinces. The
constitutional provision envisaging that the provinces will receive 40 per cent of the
resources generated by them, has yet to be fully implemented. On 1 October, in
Katanga, the President of the Provincial Assembly urged the Government to transfer
to the provincial government 40 per cent of the estimated $830 million in taxes and
related revenues collected from the province during the first half of the year.
Structural reforms of Government institutions, including financial reforms
57. Efforts to move forward on structural reforms stalled, owing partly to delays in
forming the Government of “national cohesion”. The loan programme of IMF
amounting to $532 million and technical assistance on structural reforms remained
suspended owing to the lack of transparency in the mining sector. There was some
progress in the transformation of the Supreme Court of Justice into three separate
courts (Constitutional Court, Conseil d’Etat and Cour de Cassation) as provided for
by article 223 of the Constitution, with the appointment by President Kabila on
19 November of the high magistrates of the Office of the Prosecutor General of the
Constitutional Court.

12/15

14-67937

S/2014/956

Extraction and trade of natural resources
58. From 3 to 5 November, in Kinshasa, the 8th Forum on Responsible Supply
Chain of Minerals was held, with the participation of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD), MONUSCO and the United Nations Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Forum sought to support and coordinate
implementation of OECD Guidelines on Due Diligence and the United States DoddFrank Act to ensure that minerals extracted and exported from conflict -affected
zones are certified as conflict-free. The Mission continued to provide logistic and
security support to the joint validation team, which cleared 30 new mining sites as
conflict-free since October. On 5 December, the Minister of Justice, supported by
MONUSCO, signed a memorandum of understanding with a second company to
accelerate the validation of mining sites.

IV. Mission reconfiguration and transfer of responsibilities
59. MONUSCO and the United Nations country team conducted an in -depth
analysis of the status of the transfer of responsibilities. The assessment confirmed
that in most cases the assumption of additional responsibilities by the United
Nations country team was hampered by the lack of adequate funding.
Recommendations included further defining respective roles in relation to: justice
and corrections reform and support to rule of law institutional capacity-building;
children affected by armed conflict; coordinating the national strategy on sexual and
gender-based violence; the extraction and trade of natural resources; and electoral
assistance.
60. MONUSCO and the United Nations country team agreed to develop a joint
strategic plan based on a revised United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF) for 2013-2017. The revised UNDAF, incorporating
MONUSCO priorities, will be developed in cooperation with Government
counterparts and aligned with relevant Government plans. The aim is to ensure
adequate planning and resource mobilization for the repositioning of the United
Nations integrated presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the next
three years as part of a wider exit strategy.

V. Observations
61. I welcome the appointment of the long-awaited new Government and the
inclusion of some members of the political opposition. I call on the Government to
assume its protection of civilians and governance responsibilities and implement the
national commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, while
accelerating structural reforms. I urge the authorities to accelerate the adoption of a
budget for the electoral process and to publish a global electoral calendar. I also call
on the national authorities to address uncertainties surrounding the elections, which
risk undermining the confidence of national and international stakeholders in the
country’s political trajectory and its future stability.
62. I am concerned about reports of human rights violations committed against
members of the political opposition and some individuals who are critical of the

14-67937

13/15

S/2014/956

Congolese authorities. Freedom of speech and the right of ass ociation and peaceful
assembly are essential to a vibrant political life and to the democratic process. I
reiterate my condemnation of the Government’s decision to expel the Director of the
United Nations Joint Human Rights Office following the publication of the report on
human rights violations committed by agents of the Congolese National Police
during “Operation Likofi”. Respect for human rights and the fight against impunity
are absolutely essential for long-term peace and stability. MONUSCO and the
United Nations Joint Human Rights Office will continue to implement the Security
Council mandate to promote human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
63. Although FARDC has made important gains, at a heavy cost, in their
operations against ADF since January, I am appalled by the resurgence of horrific
attacks by ADF and affiliated elements, which have resulted in the deaths of
hundreds of defenceless civilians. I support the increasing cooperation between
FARDC and the MONUSCO Force. A more mobile, flexible and robust posture by
MONUSCO should further increase the response to such asymmetric attacks. These
incidents, while they may reflect a change in tactics by an armed group under
pressure, have complex roots, connected to local political rivalri es and, notably, to
illegal economic activities. It is critical that the Government address the complicity
between the extensive networks behind these brutal attacks and some within the
ranks of the country’s own security forces.
64. The ongoing conflicts not just in Beni but throughout the East have security,
economic and political dimensions that cannot be addressed through military action
alone. To break the illicit networks that perpetuate conflict, it is essential that all
stakeholders — national, regional and international — are genuinely committed to
shifting from the mindset of a war economy to peacetime economic activities.
Private investment is critical to long-term stability in the eastern part of Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, while the illicit economy dominates, real gains in
livelihoods and standards of living will remain elusive.
65. I call on the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its neighbours to work
closely, including through bilateral agreements, International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region protocols and the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, to
strengthen border security and arrest and prosecute those involved in cross -border
trafficking of Congolese natural resources. I further call on regional and
international partners to tighten the regulations by which economic actors in their
countries engage in illicit exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
66. The Mission’s islands of stability initiatives in recently liberated areas, such as
Rutshuru in North Kivu, and in areas where they can reduce community violence or
encourage disarmament, as in Sange and Shabunda in South Kivu, illustrate how
peacekeepers can contribute to early stabilization by fostering the restoration of
State authority and community dialogue. The United Nations family should advance
broader, long-term stabilization objectives under the UNDAF, and renew efforts to
work with the Government and partners under the Government Strategy for the
Reconstruction of Areas Emerging from Conflict framework.
67. Despite impressive gains in stabilizing some areas, I remain increasingly
concerned about the humanitarian situation, particularly in Katanga Province. It is
imperative that the Mayi-Mayi Kata-Katanga rebellion and the Twa-Luaba conflict

14/15

14-67937

S/2014/956

and the massive internal displacement of the population are addressed, while
enhancing efforts to stabilize Northern Katanga.
68. I fully support the position of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and SADC on the FDLR disarmament process. Military action is needed in
the event of non-compliance by the time the six-month deadline expires on
2 January 2015. I urge the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the subregion to stand firm by their decisio n and to take decisive action should
FDLR fail to complete their disarmament by 2 January. While there cannot be a
purely military solution to the FDLR problem, it has now become, through the
group’s own fault, inevitable.
69. I welcome the steps taken by the Government of the Democratic Republic of
Congo and the Government of Uganda to expedite the repatriation of former M23
elements from Uganda. I am concerned about the repeated refusal of the M23
Coordinator to engage with the Government of the Democrati c Republic of the
Congo on the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations. The repatriation of M23
elements is a critical element of the commitments outlined in the Nairobi
Declarations. Its implementation is vital to ending a vicious cycle of violence in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. I encourage the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, working closely with the
Government of Rwanda and the Government of Uganda to complete the voluntary
repatriation of all former M23 elements and to ensure that they will be treated in
line with international obligations, while moving forward on other outstanding
commitments under the Nairobi Declarations.
70. The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former combatants is a
vital part of neutralizing armed groups. I am concerned at delays in implementing
the third national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plan and poor
treatment in assembly sites risks discouraging former fighters to lay down their
arms and join the process. Positive developments, such as the apparent willingness
of Forces de résistance patriotiques en Ituri to surrender, must be fully exploited and
must not be put at risk by a lack of funds. It is essential that committed funds,
especially from the Government, be made immediately available and that
sensitization and reinsertion activities commence without undue delay.
71. I wish to express my sincere appreciation for my Special Representative ,
Martin Kobler, and the men and women of MONUSCO and the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo who
operate in a challenging and often volatile environment. I also thank troop - and
police-contributing countries, bilateral partners, regional and international
organizations, and my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, Said Djinnit, and
the team of Special Envoys for their support.

14-67937

15/15
