S/PV.8294

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8294

th meeting
Tuesday, 26 June 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Safronkov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Djédjé
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2018/539)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-19776 (E)
*1819776*

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2018/539)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Germany, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Pakistan, Turkey
and Uzbekistan to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan; Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime; and Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-SecretaryGeneral, United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Gerton
Van Den Akker, representative of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/539, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yamamoto.
Mr. Yamamoto: Afghanistan is experiencing a
politically dynamic period. Ten days ago, we witnessed
an extraordinary series of events in Afghanistan that
demonstrated both the possibilities for peace and the
enduring structural obstacles. On 7 June, President
Ghani declared a unilateral ceasefire for the period
12-19 June to commemorate the Eid festivities that
conclude the month of Ramadan. Two days later,
the Taliban announced its own unilateral ceasefire,
covering 15-17 June. During these overlapping three
2/38

26/06/2018

days, both sides honoured their respective ceasefires
for the first time in the past 17 years of conflict. Many
Afghans reacted with jubilation. Local Government
authorities invited members of the Taliban to lay down
their arms and enter cities to visit their families; some
Afghan soldiers visited Taliban-controlled areas. Social
media was inundated with photos of Taliban fighters
embracing Afghan security forces.
President Ghani then proposed to extend the
ceasefire — a proposal endorsed by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
many members of the international community. The
Taliban, unfortunately, recommitted themselves to
battle. I regret deeply that the Taliban did not take up
the opportunity to cease fighting and reduce violence.
Their decision to fight will only increase the suffering
of civilians.
It is nonetheless worth taking stock of how much
has changed this year alone on the question of peace in
Afghanistan. The National Unity Government’s offer
of peace talks without preconditions, made during the
Kabul Process conference on 28 February, created a
new reality. Even though the Taliban did not formally
respond to the offer, a number of other developments
reinforced it. First, we saw an unprecedented grassroots movement. Beginning in March, ordinary Afghan
people began setting up tents in around 20 of the 34
provinces, where they protested for peace. In early June,
a group of 2,000 religious scholars met in Kabul. They
pronounced suicide bombings to be against the teaching
of Islam and called for a ceasefire and for peace talks
to begin. At the beginning of Ramadan, one of the first
groups to set up a peace tent began a 500-kilometre
march from Helmand to Kabul, stopping along the way
to raise support for their call for a ceasefire and talks
and reaching Kabul last week. Their demand to end the
conflict is addressed to every party to the conflict. The
Afghan people’s genuine demand for peace, coming
from the bottom of their hearts, must not be ignored.
We should ask ourselves two questions. What have
we learned from these events for peace and how do we
respond? What we have learned is that both the Afghan
Government and the Taliban have command and control
over their troops. Afghans, including Taliban fighters,
clearly want peace. It is also clear that President Ghani
is taking courageous steps to seek peace through talks.
How do we respond? In returning to the battlefield,
the Taliban insist that its goal is to end the presence
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

of foreign forces in Afghanistan. Therefore, it shuns
direct talks with the Afghan Government. However,
any future political settlement in Afghanistan must take
into account the concerns of all Afghans. The Afghans
must talk among themselves to end the conflict and to
decide on the future. That clearly requires the Taliban
to have direct talks with the Afghan Government.
We believe that the issue of international forces will
inevitably be taken up in the comprehensive context of
peace talks, which will determine the future political
order for all Afghans. I should like to note here that
regional efforts to counter terrorism have been receiving
more attention, with some important international
conferences organized by Tajikistan and the Office of
Counter-Terrorism.
Preparations are now under way in earnest for
parliamentary elections in October and presidential
elections planned for spring of next year. Since
mid-April, over 7 million people have registered to
vote. This is the first time since 2003 that Afghanistan
is conducting a complete registration of voters for both
parliamentary and presidential elections. The goal is a
single, national voter registry that can produce accurate
lists based on polling stations. When achieved, it is
expected to significantly reduce fraud.

S/PV. 8294

Political parties and political leaders need to be
fully aware that they also carry a large part of the
responsibility for credible elections. Rather than simply
criticizing the process, they must be actively engaged
to make elections truly Afghan-owned.
We welcome the commitment of civil society to
monitor voting, counting, tabulating, and transmission
of results at every polling station. The international
community must support their monitoring activities. The
United Nations has 23 international experts currently
working with the Independent Election Commission
and the Electoral Complaints Commission, as well as
their respective secretariats, and additional technical
advisers are being recruited. UNAMA will do all it
can alongside the international community to assist
Afghan efforts to bring about transparent, inclusive and
credible Afghan-owned elections.

The registration of over 7 million voters is a
positive achievement under difficult circumstances,
particularly insecurity. On closer scrutiny, however,
there remains cause for concern. First, in six provinces,
less than 35 per cent of the estimated eligible voters
were registered. Secondly, registration within provinces
is uneven, with certain areas being prevented from
registering for logistical or security reasons. Given
Afghanistan’s multi-ethnic composition, the exclusion
of those communities could lead to the election results
being contested. Such disparities have also affected the
nomination of candidates.

The ministerial conference on Afghanistan in
Geneva, hosted by the United Nations and co-chaired
by the Government of Afghanistan, will be held on
28 November. The conference comes at the mid-point
of the transformation decade during which the country
transitions from dependence on the international
community to self-reliance. The conference will focus
on three areas. The first is the extent to which the country
is moving towards self-reliance and the effectiveness of
aid. The second area is the remaining challenges, for
example insecurity and job creation. Clearly, a safer
country where the private sector can grow faster is
key to creating employment. Finally, it will address
the link between short-term humanitarian action and
development cooperation. The link between peace
and security, humanitarian action and development is
a key theme for the United Nations, and the Geneva
ministerial conference offers an opportunity to focus
on that nexus.

This time, elections in Afghanistan are being
conducted as a fully Afghan-led and-owned process.
All Afghans share responsibility for transparent
and inclusive elections. The Independent Election
Commission has the primary responsibility. All
Commissioners must become fully aware of the
lofty responsibilities they shoulder for the future of
Afghanistan — to strengthen the foundation of the
democratic political process and to demonstrate that
Afghanistan is determined and ready to take on the
challenges to bring about an independent, sovereign
State that can stand on its own feet.

In Geneva, we expect the Afghan side to report on
its achievements in the areas of development, poverty
reduction and reforms, and to outline concrete plans to
address remaining challenges. In response, I count on
Afghanistan’s development partners to actively support
the people and institutions of Afghanistan as they
move the country forward. We are encouraged to see
that the Afghan Government is already looking beyond
the transformation decade, for example by working to
increase regional connectivity and trade. Much has
been achieved, but much remains to be done in the
domains of peace, security and development. Geneva

18-197763/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

affords us all this year’s best chance to set in stone the
road to a safer and better future.
Much of Afghanistan, in particular the north and
the west, have been struck by drought more severe
than anything experienced in almost a decade. Wheat
production in 2017 was reported to be 57 per cent below
the five-year average. The 2018 harvest is forecast to
be even lower. The humanitarian response plan has
been revised by the amount of $117 million up to the
still modest total of $547 million in order to enable the
United Nations to provide relief to affected populations
and to complement the work of the Government to
assist people in need.
While our attention has been focused on the larger
political processes, it is important that we not lose sight
of the critical issue of the protection of women’s rights.
UNAMA recently issued a report on the use of mediation
to resolve criminal cases of violence against women. I
was greatly disturbed by the findings. The report found
that a majority of those cases were resolved through
mediation instead of being tried in accordance with
criminal laws. In many cases, such traditional means of
resolution compounded the original violence. Women
were left to suffer. Women who have been subjected
to criminal violence must be able to assert their rights
according to the law.
The key political events of peace and the
elections are far from ensured. However, we are
seeing unprecedented opportunities to make progress
in seeking peace and in consolidating the political
foundation for the future. Afghanistan’s evolving
development needs and the strategies to address them
are being re-evaluated as part of the preparations for the
Geneva conference. In other words, the coming months
will present critical opportunities for the international
community to seriously review and adjust the way in
which it supports and assists Afghanistan in its efforts
to bring about peace, democracy and self-reliance.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Yamamoto for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
successful presidency of the Security Council and on
its convening of this very timely consideration of the
issue of Afghanistan today in the Security Council. I
also thank you for inviting me to this meeting.
4/38

26/06/2018

(spoke in English)
When I last addressed the Security Council on
the counter-narcotics challenges and responses in
Afghanistan in December 2017 (see S/PV.8147), I
highlighted the urgent need to step up international
action. In half an hour, I will join the President of the
General Assembly to launch the World Drug Report
2018, which is the flagship publication of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). The
findings of the report indicate that last year, the total
global opium production increased by 65 per cent to
the amount of 10,500 tons. That is the highest number
recorded by UNODC since we started monitoring. Most
of that opium originates in Afghanistan, where, as the
Security Council is well aware, opium poppy cultivation
and production have reached unprecedented levels.
That situation clearly has a high destabilizing
potential for the country, the wider region and the
international community. Last month, UNODC
released a socioeconomic study that complements the
annual Afghanistan Opium Survey. The study clearly
underlines the multiple challenges to sustainable
development, peace and security posed by opium.
The linkages with terrorism and other forms of crime
have also been widely acknowledged, including by the
Council. Those problems require long-term engagement
and solutions in order to achieve results.
Today, I am pleased to note that since December,
we have seen some positive momentum with efforts
to respond to that global threat. Nevertheless, many
formidable challenges remain. Once again, I would like
to highlight the importance of shared responsibility
and international cooperation in addressing the many
security, safety, development and health challenges
posed by the situation. Unfortunately, the focus of the
international community has shifted away from the
priority of counter-narcotics in recent years. We cannot
afford such inattention. Moreover, sustained resources
are needed to address the situation.
In that context, UNODC has pursued efforts to
advocate for renewed awareness and support and to
strengthen regional and interregional dialogue and
responses to opium trafficking. UNODC and the
Afghan Ministry of Counter-Narcotics have worked
together to reinvigorate the Afghan commitment
to the issue, including in the broader context of the
Kabul peacebuilding process. That includes UNODC
support to the interministerial working group, led by
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics, for the development
of a counter-narcotics strategy with a strong regional
cooperation component.
Furthermore, in close coordination with the
Government of Afghanistan, UNODC has developed
strategic actions to respond to the global threats of
opiates in order to step up regional and interregional
responses to counter the increases in opium cultivation
and production and to address the related threats of
crime, terrorism and corruption. Our efforts focus
on four identified priorities: first, the need for a
revitalized and strong Afghan lead in counter-narcotics
action; secondly, the importance of comprehensive
and balanced approaches, from the health sector
to law enforcement, under the principle of shared
responsibility and in line with the recommendations
of the seventeenth special session of the General
Assembly to consider the question of international
cooperation against illicit production, supply, demand,
trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances; thirdly, the need to target the
nexus between drugs, crime and terrorism as a spoiler
of the peace process; and, fourthly, the need to support
Member States, especially in Central and West Asia, in
strengthening mechanisms that contribute to preventing
conflict and destabilization related to the opiate threat
and the action of international terrorist groups based
in the region and beyond. The strategy seeks to further
enhance effective interagency coordination with the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia.
For maximum effectiveness and efficiency, the
strategy also aims to plug into existing coordination
and governance mechanisms, such as the Paris Pact
Initiative, the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process on
Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure
and Stable Afghanistan, the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, the Regional
Anti-Terrorism Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, and the Afghan Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board, among many others.
The recent Paris Pact Policy Consultative Group
Meeting in Vienna noted the following strategic and
policy developments. UNODC remains fully engaged
in supporting Afghanistan and the neighbouring
countries in pursuing comprehensive counter-narcotics
action. That includes alternative development, regional
and interregional cooperation to deal with the illicit

S/PV. 8294

trafficking of drugs and precursors, as well as to
intercept the financial flows, law enforcement capacitybuilding, and the scaling up of drug-use prevention and
treatment services.
Looking ahead, the Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan, to be held in Geneva in November,
represents an opportunity to highlight the importance
of counter-narcotics responses. I hope that we can
count on the assistance of the Security Council to draw
attention to the many threats to Afghanistan, the wider
region and beyond posed by opiates and to the need for
urgent and determined international action.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
Mr. Voronkov: I would like to begin by thanking
the Russian presidency of the Security Council and the
members of the Council for this opportunity to speak
about the challenges facing Afghanistan when it comes
to preventing and countering terrorism.
Last month, when I briefed the Security Council
on the outcomes of my mission to Iraq, together with
Assistant Secretary-General Ms. Michèle Coninsx (see
S/PV.8271), I started by expressing our solidarity with
the victims of multiple terrorist attacks in many regions
of the world, including in Afghanistan.
Unfortunately, the deadly violence continues
across Afghanistan. According to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), there
were 5,675 security incidents between 15 February and
15 May. The use of improvised explosive devices caused
1,018 civilian casualties — 311 people were killed and
707 injured. Two heinous and cowardly terrorist attacks
took place in Nangarhar on 16 and 17 June, which left
at least 43 people dead and 45 injured, and there was a
suicide bombing in Kabul on 11 June, which claimed
lives of 17 people and injured at least 40. I would like to
express my sincere condolences to the Government of
Afghanistan. Such attacks target not only Government
officials, Afghan police and security forces, but also
civilians, causing the deaths of innocent people and
instilling fear throughout the country.
Secretary-General António Guterres has made
countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism
the highest priorities on his agenda. In just two days,
we will host in New York the first ever High-Level
Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of

18-197765/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

Member States. We hope the Conference will provide
an opportunity for frank and candid discussions among
counter-terrorism practitioners and boost international
counter-terrorism cooperation. It is very important that
civil society take part in the meeting. The international
community has a solid foundation on which to build.
The international legal framework, including counterterrorism conventions and protocols, relevant Security
Council resolutions and the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism strategy, which Member States are
currently reviewing for the sixth time, all provide that
foundation. I hope that final discussions on the review
process will be successful and that we can approve the
outcome document.
Nonetheless, having the framework is not enough.
A stronger focus on implementation is needed.
Afghanistan genuinely needs and continues to request
legal technical assistance and capacity-building
projects to strengthen its national criminal justice
framework to combat terrorism. I am grateful for the
information provided in that regard by the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED). Acting
on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Executive Directorate visited Afghanistan in early
2017 to monitor its implementation of resolutions 1373
(2001), 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014) and identify its
related technical assistance needs.

26/06/2018

Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia, located in Ashgabat, launched the third phase of
the Joint Plan of Action for the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
entitled “Towards a Comprehensive Implementation
of United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
in Central Asia”. The new initiative sheds light on the
emerging challenges faced by the region, including
the spillover of the conflict from Afghanistan. I am
delighted that Afghanistan has actively collaborated
with the United Nations both on the development and
the implementation of the Plan.
I hope that Afghan counterparts will participate
in the upcoming United Nations training sessions on
border security, countering the use of the Internet for
propaganda and recruitment purposes by terrorists
and tackling drug trafficking as a means to finance
terrorism, organized under the umbrella of the Joint
Plan of Action. It is clear that terrorism has a very real
and direct impact on the enjoyment of human rights.
Counter-terrorism efforts should be based on respect
for human rights and the rule of law. The Office of
Counter-Terrorism stands ready to provide capacitybuilding in that regard.

In October 2017, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
approved the mission report, which identifies 24
priority areas where Afghanistan would benefit from
receiving technical assistance, including with regard
to legal matters, international cooperation, countering
the financing of terrorism, law enforcement and border
security and countering radicalization and incitement
to commit terrorist acts. To support Afghanistan’s
implementation
efforts,
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee held an informal meeting on 28 November
2017 to discuss the challenges, focusing in particular on
the 24 priority needs. On behalf of the Office of CounterTerrorism, I participated in the meeting, together with
the Permanent Mission of Afghanistan, a representative
of Afghanistan’s National Security Council, UNAMA,
other relevant entities and INTERPOL.

Allow me to express my strong support for all
Afghan victims and survivors of terrorism and praise
the resilience of the Afghan people. The leadership of
Afghanistan helped to establish the International Day of
Remembrance and Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism
on 21 August through General Assembly resolution
72/165. The Office of Counter-Terrorism has recently
launched a Victims of Terrorism programme that will
demonstrate solidarity with victims, raise awareness
on their needs and work towards the fulfilment of their
rights through practical activities, such as building the
capacity of victims to put forward counter-narratives to
those of violent extremists; strengthening mechanisms
to provide practical resources to victims, through the
United Nations Victims of Terrorism Support Portal;
and building the capacity of victims associations and
Member States to better support and assist the victims
of terrorism.

The Office of Counter-Terrorism has been working
in collaboration with the Government of Afghanistan
on how it can best support Afghanistan’s needs in the
areas of countering terrorism and preventing violent
extremism, both at national and regional levels, based
on the CTED’s priority recommendations. In May, the

The Office of Counter-Terrorism will continue
working closely with Afghanistan and other Member
States to support the victims of terrorism, including by
producing a documentary on Afghanistan in our Victims
of Terrorism documentary series project, implemented
by the Office, in collaboration with the Department

6/38

18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

of Public Information. To further raise awareness on
the issue of victims of terrorism, I would like to invite
representatives to an event on the sidelines of the HighLevel Conference, entitled “Standing in Solidarity for
the Rights of Victims of Terrorism”, and organized by
the Office of Counter-Terrorism, which will be held
today in conference room 1 at 6:15 p.m.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Voronkov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mr.Saikal (Afghanistan): I would like to begin by
congratulating the Russian Federation on its presidency
of the Security Council for the month of June and for
organizing today’s debate. I would like to express our
appreciation for the delegation’s flexibility in adjusting
the date of the debate at our request. Also, we wish the
Russian Federation all the best for the World Cup.
I welcome the presence of my good friends, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tadamichi
Yamamoto,
Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir
Voronkov and Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Yury Fedotov. We thank
them for their briefings.
Since the last meeting of the Council on Afghanistan
(S/PV.8199), we experienced a mix of apprehension and
hope. The Taliban’s so-called spring offensive caused
still more deaths and injuries throughout the country,
but their attacks faced prompt and at times pre-emptive
action from our national security forces and hence
were futile in achieving their objectives. In contrast,
we reiterated our commitment to peace and to ending
violence, offering the Taliban a historic chance to prove
their willingness to choose a path away from conflict
and destruction, with a key role being played by our
Islamic clerics, peace marchers and international
partners. We also witnessed notable developments
in the regional context, particularly with respect to
Afghanistan-Pakistan cooperation.
Further, international support for securing and
safeguarding our country against violent attacks
remains high. We completed the fourth-year review of
our national security strategy at the NATO Ministerial
Visit, where the security situation in Afghanistan and
our reform measures were discussed. As a key outcome
of the gathering, NATO partners renewed commitments
to helping fund our security forces for the coming years

S/PV. 8294

with annual financial support. In this regard, we look
forward to new pledges of support at the July NATO
summit in Brussels and the potential contribution of
other international partners.
In line with our unremitting commitment to the
security of Afghanistan and the wider region, we have
moved to double the size of our commando forces and
strengthen our air force, which will enhance the overall
capability of our national defence and security forces.
Reforming our Defence and Interior Ministries also
remains a priority; measures are already under way to
bring a new generation of highly educated and capable
officer corps in our defence and security institutions to
leadership positions.
The Security Council is well aware of our firm
desire for an end to the senseless violence that has
been taking scores of innocent lives each and every
day in our country. Earlier this month, the leadership
of the National Unity Government took another
bold and historic step to achieve lasting peace by
announcing a unilateral ceasefire with the Taliban for
the end of Ramadan and the Eid al-Fitr holiday. Our
announcement responded to a call by a grand gathering
of around 2,500 Islamic clerics from 34 provinces who
met in Kabul and condemned acts of terror and violent
extremism as contrary to Islamic tenets and principles.
These developments complement our revitalized peace
strategy, which was unveiled at the second Kabul
Process Conference and reaffirmed in Tashkent later on.
The initiative once again demonstrated our
willingness to make a difficult and selfless decision
in favour of peace for our people. The ceasefire was
mutually observed during the three days of Eid. At
the expiration of this period, we extended it for an
additional 10 days. Regrettably, the Taliban failed
to reciprocate, and carried out terrorist attacks on a
number of occasions. We thank the Council and all its
members for joining our call to the Taliban to re-engage
in the ceasefire and take part in peace talks without
preconditions. We appreciate efforts from within our
region and beyond in helping to create an environment
conducive to a ceasefire during the religious holiday.
During the ceasefire, our security forces acted to
defend our territorial integrity and continued operations
against elements of foreign terrorist groups, including
Da’esh and Al-Qaida, inter alia. They played a major
role in the elimination of Mullah Fazlullah, head of the
Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan terrorist group, which was

18-197767/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

an important development that reaffirmed our longstanding policy of combating terrorist groups with
equal measure and focus and without any distinction.
The success of the peace process will depend on
a number of factors. We need to further strengthen
our unity, continue to keep our people informed and
involved at all stages of the process, ensure effective
management of future ceasefires and potential
negotiations, guarantee genuine implementation
of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace
and Solidarity, and work to further improve regional
and global consensus on the international effort in
Afghanistan. It is imperative that our zeal for peace
be based on political, social and diplomatic efforts,
coupled with security considerations whose only aim
should be to strengthen our unity and stability. We must
make sure that opportunities for peace are seized, not
lost or turned into new challenges. That will only be
possible by ensuring that the overall outcome conforms
to the wishes and expectations of all Afghans, across
the full spectrum of society.
To that end, ensuring transparency in all stages
of the peace process and preventing any degree of
misuse will remain important. It is also essential
that peace efforts serve to complement and reinforce
social cohesion and consensus on other national issues,
including the consolidation of democracy, in particular
through the forthcoming elections. Furthermore,
preserving fundamental human rights, particularly
of women, and ensuring justice for victims remain of
paramount importance.
With regard to regional cooperation, a number
of high-level reciprocal visits between Kabul and
Islamabad have led to a new framework in the form
of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace
and Solidarity. The seven agreed principles cover a
number of important areas, including counter-terrorism
cooperation and Pakistan’s support for an Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace process. Pakistan’s Chief
of Army Staff, General Qamar Javed Bajwa, visited
Kabul on 12 June, and important discussions were
held with Afghan leadership, focusing on the sincere,
effective and timely implementation of the Action Plan
through concrete measures. Last week, a senior Afghan
delegation visited Islamabad again in order to generate
positive momentum on the Action Plan for Peace
and Solidarity. The framework has the conceptual
ingredients to shift dynamics towards greater trust,
confidence and mutual cooperation, but an agreement
8/38

26/06/2018

is only as good as the will there is to implement it. And
we, for our part, cannot overstate our commitment to
its terms in letter and spirit and expect Pakistan to do
the same.
In the broader context, we have expanded dialogue
for greater cooperation with a number of countries,
including those in our immediate region, as well as
our Central Asian partners. The past three months
have also witnessed developments that we hope will
strengthen regional consensus in support of the joint
strategy of Afghanistan and its international partners.
To that end, we wish to reaffirm our overriding
commitment to ensuring Afghanistan’s centrality as a
platform for cordiality and win-win cooperation for all.
I repeat: to that end, we wish to reaffirm our overriding
commitment to ensuring Afghanistan’s centrality as a
platform for cordiality and win-win cooperation for all.
Earlier this month, President Ghani attended the
summit of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO) in Qingdao, China. Together with SCO member
and observer States, we reiterated our position that
expanding regional connectivity and overcoming
the nexus of transnational crime and terrorism
are fundamental for stability and prosperity in the
wider region. With the revitalized SCO-Afghanistan
Contact Group, we look forward to increased
cooperation with that important forum.
Four months from now, we are scheduled to hold
our parliamentary and district council elections.
Preparations are under way for these, along with
presidential elections next year. So far more
than 7.3 million citizens have registered to vote,
demonstrating their firm conviction that democracy,
pluralism, and the rule of law are the bedrock of our
stable future. Our hope and expectation is to ensure that
these elections are transparent, credible and inclusive,
in accordance with our people’s demands. We are
pleased that a number of young talented figures have
stepped up as candidates. To that end, reform measures
are under way in the Independent Election Commission
and the commission on electoral complaints. Moreover,
a list of new nominees for the position of Chief of the
secretariat of the Independent Election Commission
was presented to the leadership for consideration
and approval.
Ensuring security for the elections is another
important priority, and I am pleased to inform the
Council that comprehensive security arrangements
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

have been put in place for that purpose. As a final note
on this issue, we reiterate that the successful completion
of the electoral processes is of vital importance for our
unity and political stability.
The next main international event on the political
calendar concerns the Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan, which will be co-chaired by Afghanistan
and the United Nations in Geneva in November.
We look forward to presenting the highlights of the
progress made against key benchmarks from the
Brussels Conference, based on our national peace and
development framework. These include progress in
the areas of governance, public-sector reform, local
governance, economic growth, and promoting and
protecting human rights. We look to international
partners to recommit new support over the coming years
for our stability and prosperity. We look forward to highlevel participation from our regional and international
partners. The Conference comes at an important time,
when the level of regional and international consensus
on Afghanistan, particularly on the imperative of peace,
is at its highest point since 2001.
Looking ahead, we will remain focused on other
pressing priorities, such as the looming effects of the
drought, with the prospect of displacing half a million
people. The situation warrants immediate international
attention. I strongly call upon the international
community to fully fund Afghanistan’s Humanitarian
Response Plan covering 2018-2021. We thank the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and other United Nations agencies for their tireless
efforts on the ground and call on the broader donor
community to join the relief efforts.
By the same token, we will remain engaged in
implementing our national strategy to address the
lingering problem of narcotics in all its aspects. We
hope to do so with a greater degree of collaboration
with regional and international partners. This year,
we continued to work on multiple fronts to combat
this threat as a key priority in the work of the National
Unity Government. This included eradication, law
enforcement and alternative livelihood measures. In
the first six months alone, our counter-narcotics police
force carried out 1,688 operations nationwide, seizing
more than 112,500 tons of illicit drugs and destroying
a significant number of drug-processing laboratories.

S/PV. 8294

We hope to witness more tangible progress in
this effort, which will be possible only with greater
cooperation among regional and international actors,
including in curtailing driving factors such as the
trafficking of precursors and reducing demand. We
appreciate the support role of UNODC in this effort and
thank the Executive Director for leading the agencies’
work in Afghanistan.
We are looking to the future with a degree of
optimism in the light of recent developments concerning
our peace efforts, including the announcement of the
ceasefire and a possible shift in regional dynamics
in support of peace. Moreover, our progress towards
economic integration in the wider region, through
various mega economic and infrastructure projects,
continues unabated on a positive trajectory. Institutional
reforms will remain a key component of our strategy
for the promotion of the rule of law and our stability.
In the broader perspective, we believe that these gains
can best be solidified in an atmosphere in which all
partners work together, in unison and cooperation, for
a strategic objective that is vital to us all.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank the
three briefers for having shared their insightful analysis
on the latest developments in Afghanistan. We were
touched by the impressive pictures of the peace march
that Special Representative Yamamoto just showed us.
We align ourselves with the European Union
statement to be delivered later in the debate.
Last week my Minister for Foreign Affairs, Steph
Blok, visited Afghanistan. The message he consistently
heard from many Afghans was one of peace and
reconciliation. One Afghan youth wisely told him:
“Blood cannot be washed away with blood”.
These words coincided with powerful images of
hope at the end of Ramadan, showing Afghans uniting
for peace. I thank Mr. Yamamoto for sharing these
pictures as well. Afghans celebrated the first peaceful
Eid al-Fitr since 2001, and there were marches for peace
throughout the country.
The Afghan people clearly want peace, not tomorrow
but today. But their call for peace is still not heeded by
all. Brutal and heinous attacks continue. The Taliban
has not reciprocated the extension of the ceasefire by

18-197769/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

26/06/2018

the Government of Afghanistan. The Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province is still carrying
out deplorable acts of terror. Yet there remains space for
accelerated momentum and hope. That is what we as a
Council need to rally behind, using all of our leverage,
bilaterally and collectively.

preparations need to stay on track. The credibility of the
Independent Election Commission in this is key. Trust
in the Commission in large part will determine the trust
of the Afghan people in the results of the election, and
any issues arising in that regard need to be dealt with
transparently, swiftly and effectively.

In this context, I will touch on three points: first,
the peace process; secondly, the elections; and, thirdly,
the nexus between crime and terrorism.

Furthermore, women’s participation in the elections,
as voters and as candidates, is crucial. Political and
decision-making processes are incomplete without the
involvement of women. That was the message we heard
from the civil society briefers during the previous
debate on Afghanistan in March (see S/PV.8199). We
also heard it during the Council’s visit to Afghanistan
in January.

My first point concerns our collective responsibility
for an inclusive and Afghan-owned peace process,
which is the only way in which true stability in
Afghanistan can be realized. Our Minister for Foreign
Affairs reassured President Ghani last week of our
strong support for his courageous efforts in pushing the
peace process forward.
Neighbouring countries should also shoulder
their responsibility by actively contributing to the
momentum, and we very much welcome the progress
reported in this regard.
As the Council we continue to be united in our
messaging, as we were in our statement to the press
issued last week. Our unity is crucial.
The Taliban should accept the offer by the
Afghan Government to engage in direct peace talks
without any preconditions. All parties should respect
international humanitarian law and put the protection
of civilians first.
We commend the comprehensive, integrated
approach just described by Mr. Yamamoto of combining
peace, security and development in policies. Nationally
the Kingdom of the Netherlands is ready to do its
part as well in an integrated manner. Our bilateral
development cooperation with Afghanistan continues,
and our Government decided last week to substantially
increase its support for Afghanistan with additional
military and police advisers in the Resolute Support
Mission. We will also extend the mandate of the whole
contingent until the end of 2021. And, of course, we
support the election process.
That brings me to my second point: progress
in preparing the elections. It is important that the
Council pronounce itself on this. The first phase of
registration has been concluded successfully, which
is very encouraging. At the same time, the Afghan
Government and the Independent Election Commission
will need to step up their efforts. Reforms and
10/38

Young people have a crucial role in building a
culture of peace. That was reaffirmed by resolution
2419 (2018), adopted this month, on youth, peace and
security. Investing in Afghan youth will bring stability
to the country. We are pleased with the election in
Afghanistan last week of the first ever Afghan Youth
Representative to the United Nations. My Minister was a
proud member of the jury, together with Mr. Yamamoto.
My third point concerns the nexus between
organized crime and terrorism. Terrorist groups, such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan
Province and Al-Qaida remain active. They undermine
State security, stability and development, and often
conditions for organized crime and violent extremism
converge. The Government of Afghanistan, in our view,
should continue to address the nexus between these two
phenomena, for example by strengthening capacities,
including border control. In general, we believe that
the nexus between organized crime and terrorism is an
important topic for the Council.
In conclusion, the Afghan people need a workable
peace deal. That will require political courage,
perseverance and the continued unity of the Council.
Galvanizing the momentum of the Afghan-owned
peace process is our collective responsibility. We should
remain clear in our joint message on the importance of
credible elections with strong participation of women.
Finally, I want to thank the Special Representative
and his team for their tremendous efforts in assisting
Afghanistan in often difficult circumstances. They
deserve our full support. The Afghan people should be
able to count on the Council. Let the Council answer the
call for peace, as expressed in the impressive Afghan
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

peace march, and let the Council be a beacon of hope
for the people of Afghanistan.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this morning’s meeting
and the briefings of Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov and Mr. Yury Fedotov, as well
as the statement of the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Mr. Mahmoud Saikal.
Peru notes with concern the security situation that
Afghanistan continues to face. We strongly condemn
the suicide attacks perpetrated by Da’esh and Taliban
groups, which have serious consequences for civilians
and the stability of the country even as preparations
for a major electoral process are under way. Faced with
those repugnant attempts to undermine democracy,
we want to pay tribute to the courage of the Afghan
people and the endeavours of their authorities, who
are pursuing the voter registration process and other
work in preparation for the parliamentary elections and
district elections scheduled for 20 October.
We also want to associate ourselves with the call
of Secretary-General António Guterres on the various
political groups to speak and act as one on the need to
tackle those threats and, on that basis, on the governance
and reconciliation of the country. The objective of
sustainable peace ought to spur all actors to pursue
that course of action. We must deplore the refusal of
the Taliban to extend the ceasefire as proposed by the
Afghan Government at the end of the Eid al-Fitr holiday.
That refusal stands in contrast to the mass mobilization
of the Afghan people in the so-called march for peace,
held during Ramadan, to express their support for a
lasting ceasefire.
Peru reiterates its support for the Kabul process,
designed and led by the Afghans themselves. We are
convinced that intra-Afghan dialogue, supported by
the countries of the region, is the only viable path to
sustainable peace.
We would like to underscore the Afghan
Government’s commitment to increasing the number of
women in the public sector, as well as the importance
of compliance with the national strategy and action
plan for the elimination of violence against women,
and the concurrent efforts of the Independent Human
Rights Commission.
However, we must express our concern about the
situation described by the Assistant Secretary-General

S/PV. 8294

for Human Rights after his visit in May. In particular,
we are concerned about the increase in the number
of children recruited by the different factions of the
conflict, who often fall victim to sexual violence. There
is a need for immediate action by the Government to
counter that practice, as well as to provide for the
rehabilitation of victims.
We also consider the fight against corruption and
illicit drug trafficking to be a priority. Mr. Fedotov
reported record figures for the opium harvest in 2018.
That is a business that undermines the framework of
institutions and encourages terrorism. We welcome
the efforts that are being developed on a joint basis
to reverse this situation. Allow me to recall that the
Council is committed to supporting the efforts of the
Afghan Government in its fight against those scourges.
We would like to express our regret to and solidarity
with the relatives of the recently assassinated counternarcotics police officer who was recently murdered for
courageously confronting that type of organized crime,
as well as those of other officials.
In conclusion, we associate ourselves with the
Secretary-General’s call for humanitarian assistance
to be provided, through the donation of the necessary
funds, to the more than 2 million people whose
situation has been aggravated by the drought affecting
that country.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Yamamoto, Executive Director Fedotov; and
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for their briefings.
China listened attentively to the statement by the
representative of Afghanistan.
Peace and stability in Afghanistan have a direct
bearing on the well-being of the Afghan people, as well
as on security, stability, development and prosperity
in the region. The Afghan parliamentary and district
council elections will be held during the year and
preparations are under way. The recent terrorist
attacks caused a large number of civilian casualties
and the political and security situation in Afghanistan
remains severe.
China welcomes President Ghani’s recent
unilateral declaration of a temporary ceasefire with
the Taliban and appreciates the Afghan Government’s
efforts to maintain national stability and promote
national reconciliation and economic development. The

18-1977611/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

international community should continue to provide
strong support for Afghanistan.
Peace and stability are the foundation for
Afghanistan’s national reconstruction and economic
development. The international community should
continue to support the capacity-building efforts
of the Afghan National Security Forces, strengthen
Afghanistan’s self-defence capacities and work
together to effectively address such threats as
terrorism, transnational crime and drug trafficking. At
the same time, regional efforts should be made to help
Afghanistan meet those challenges. The international
community should strengthen coordination and
cooperation in combating regional forces of terrorism.
Strengthening governance is an important guarantee
for promoting peace and reconstruction in Afghanistan.
Afghan affairs should ultimately be determined by
the Afghan people. All political parties in the country
should strengthen unity and resolve differences through
dialogue and consultation. The international community
must earnestly respect the Afghan people’s right to
independently choose their political system and path to
development. In accordance with Afghanistan’s national
development strategy and specific needs, it should
help the Afghan Government improve its governance
capacity in a targeted manner. Advancing national
reconciliation is essential to resolving the question of
Afghanistan. We should firmly support an Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process,
including supporting the role that the Kabul process
continues to play. We support the Afghan Government
in reaching an agreement on national reconciliation
with armed opposition groups, including the Taliban,
and launching the peace process. The Taliban should
actively respond to the peace initiative of the Afghan
Government and commit to lasting peace and stability
in the country.
As a historically friendly neighbour of Afghanistan,
China has always supported the country in achieving
peace, security, stability and development as soon as
possible. Subsequent to the first Foreign Ministers’
dialogue with Afghanistan and Pakistan hosted by
China last December, China hosted in Beijing in May
a Deputy Foreign Minister-level strategic dialogue
among China, Afghanistan and Pakistan, as well as
a Deputy Foreign Minister-level counter-terrorism
security consultation among those three countries and a
Deputy Foreign Minister-level meeting of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO)-Afghanistan Contact
12/38

26/06/2018

Group. President Ghani, as Head of an observer nation,
attended the eighteenth meeting of the Council of Heads
of SCO member States in Qingdao, China, in early
June. All of the activities I just mentioned achieved
positive results in promoting a political settlement of
the Afghanistan issue, while strengthening regional
cooperation and advancing counter-terrorism efforts.
China is ready to continue to use the mechanisms I
just referred to in order to strengthen cooperation with
Afghanistan and other countries in the region to jointly
address the threat of terrorism and promote regional
peace, stability and development.
Afghanistan is an important country within the
Belt and Road Initiative. Security Council resolutions
have pointed out time and again that all parties should
take advantage of the Initiative to promote economic
development in Afghanistan and regional cooperation,
in that regard, so as to help Afghanistan achieve stability
and prosperity and, through dialogue and cooperation,
make concerted efforts to create a community with a
shared future for humankind. In accordance with the
provisions set out in the relevant Security Council
resolutions, China will continue to work with all other
parties to help the country leverage its comprehensive
and comparative advantages, participate in regional
economic cooperation and connectivity and achieve
economic and social development.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and voice support for the positive role that
UNAMA has played in helping Afghanistan promote
the political process, safeguard national security, foster
economic development and enhance its governance
capacity. China will continue to support UNAMA and
Special Representative Yamamoto in their work.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French):
First of all, let me thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Yamamoto for his very
enlightening briefing, especially on peace efforts and
the electoral process. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov and Executive Director Fedotov
for their briefings on combating terrorism and drug
trafficking in Afghanistan, where the conflict is
tragically illustrative of the persistent combination of
local and global factors, whether relating to terrorism,
drug trafficking, negative climactic developments
or non-respect for basic rights, in particular those of
children and women.
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the observer of the European Union.
I will comment on four areas today.
My first observation concerns the security situation
in Afghanistan, which continues to be extremely
unstable and calls for pursuing efforts to protect
civilians. France condemns in the strongest terms the
two suicide bombings perpetrated on 16 and 17 June
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan
Province in the province of Nangarhar. That type of
asymmetrical attack — whether carried out by Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province or the
Taliban — has become the leading cause of civilian
deaths, as the Secretary-General pointed out in his
quarterly report (S/2018/539). In that regard, more
must be done to protect women and children, who are
especially vulnerable should there be a resurgence of
violence. Almost one in three victims in Afghanistan
last year was a child. The implementation of the
national action plan deserves praise, but much remains
to be done — for example, concerning the detention of
children, their recruitment by parties to the conflict and
the police force, and early or forced marriages. France
reiterates its full support for the Afghan Government
in its struggle against the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan Province and the Taliban insurgency.
In particular, we must see to it that foreign terrorist
fighters fleeing Iraq and the Syria are prevented from
finding refuge in Afghanistan.
France remains very concerned about drug
trafficking, which continues to fuel the illicit
economy, finance the Taliban insurgency and terrorist
groups, and threaten the health of many Afghans. As
Mr. Fedotov just underscored, recent developments
give cause for concern, with an unprecedented level of
opium production since last year. France calls on the
Afghan authorities to redouble their efforts in that area,
with the support of the international community and
the United Nations. We hope that this subject, which is
crucial to the future of the country, will be brought up
at the ministerial conference on Afghanistan to be held
in Geneva in November. In that regard, the Paris Pact
Initiative remains an optimal framework for sharing
ideas among all countries affected by drug trafficking
in Afghanistan.
My second point concerns the fact that the dire
security situation and the human cost of the conflict
must motivate us to redouble efforts to achieve lasting

S/PV. 8294

peace in Afghanistan. We have seen encouraging
signs over recent weeks. The ceasefires, which
were honoured during Eid Al-Fitr, at the Afghan
Government’s initiative, have given hope to the
Afghan people, who have begun their march towards
peace. France welcomes the unilateral extension of the
ceasefire by Afghan forces but regrets that the Taliban
did not respond positively to President Ghani’s offer
to extend the ceasefire beyond Eid Al-Fitr. In that
regard, France highlights the importance of the Kabul
process for peace and security and calls on the Taliban
to engage in direct negotiations as President Ghani has
proposed. At the same time, we recall the demand of
the international community that the Taliban renounce
all forms of violence. Lastly, the improvement in the
regional dynamic must be commended and encouraged.
With regard to the electoral process — this being my
third point — France welcomes the preparatory efforts
of the Afghan Independent Election Commission.
As of today, nearly 7 million registrations have been
recorded on the electoral lists — an encouraging,
albeit inadequate, number. We call on the Afghan
Government to pursue those efforts, with the support
of United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and its international partners, to conduct
free, credible and transparent elections according to the
agreed timeline. The Independent Election Commission
must continue to work towards ensuring the largest
voter turn-out among the population. In that regard, we
are concerned about the dearth of candidates in some
provinces. It is also important to recall that women can
fully participate in the electoral process both as voters
and as candidates. In order to sustainably improve
women’s political participation, support — including
financial support — for the national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, is needed today.
Lastly, my fourth remark concerns indispensable
international support for Afghanistan. By renewing
UNAMA’s mandate in March, the Council reiterated
its unwavering commitment to restoring peace
in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, I welcome the exceptional dedication
of UNAMA’s personnel, who work with courage and
perseverance in particularly difficult conditions.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Russian presidency for convening
this important debate on the situation in Afghanistan

18-1977613/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

and express my gratitude to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Yamamoto, UnderSecretary-General Voronkov and Under-SecretaryGeneral Fedotov for their comprehensive updates.
We also appreciate the statement of our good friend
Ambassador Saikal.
We would like to express our appreciation for
the dedicated work of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Yamamoto and the team of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, as
well as that of other United Nations agencies, to bring
peace and security to Afghanistan. The delegation of
Kazakhstan, being committed to the stable development
of Afghanistan as our neighbour, friend and partner,
would like to highlight five key points today.
First, on the political-military dimension, we
commend the Afghan Government’s efforts on the
political track to launch an intra-Afghan political
dialogue to stabilize the situation, improve public
administration, reform the legal sphere and prepare for
the upcoming parliamentary elections in October. The
elections should be fair, free, transparent, trustworthy
and inclusive if they are to succeed, as preliminarily
discussed this January during the Security Council
mission to Kabul. To demonstrate our continued
support for the Afghan Government in that regard,
we believe that a Security Council press statement
would be quite timely. We also welcome the second
meeting of the Kabul process for peace and security
cooperation as an Afghan-led and -owned peace effort,
as well as the adoption of the Kabul declaration. We
also welcome the intensified Afghan-Pakistani talks
on building peace, security and confidence between
the two neighbours. We stress the need to continue
providing diversified assistance to Afghanistan during
the transformation period. My country has therefore
provided $4 million to the Afghan National Army to
train Afghan military specialists.
Secondly, on the security track, despite the
effective measures taken by the international
community and the Government, the security situation
remains complicated. We express our hope that the
brief ceasefire announced by the Afghan Government
and the armed opposition during the holy month of
Ramadan and the Eid Al-Fitr holiday, will be the first
step towards national reconciliation.
Thirdly, on the counter-terrorism track, we must
say that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/
14/38

26/06/2018

Da’esh in Afghanistan remains combat-capable and
continues to step up its presence in various provinces
of the country. Increased terrorist activity in the
north of Afghanistan, near its borders with Central
Asian States, is of particular concern. In that regard,
the effective implementation of the third phase of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in
Central Asia is important. Afghanistan must serve as a
platform where the Security Council demonstrates its
unity in the fight against this persistent scourge and
collectively confronts it. We express our deep concern
over the increase of drug production in Afghanistan,
which is one of the main sources for terrorist financing.
In that connection, we also welcome the outcomes of
the high-level international conference on countering
terrorism and violent extremism, held on 3 and 4 May
in Dushanbe.
Fourthly, we fully support Special Representative
Yamamoto’s view that peace and security are closely
connected with development and that we need to increase
regional connectivity and economic cooperation in
the wider region in order to achieve stability and
prosperity in Afghanistan and its neighbourhood. In
that context, we welcome the Tashkent international
high-level conference on peace and development in
Afghanistan, held in late March. The launch of the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India
pipeline
project is also a welcome measure. That, along with the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization road map to assist
Afghanistan, corresponds to the common position in
our part of the world to strengthen ties with Afghanistan
as a potentially profitable economic partner.
In that connection, we see it as critically important
to implement the three-pronged strategy for conflict
prevention, which includes strengthening the security
and development nexus and utilizing a regional
whole-of-system approach based on the development
strategy for the wider region. In that regard, we note
the importance of regional cooperation as a means of
ensuring the economic prosperity of Afghanistan and
strengthening its security. We must involve regional
countries in the development of trade, economic, transit/
transport and humanitarian ties with Afghanistan by
providing them with related grants for such purposes.
In addition, we believe that it is necessary to
involve the United Nations in the development of a
regional development strategy, including engaging all
country offices of the Organization, in accordance with
the priorities of the Governments of the region and
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan, while uniting and coordinating the efforts
of all funds and programmes based on the Delivering
as One principle. The main task is to integrate the
region on development programmes for the Sustainable
Development Goals through trade and economic
integration and connectivity.
Fifthly, Kazakhstan attaches great importance
to the empowerment of women and the development
of education, as it does to strengthening the role of
women and easing the plight of children in Afghanistan
in order to ensure the country’s stable and progressive
development. In that regard, an official ceremony
dedicated to the completion of Kazakhstan’s assistance
project in Afghanistan, through the mediation of the
United Nations Development Programme, was held in
April in Astana. The project was aimed at strengthening
the economic independence of Afghan women and
training Afghan citizens in Kazakhstan. Training was
provided in needed fields for Afghanistan, such as
public administration and health, with a special focus
on maternal and child health.
In the light of the successful completion of
Kazakhstan’s public educational programme for
Afghanistan, we proposed to prolong it with the help
of other stakeholders. We suggested to our partners
to consider continuing the programme in a tripartite
format — to be comprised of Kazakhstan, Afghanistan
and the corresponding sponsor.
In addition, next September in Astana, we are
planning to organize an international conference entitled
“Expanding Opportunities for Women in Afghanistan”.
The main goals of the conference are to assess the role
and contribution of women to the peaceful development
of Afghanistan and the issues related to empowering
Afghan women in the socioeconomic and political
spheres by increasing their participation in the public
and private sectors. The conference will also provide
an opportunity to share international experiences
in the promotion of gender equality and to develop
specific recommendations for empowering women
in Afghanistan.
The Government of Kazakhstan made a contribution
to UNICEF in 2018 for projects on reintegration,
rehabilitation and providing access to education for
children in Afghanistan.
In general, Kazakhstan will continue to assist
Afghanistan in all areas in order to achieve peace and
stability in that brother country. Cooperation between

S/PV. 8294

Afghanistan and Central Asian States could become
a model of partnership for peace and development for
other regions. We have great hope for the forthcoming
ministerial conference on Afghanistan in Geneva,
to be held on 25 November, and we look forward to
a productive discussion on ensuring security and
development in Afghanistan and the wider region.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to thank Mr. Yamamoto for
his comprehensive and informative briefing on the
situation in Afghanistan and the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
I also thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov
and the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, for their excellent statements.
Despite the ongoing efforts of the Afghan
Government, which the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
commends and supports, it is evident that the peace,
security and, consequently, stability and prosperity
for the people of Afghanistan seems like a pipe dream
for those who, on a daily basis, suffer the catastrophic
consequences of lethal attacks. The incessant attacks in
public places and the indiscriminate use of improvised
explosive devices by anti-Government elements and
suicide bombers are nothing more than cowardly
attacks on the vulnerable in society. Such attacks are
highly disturbing. We therefore urge all parties to the
conflict to take all possible measures to protect the
civilian population, in particular women and children,
in accordance with the provisions of international
humanitarian law and the basic norms of human rights.
Likewise, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is
concerned about the ongoing increase in the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict. In that regard,
we welcome Mr. Yamamoto’s remarks with regard to
urging the Government to adopt the necessary measures
to ensure referral and rehabilitation mechanisms for
the victims.
The threat of terrorism and the drug problem are
closely linked. Drugs continue to be an significant
source of funding for terrorists in Afghanistan. Close
cooperation between the Government and the relevant
regional organizations is therefore necessary to combat
the trafficking in such drugs, especially opium.
Bearing in mind that the elections constitute a
crucial moment for the renewal of political trust and
the forging of the desired stability in Afghanistan,
the Government of Equatorial Guinea welcomes the

18-1977615/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

decision of the Independent Election Commission to
set a date for the parliamentary and district council
elections. It is vital that the Independent Election
Commission and all the political parties concerned
join forces so that transparent, inclusive and credible
elections can be held on the scheduled date in the
manner lawfully established by the country’s national
legislation. To that end, the United Nations must play
an significant role in supporting the holding of free and
fair elections. We commend UNAMA in particular for
supporting the Afghan Government in ensuring that
voter registration is completed in accordance with the
agreed deadlines.
Like all the representatives who have spoken here
today, we believe that the only effective way to ensure
the long-term security and stability of Afghanistan is
by means of a political process and broad and inclusive
reconciliation that are Afghan-led and Afghan-owned.
The international community must therefore continue
to provide robust support to Afghanistan so that it
can respond to the many political, economic and
security challenges.
To conclude, we would once again like to reiterate
our praise for all the efforts made by the Government
of Afghanistan that are reflected in the report
presented today (S/2018/539). We encourage it not to
give up on developing a strategy based on open and
inclusive negotiations so as to achieve stability for the
Afghan people. Clearly, we once again underscore the
commendable work of Mr. Yamamoto and of his entire
team in supporting Afghan society, in promoting and
monitoring the human rights situation, in furthering
peace and reconciliation and in providing valuable
assistance to the Government of Afghanistan.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): On 12 May, a small group
of ordinary Afghan citizens began an extraordinary
journey. They left their homes in Helmand province to
begin a 600-kilometre march to Afghanistan’s capital,
Kabul. As they marched, their numbers increased and
they were greeted by large crowds when they arrived
in Kabul on 18 June. They brought with them a simple
message. After 40 years of violence and conflict,
the time for peace in Afghanistan has come. In the
presence of Ambassador Saikal, I want to pay tribute
to the incredible resolve and resilience of the Afghan
people. The widespread support for the march was a
demonstration of the strong desire for peace in Afghan,
all the more after the brief but historic ceasefires that
inspired it. However, while the past weeks have offered
16/38

26/06/2018

a much-needed glimpse of hope, we remain concerned
about the security situation in Afghanistan.
The continued high number of civilian
casualties, not least among children, and the attacks
against humanitarian and development workers are
unacceptable. International humanitarian law applies
to all parties. There is no military solution to the
conflict. The only viable option is an inclusive and
Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace process, leading
to a politically negotiated settlement. We strongly
welcome the unprecedented steps taken by the Afghan
Government in the pursuit of peace. The Government’s
peace offer at the second Kabul process conference and
its temporary unilateral ceasefire are commendable.
We deeply regret that the Taliban has not extended its
partial ceasefire. We call on the Taliban to respond to
the plea for peace from the Afghan people and to engage
in a dialogue with the Government to achieve that end.
A peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan is key to
achieving development and prosperity in the broader
region. That should be in everyone’s interest. We urge
all those with stakes and influence, especially the
countries of the region, to act with full and unreserved
commitment to engaging constructively in support of
a political solution. Indeed, many challenges faced by
Afghanistan are common to the countries of the region:
security threats, radicalization, the production of, and
trade in, narcotics — with all its negative effects, as
highlighted by Executive Director Fedotov earlier this
morning — climate change and conflicts over water
and energy resources. Through regional cooperation,
such challenges can be addressed and transformed into
mutually beneficial opportunities.
Women’s full and effective participation in peace
processes and political, social and economic life is
essential to creating legitimate systems that cater to the
needs of the whole population. In addition, it is difficult
to think of any other structural change that would more
effectively reject what the Taliban stands for. I want to
welcome the efforts that the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan has made to that end, which we
support. We encourage efforts to ensure women’s full
participation in the preparations and in the ministerial
meeting in Geneva in November.
For our part, to that end and through our most
recent contribution to the Afghan National Army trust
fund, we support the establishment of the first Women’s
Police Town, which is aimed at enabling and furthering
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

women’s participation in the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces.
It is imperative for Afghanistan’s future and stability
that the planned elections take place in 2018 and 2019
according to schedule and that they be conducted in an
inclusive, credible and transparent manner. We urge
all stakeholders to do their utmost to ensure increased
women’s participation in the elections. Recent targeted
assaults on the electoral preparations are not only
horrific attacks on civilians but also direct attacks on
the efforts to build democracy. We support the proposal
put forward by the representative of the Netherlands
this morning that the Security Council stay engaged
and make public statements in support of the electoral
process moving forward.
At the NATO Summit in Brussels on 11 and 12 July,
we will reaffirm our commitment to doing our part
to strengthen and to enable a self-sufficient Afghan
security sector that is able to provide the conditions
necessary to increased security in Afghanistan.
Combating terrorism, creating stability and building
national capacity and strong institutions will require
action to address the political and economic root
causes of conflict and instability. Our commitment
to Afghanistan remains firm. It includes $1 billion
in bilateral development assistance from 2015 to
2024, humanitarian assistance, capacity-building and
dialogue and mediation training, including for local
female actors, as well as our military contribution to
the NATO Resolute Support Mission.
With regard to the effect of the conflict on children,
as stated by the representative of France, we welcome
the Government’s commitment to including concrete
actions in the criminal code to protect children and
prevent their recruitment, including the establishment
of child protection units by the Ministry of the Interior
in all provinces. However, because the recruitment and
use of children remain prevalent, we strongly emphasize
the importance of implementing the penal code, with a
focus on accountability, including prosecutions.
Lastly, demonstrators in the march from Helmand
to Kabul were between the ages of 17 and 70. Many
Afghans’ entire lives have been blighted by conflict.
All parties must now respond to their call for peace and
ensure that future generations of Afghan children can
grow up without the shadow of war.

S/PV. 8294

Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Yamamoto, Mr. Fedotov and
Mr. Voronkov for their excellent briefings.
My delegation remains concerned about the
deteriorating security situation, marked by an increase
in the number of indiscriminate attacks against the
civilian population, resulting in the death of many
people and leaving thousands injured. My country
condemns the wave of violence and deadly attacks,
which has plunged Afghanistan into mourning, and
once again calls on the Security Council to pay greater
attention to the security situation in the country. My
delegation calls on the Taliban to grant the Afghan
President’s request to extend the ceasefire and implores
it to be firmly committed to direct peace talks without
conditions, within the framework of the Kabul process,
to achieve a political settlement to the crisis and bring
about sustainable peace.
An inclusive political process should lead to
credible elections and remains the key to ending the
crisis in Afghanistan. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the considerable progress made in the
dialogue among Afghan political stakeholders, which
helped to peaceably resolve the dispute between
President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai and the former
governor of Balkh province, Mr. Atta Mohammad
Noor. My delegation is also pleased to note President
Ghani’s implementation of the peace agreement with
the leader of Hezb-i-Islami, Mr. Gulbuddin Hekmatyar,
which has enabled Mr. Hekmatyar to return to Kabul
after a 20-year absence, his supporters to be released
and members of his movement to assume provincial
governorships.
We encourage Afghan stakeholders to continue to
engage in dialogue in order to meet their aspirations
for peace and take ownership of their country through
inclusive and peaceful elections. However, attacks
on electoral infrastructure, the abduction of election
workers and the intimidation and harassment of
registered voters are acts that could disrupt the electoral
process and that demand action from the Council.
Furthermore, my country commends the Government
on its efforts to provide Afghan women with the means
to consolidate their place in society and to promote their
participation in regional and international initiatives to
bring about peace, while protecting their fundamental
rights.

18-1977617/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

The humanitarian situation also remains a source
of concern owing to the ongoing drought and low
levels of rainfall, which could lead to famine in the
country and to the forced displacement of people.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/539) of 6 June, more than 2 million people
across two thirds of the country will be affected by
drought and 1.4 million will be severely affected and
require emergency food and water assistance in order to
survive. My delegation deplores the very limited access
of humanitarian agencies to vulnerable people and the
attacks on humanitarian workers, which constitute a
breach of international humanitarian law. We therefore
call on the international community to respond to the
emergency appeal launched by the United Nations
aimed at meeting the basic needs of those affected
by the drought. My country commends the Afghan
Government, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and donor countries on their efforts to
organize the ministerial conference on Afghanistan to
be held in Geneva on 28 November.
The presence of Islamic State-affiliated terrorist
groups in Afghanistan could destabilize the country
and the entire region. Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its
support for the efforts of the Afghan authorities to
combat terrorism and calls for enhanced regional and
international cooperation in that area. My country
welcomes the signing of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity, which is an
innovative partnership for regional cooperation in the
areas of counter-terrorism, violence reduction, refugee
repatriation and economic development. In addition,
the international community should encourage greater
coordination between the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Afghan Government in order
to cut off the sources of funding for armed groups
and terrorists in Afghanistan by providing alternative
livelihoods to those living in rural areas who depend
on poppy cultivation.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate
its support for the efforts of the Afghan Government to
bring about lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan,
as well as its gratitude for the work conducted by the
Special Representative to the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, through his good offices in
the framework of the political dialogue. We encourage
him to continue his efforts to restore lasting peace and
stability to the country.
18/38

26/06/2018

Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me start by conveying
Poland’s deepest sympathy following further senseless
killing of innocent civilians in the recent attacks. It
simply demonstrates the kind of enormous challenges
that lie ahead on the path to lasting peace in Afghanistan.
I would like to thank all our briefers — Special
Representative Yamamoto, Executive Director Fedotov
and Under-Secretary-General Voronkov — for their
insightful and thorough briefings. Let me also take
this opportunity to pay tribute to the courageous
and dedicated team of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan for its daily efforts to advance
peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Poland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later today by the observer of the European
Union.
Poland reiterates the significance of the peace
process, which should be continued through constructive
dialogue. In that regard, we recognize President Ghani’s
comprehensive and unprecedented proposal, which was
made during the second Kabul process conference in
February, as an important step forward. We hope that
that offer will be given a chance and eventually lead to a
genuine peace process. We count on the representatives
of Taliban groups to respond positively to the offer of
peace talks without conditions and to take part in an
inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process.
Good governance and successful institution-building
require adherence to rules and procedures that enable
all citizens to participate in the democratic process.
Poland welcomes the announcement of 20 October as
the date on which parliamentary elections will be held.
We regard as a key political commitment the holding
of parliamentary elections in 2018 and presidential
elections in 2019 in a transparent, inclusive and credible
manner. We note that the process faces challenges at the
outset, such as recruiting personnel for electoral bodies
and providing security for polling stations. However,
such challenges must be overcome by the authorities.
Poland hopes that the new Parliament will create
a strong legislative foundation for the sustainable
development and protection of human rights in the
country. With regard to technical support, we encourage
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
to provide necessary assistance at the request of the
Afghan authorities. Broad participation by women, both
as candidates and voters, remans a high priority for us.
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8294

We see it as an important precondition for enhancing
peace and security.

appreciation for the efforts of UNAMA in supporting
the Afghan people in such difficult circumstances.

The development of a prosperous and peaceful
future must be founded on wide and equal access to
education for both boys and girls. Unfortunately, the
report published this month by UNICEF, entitled
Global Initiative on Out-of-School Children:
Afghanistan Country Study, indicates that almost half
of Afghan children are denied education — a very
basic human right — due to a lack of security, poverty
and discrimination. We think that the current situation
needs to be addressed by the Afghan Government,
with strong assistance provided by the international
community and civil society organizations.

We have read the Secretary-General’s quarterly
report (S/2018/539) on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
We noted the information provided and the realistic
assessment of the events in Afghanistan since the last
report (S/2018/165). The current report, which covers
the events of the last three months, is an amalgamation
of positive and negative events. In that regard, I would
like to touch upon the following main points.

The security situation in the country continues to
negatively impact civilians, particularly those who are
most vulnerable, such as women and children. In that
respect, I wish to echo the words of the representatives
of France and Sweden to the effect that more needs
to be done to protect those members of society,
particularly children.
The continued violent acts of terrorist groups remind
us of the fundamental importance of strengthening
Afghanistan’s institutions, specifically those tasked
with ensuring the security and defence of the country and
its people. Poland supports and encourages the Afghan
Government to continue its efforts to improve the
capability of the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces. Those undertakings require determination and
engagement, which we will continue to support through
training and advisory activities, within the framework
of the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission.
Finally, let me refer to the briefing of Special
Representative Yamamoto, who said that there are
currently unprecedented opportunities to make progress
in seeking peace, and that it is up to the people and
Government of Afghanistan to seize those opportunities
and strengthen their resolve to achieve lasting peace
and development. He also noted that it is up to us, the
Security Council, and the international community to
provide the Government and the people of Afghanistan
with the necessary assistance in that regard.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the briefers: Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov and Mr. Yury Fedotov. We underscore our

First, on the political situation, we welcome
the announcement by the Independent Election
Commission of the upcoming parliamentary elections
on 20 October. We commend the progress achieved in
the preparations for the parliamentary elections, despite
the destabilizing incidents that have occurred in certain
provinces in Afghanistan since the announcement. The
voter registration process began on 14 April, which
is the first time that the country has registered voters
since 2003.
My country’s delegation noted that the voterregistration process forms part of a national campaign
to organize electoral action in the country, which
coincides with the distribution of smart identification
cards and the naming of polling stations and the cities
where voters will be able to vote in the upcoming
elections. Moreover, the voter registry has been
prepared and linked to polling stations. All such efforts
prove that there is a true and genuine desire to achieve
tangible progress in Afghanistan. We hope that such
preparations will ensure that all Afghan people, men
and women alike, are able to participate in the elections.
It is very clear that Afghanistan is going through
a transitional critical period, and we would like to
commend the people of Afghanistan for their resilience
in the face of numerous challenges. We hope that the
preparations for the upcoming elections will contribute
to further action and consultation among the political
parties and leaders of the country with regard to
parliamentary coordination and the creation of political
coalitions that reduce political tension. Prioritizing
national interests over partisan ones is what we called
for in the last meeting on this issue (see S/PV.8199).
We reiterate that point once again, as national interests
must come first.
Secondly, on security, we follow with concern the
unstable security situation in Afghanistan, as the Afghan

18-1977619/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

Government still faces anti-Government forces, such as
Taliban and the so called Da’esh and other groups in
many parts of the country. Suicidal bombings continue
to claim the lives of innocent citizens, and we are also
concerned by the breaches of security that occurred in
Afghanistan from 15 February to 15 May, amounting
to 5,675 incidents. That underscores the staggering
task that the Afghan Government and international
community are facing, with continuous terrorist attacks
perpetrated by Taliban and Da’esh against innocent
Afghan citizens and foreigners living in Afghanistan.
We recognize that the increased acts and threats
of violence are simply desperate attempts from those
who do not believe in democracy or human rights and
are adverse to stability and security in the country.
With such acts, those groups are trying to delay the
upcoming October elections. We hope that the Afghan
authorities will continue to thwart such attacks for the
remaining period leading up to the elections.
Thirdly, on the humanitarian situation, despite the
fact that the number of displaced people has dropped to
65 per cent, we are still concerned about the remaining
75,000 displaced persons, due to armed conflicts this
year. The report of the Secretary-General maintains
that there are still many internally displaced persons,
due to factors such as violence and drought in many
provinces, forcing almost 500,000 people to leave their
homes and seek other accommodation. My colleague,
the representative of Afghanistan, touched upon
that matter.
We have repeatedly stressed to the Council the
important role of education in building nations. In that
regard, Afghanistan can benefit from the education
sector. We have followed with concern the findings of
the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism on Children
and Armed Conflict, which verified 11 incidents of
attacks on schools. The unabating Taliban attacks on
educational facilities led to the closure of many schools
in Kunduz and Logar. Such terrorist threats and acts
undermine the future of the country by intimidating
children and scaring them away from schools. That is
one of the battles that have to be won, as children are
the future of Afghanistan and must be protected.
The Government of Afghanistan is making efforts
to amend a number of laws on violence against women.
We appreciate and commend such efforts. We believe
that the Government should continue its efforts in that
regard, as it will benefit the Afghan people.
20/38

26/06/2018

In conclusion, we believe that lasting peace and
stability in Afghanistan and the region can be achieved
only through an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
negotiated diplomatic settlement. We therefore urge
all parties to participate constructively in the efforts
to achieve peace through diplomacy in the interests
and well-being of the Afghan people. The political,
economic and security steps taken by the Government
of Afghanistan towards regional connectivity with its
neighbouring countries are extremely encouraging, and
we urge it to continue on that path. We welcome the
signing of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for
Peace and Solidarity, and we look forward to further
interregional cooperation.
Such diplomatic efforts should be accompanied
with significant and real investment in the education
sector. Investment in the education system, based on
gender parity, is the real investment that will help to
revive Afghanistan and build a brighter future by the
country’s educated sons and daughters.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We too would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2018/539) on the situation in Afghanistan
and the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We appreciate the
briefings of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Yamamoto, Vladimir Voronkov of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism, and Yury Fedotov of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
Afghanistan still faces multiple and complex
challenges to its security, stability and development.
The people continue to pay a heavy price because of
the instability and violence affecting the country, and,
as the report of the Secretary-General makes evident, it
is civilians, particularly women and children, who are
the most vulnerable and face the bulk of the challenges.
According to the Secretary-General’s report, the
security situation has remained highly unstable in
Afghanistan, with several mass-casualty incidents in
urban areas. Suicide attacks have become the leading
cause of civilian casualties. Once again, we take this
opportunity to express our sympathy to and solidarity
with the people and Government of Afghanistan for
the loss of innocent lives, including those of women
and children. We welcome the statement issued by
the Security Council (SC/13386) condemning in the
strongest terms the two heinous and cowardly terrorist
attacks that took place in Nangarhar on 16 and 17 June,
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

which resulted in at least 43 deaths and 45 injuries.
Those acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation.
We appreciate the proposal of President Ghani
for direct negotiations with the Taliban, which has
received broad and strong support from Afghans
and the international community. We also note that
the Afghan Government offered another temporary
ceasefire during the holiday of Eid al-Fitr and called
for an extension to the ceasefire, with no response from
the Taliban.
The long-term security and stability of Afghanistan
can be ensured only through a comprehensive and
inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation
and political process. In that regard, the renewed call
of the Afghan Government for unconditional peace
talks with the Taliban and the outlining of a framework
for peace that was presented at the Kabul process
conference are encouraging and need meaningful
support from all stakeholders, including UNAMA. We
hope that the Taliban will respond positively to that call
and engage in direct talks with the Government with a
view to achieving a political settlement and restoring
lasting peace and security in Afghanistan.
The support of regional and international
stakeholders will be key to the success of the peace
process, and we welcome the declaration adopted on
28 February reiterating the support of the international
community for the Kabul process for an Afghan-led,
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process, and
reaffirming its commitment to the necessary fight
against terrorism in order to bring lasting peace,
security, stability and prosperity to Afghanistan.
With regard to the political situation in the
country, we take note of the peaceful settlement of the
tension between the Presidential Palace and Jam’iyat-i
Islami. We hope that the parties will redirect their
efforts towards addressing the multiple challenges
facing Afghanistan.
The holding of peaceful and democratic
parliamentary and district council elections within
the set time frame is indeed very important, and we
note some of the progress made in preparation for
the elections. Accelerating those efforts and building
the confidence of the Afghan people in the electoral
process through the involvement and participation of
all the relevant stakeholders will be key to ensuring the
timely and successful holding of the elections. As the

S/PV. 8294

Secretary-General’s report notes, ensuring an inclusive
and credible electoral process while a significant
percentage of the population lives in parts of the
country that are insecure, with limited State authority,
remains a fundamental challenge. The peaceful conduct
of elections at all stages is critical to enabling people
to exercise their right to vote without fear or threat of
insecurity. In that regard, we duly share the SecretaryGeneral’s concern about ongoing attempts to disrupt
the electoral process through violent means, including
tactics such as intimidation and the harassment of
registered voters.
Without sustained and inclusive economic growth
and development, the peace and security challenges
faced by Afghanistan cannot be effectively addressed.
That is why the National Unity Government needs
the coordinated and comprehensive support of the
international community to push forward its political
reform and national development priorities, as envisaged
in the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework. It is vital that the international community
sustain its engagement and deliver on its various
commitments in that regard.
Therefore, we further note the steps taken
towards closer regional economic cooperation by
the Afghanistan Government, including the Afghan
segment of the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-PakistanIndia natural gas pipeline inauguration on 23 February,
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, held in Istanbul on
19 April, and the Afghanistan and Pakistan finalization
of an agreement on the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action
Plan for Peace and Solidarity, among others.
In all of those initiatives, the efforts of UNAMA
in promoting and supporting peace talk initiatives
and reconciliation, dialogue and support for social
and economic development, with full respect for the
country’s sovereignty, as well as its leadership, remains
very important. We therefore commend the active
engagement of UNAMA with the Government and the
people of Afghanistan, in line with its mandate.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General; Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under
Secretary-General, United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism; and Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

18-1977621/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

On behalf of my delegation, I wish to express our
profound shock at the numerous deaths of civilians that
have occurred since the beginning of this year, caused
by the conflict in Afghanistan. Moreover, the complex
and violent situation that is afflicting the country is
occurring within the framework of preparations for
inclusive parliamentary and district council elections,
scheduled for 20 October. In that regard, Bolivia
expresses its concern over the security incidents related
to the elections, causing 86 deaths and 185 injuries, the
majority women and children. We condemn the fact
that around 75 per cent of those violent incidents have
taken place in schools or mosques that are being used
for electoral purposes.
We also categorically condemn the announcement
on 25 April by the Taliban of its annual spring offensive,
named the “Al-Khandaq”, without having even
considered the ceasefire offer made by the Government
of Afghanistan within the framework of the second
meeting of the Kabul process for peace and security,
during which the President presented a proposal for
peace talks with the Taliban without preconditions.
It is worth mentioning that, as part of that offer,
the President promised that he would consider such
issues as political inclusion, a ceasefire, a revision of
the Constitution, the release of prisoners, the removal
of leaders from sanctions lists and the reintegration of
refugees and ex-combatants. However, ignoring the
presidential proposal, the Taliban increased its terrorist
activities against district administrative centres in
April, using improvised explosive devices in attacks of
a complex or suicidal nature. To date, such attacks have
led to 311 deaths and 707 injuries, the majority civilians.
We also highlight the unilateral ceasefire announced
by the Government on 7 June, and we regret that it was
not accepted by the Taliban. We firmly condemn all
violent actions by anti-Government elements against the
Afghan electoral process, such as attacks on electoral
facilities, the kidnapping of electoral personnel and
the intimidation and harassment of registered voters.
We categorically oppose the suicide attacks that were
carried out at a national registration centre in Kabul
on 22 April and at a voter registration centre in Khost
province on 6 May. It is imperative that the Security
Council urge all parties to respect the rights of the
Afghan people so as to ensure that it is their sovereign
decision that reshapes the history of the country.
22/38

26/06/2018

As on other occasions, my delegation expresses
its resounding rejection of the recruitment and use of
children by anti-Government elements, as well as any
act that endangers the life, integrity and dignity of a
child. We are alarmed by the reference in the SecretaryGeneral’s report to the fact that the task force verified
a case of sexual violence against a child. Such illegal
situations and violations of international human rights
law must be thoroughly investigated by national
jurisdictional bodies to find the perpetrators so that they
feel the full force of the law and are held accountable.
Bolivia expresses its support and reaffirms its
commitment to the work being carried out by UNAMA
in Afghanistan. We are optimistic about the results of the
second meeting of the Kabul process on cooperation for
peace and security, held on 28 February. The meeting
enjoyed the participation of 26 countries, regional
organizations and the United Nations, during which
they reiterated their full support for the offer of the
Government of Afghanistan to engage in direct talks
with the Taliban and decided to strengthen regional and
international cooperation for peace, reconciliation and
the fight against terrorism.
Similarly, with regard to the peace process in
Afghanistan, we welcome the fact that the process
was reaffirmed at the conference held in Tashkent
on 27 March, with the participation of high-level
representatives of 23 countries, the European Union
and the United Nations. The support of the international
community is essential to Afghans finalizing a peace
process. On the list of priorities, my delegation wishes
to express its full backing for the support provided
by UNAMA to the Afghan Government and donors
in the preparations for the Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan, organized by the United Nations and the
Afghan Government, to be held on 28 November in
Geneva. We believe that those issues remain key for
the conference programme, and the measures that the
Government must take in the light of the conference are
indispensable to the success of the event.
Furthermore, for my delegation, the fact that in
recent months many families have been displaced
and forced to move several times, without immediate
prospects of a safe and dignified return to their homes,
remains an situation that the Security Council must
continue to prioritize. In that regard, we call on the
countries of the region to reinforce their commitment
to the exchange of information and documentation,
which, conditions permitting, must guarantee displaced
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

persons a voluntary, informed, dignified, safe and
permanent return to their places of origin and avoid any
replication of conditions in which they must return to
a situation of insecurity or to areas where they do not
come from.
Finally, Bolivia stresses that there is no military
solution to the situation in Afghanistan. We endorse
any initiative for inclusive dialogue that respects the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Afghanistan, with the full participation of Afghan
women in socioeconomic, political, peace and security
processes, with their full protection from any act
of violence, in full accordance with the national
strategy and action plan on the elimination of violence
against women.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I want
to thank all three briefers for their presentations
today. We commend the continued hard work of
Special Representative Yamamoto on the ground
in Afghanistan.
The United States welcomed President Ghani’s
announcement of an extension of the temporary ceasefire
with the Taliban after the Eid al-Fitr holiday. That was a
bold gesture. President Ghani’s announcement showed
the Government’s commitment to peace as both a
national and a religious responsibility. Once again, we
see that President Ghani is making serious efforts to
find a way to end the conflict. Sadly, the Taliban has
refused to extend the ceasefire further. We condemn
the Taliban’s unwillingness to support that offer.
During Eid, we witnessed Afghan soldiers and
police sitting with Taliban fighters side by side in
prayer. If Afghans can pray together, their leaders can
talk together and, ultimately, resolve their differences.
The people of Afghanistan deserve a reprieve from the
Taliban’s campaign of violence — one that lasts longer
than a weekend. We urge the Taliban to respond to the
call for peace from the Afghan people, reciprocate the
Government’s ceasefire in full and enter into peace
talks without preconditions.
The United States stands ready to work with the
Afghan Government, the Taliban and the people of
Afghanistan to reach a peace agreement that brings a
permanent end to this war. It is also incumbent upon
those parties that maintain close ties with the Taliban to
use their influence to bring the group to the negotiating
table. Those who provide the Taliban and other armed

S/PV. 8294

insurgents with weapons, money or political support
are fuelling the conflict. That must stop.
As we continue to support the peace process, we
have not lost sight of the critical work being done to
prepare for Afghanistan’s upcoming elections. The
United States fully supports timely, credible and
transparent parliamentary elections this year, with
presidential elections in 2019. Preparations for those
elections are at a critical stage, and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan plays an essential
role in supporting Afghanistan’s electoral commissions.
We urge the United Nations to ensure that it remains
fully staffed throughout the entire election cycle, in
order to continue this vital support. We also appeal to
all donors to make a concerted and generous effort in
support of those elections, with a view to preventing
further political instability that could frustrate efforts
to advance the peace process. We have contributed
tens of billions of dollars to Afghanistan, including
hundreds of millions in support of Afghan elections.
We would urge our international partners to do all they
can to join us in that effort.
These remain difficult times in Afghanistan. The
back-to-back terrorist attacks last week, which killed
more than 40 people, show the challenges that the Afghan
people continue to face. But despite those obstacles, the
ceasefire during Eid gave us a small vision of how life
in Afghanistan could change for the better. One Taliban
fighter told a reporter that, during the ceasefire, “the
people were very happy with the peace. Nothing comes
of fighting. It is all loss.” A police officer who was able
to visit his family in a Taliban-controlled village for
the first time in years recalled that “one of my cousins
pinched me. He said, ‘Is this you, or am I dreaming?’”
Those stories, and many others like them, show
what is possible when the Afghan people come together
in support of peace. The all-too-brief ceasefire during
Eid should encourage all of us to think about what
could be within reach. The ceasefire shows that peace
is possible. The question is not if we can achieve peace,
but how. We must redouble our work to help the Afghan
people achieve a peace that can endure.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the briefers,
particularly Special Representative Yamamoto, for
updating the Council on the latest report (S/2018/539)
and for all of the work that he and his team are doing in
challenging circumstances.

18-1977623/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

This feels like a moment of opportunity
for Afghanistan. Recent events, including the
unprecedented ceasefires and the preparations for
upcoming elections, give us all reasons to be cautiously
optimistic. We must do everything we can to make
the most of this opportunity to end the violence.
President Ghani’s offer to the Taliban of talks without
preconditions and the ceasefires over Eid al-Fitr are
most welcome. The extraordinary images of soldiers
and Taliban fighters embracing in the streets of cities
across Afghanistan gave hope to millions of Afghans
that an end to the conflict was achievable. The Afghan
Government has shown an impressive commitment to
peace. Now we need a similar commitment from the
Taliban. The Taliban has to decide if it wants to be part
of the future of Afghanistan. That seems to be what
many of its fighters want. It is what the Afghan people
want. It is time for the Taliban’s leaders to show true
courage and true leadership and to work for peace. Of
course, the only solution to the conflict is an Afghanled and -owned political process.
There are now four months to go until Afghanistan
holds parliamentary elections in October. We welcome
the progress so far on key electoral reforms and thank
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for supporting the Afghan Government in
its preparations. Boris Johnson, the British Foreign
Secretary, was in Kabul only yesterday, where he said
that we encourage UNAMA to keep up the pressure on
the Afghan Government and its electoral management
bodies in order to ensure credible, inclusive and
on-time elections. The United Kingdom and the wider
donor community are also playing their part. We are
encouraging the Independent Election Commission
and the Electoral Complaints Commission to deliver
elections on time, with a focus on reducing the
opportunities for fraud. We are particularly concerned
about the fact that key positions in the Election
Commission remain unfilled, and we call on the Afghan
Government to appoint a new chief executive officer
and provincial Complaints Commission commissioners
without delay.
After the elections, the conference on Afghanistan
to be held in Geneva in November will be an
opportunity for donor countries and the Government of
Afghanistan to take stock of the progress that has been
made since 2016, and to ensure that the Government is
on track to deliver on its reform commitments. It will
also be an opportunity for the donor community and
24/38

26/06/2018

the Government to consider the future of international
support beyond 2020.
At this moment of potential change, we should
reflect on the progress that has been so far, particularly
on the rights of women and girls. That is a personal
priority for Britain’s Foreign Secretary, who met with
Afghan girls participating in a United Kingdomfunded sports education programme during his recent
trip. Over the past six years, United Kingdom aid
has helped 300,000 marginalized Afghan girls into
education and trained more than 10,000 teachers. But
there is some way to go to reach our goal of 12 years of
quality education for all girls. The United Kingdom is
contributing almost $1 billion in development funding
in Afghanistan between 2016 and 2020. We will
continue to work closely with our Afghan partners to
promote opportunities for all Afghans.
I began by saying that this felt like a moment of
opportunity for Afghanistan. There is a prospect of
peace. Elections are coming that can help support peace
and social stability. Let us stand beside our Afghan
partners at this moment. Let us stand beside the Afghan
people as they determine their own future.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We are grateful to today’s briefers, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism and Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crimes, for
their thorough analysis of the current state of affairs in
Afghanistan. Their assessments confirm that the main
barriers to stabilizing the situation in the country are
the threats represented by terrorism and drugs. The
conclusion to be drawn is that our fight against them
must be uncompromising, and we must do it together.
The security situation in Afghanistan continues
to be the most serious cause for concern. The Taliban
controls a significant part of the country’s territory.
The insurgents’ latest offensive raises serious questions
about their willingness to begin peace negotiations. All
of this once again convinces us of the damage that is
done by relying on force to resolve the problem and on
attempts to marginalize some regional stakeholders and
bring in others. These kinds of balancing acts worsen
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

regional tensions and antagonize the very stakeholders
who are capable of contributing to a settlement.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
is a factor in this deteriorating situation. The group,
which has as many as 10,000 fighters in its ranks, is
already operating in at least nine of the 34 provinces,
and increasingly often is organizing barbaric terrorist
attacks with numerous terrorist casualties, including in
Kabul, and continually consolidating its positions in
northern Afghanistan, turning it into a springboard for
further expansion into Central Asia. ISIL’s establishment
of camps for training militants, including fighters from
Central Asian States, is particularly worrying. We must
not keep silent about these facts.
Against this backdrop, we are again hearing
accusations that Russia is supporting the Taliban.
That is not new. This is something we have heard
about frequently in the past few years, with practically
identical wording every time and zero facts to back it
up. We get the distinct impression that their true goal
is to divert attention from the many real mistakes that
have been made in Afghanistan over the past 17 years.
One of the insurgents’ sources of support is the military
assistance supplied to Afghanistan by a number of our
partners, which is provided without being properly
accounted for and is frequently simply being stolen.
We should point out that Western military experts have
mentioned this too.
We have had no clear explanations of the
unidentified helicopters transporting weapons and
fighters for the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) through Afghan airspace, which is completely
controlled by our partners. The stubborn silence on this
subject continues. Our demand that the situation be
investigated without delay and this undisclosed practice
cease still stands. We expect a proper report, not a form
letter. And in general, we need to see more determined
efforts from the Afghan authorities and the foreign
contingents stationed there to clear the terrorists out of
northern Afghanistan.
As Mr. Fedotov rightly pointed out today, the
terrorist threat is inextricably tied to the drug problem.
Afghan narcotics support the terrorists financially.
In 2017, the acreage in the country under drug
crops increased by 63 per cent and drug production
doubled. All of this intensifies the drug threat both for
Afghanistan and internationally. The situation clearly
demands that we ramp up our collective efforts rapidly

S/PV. 8294

or risk letting this get out of control for good. We want
to remind the Council that the Collective Security
Treaty Organization — which has extensive experience
in countering the drug threat, including through its
Operation Kanal — is always ready to put its shoulder
to the wheel in this area. At the same time, we believe
that the Afghans themselves must play the decisive role.
After all, it is the country’s people who end up being
the main victims of illegal business.
We welcome President Ghani’s statement on
the announcement and subsequent extension of
the temporary ceasefire. It is important that these
measures not be expanded to the international terrorist
groups operating in Afghanistan, especially ISIL.
We hope that the peace initiatives will give impetus
to ending the fratricidal war in Afghanistan and to
launching a peaceful dialogue and a process of national
reconciliation. We strongly urge the Taliban to respond
in kind.
We support the existing formats for national
reconciliation in Afghanistan. However, we believe
firmly that the principle of honest and equitable
partnership, taking the interests of all the regional
stakeholders into account, that forms the basis of the
Moscow format and mechanism of the revived Shanghai
Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group,
is ideally suited to the task of launching the negotiation
process. In that context, we note the Contact Group’s
successful holding on 28 May in Beijing of its second
meeting, in which the participants unanimously
affirmed their readiness to promote interaction within
its framework based on the protocol defining the
priority tasks and modalities for the mechanism’s work.
Parliamentary elections, followed by a presidential
election, are approaching in Afghanistan. We support
holding them on schedule and take note of the authorities’
statement regarding the successful completion of the
voter registration procedure. In the circumstances, it is
more important than ever to keep to a balanced internal
political policy.
We cannot allow Afghan society to become
ethnically polarized or permit any infringements on the
rights of minorities. The elections should be inclusive
and a powerful force for consolidation, bringing
Afghanistan one step closer to attaining full political
and economic independence and returning it to the
path of sustainable development. It is obvious to us that
ensuring broad regional and international cooperation

18-1977625/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

will help to achieve that goal. Russia is ready for
constructive work.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would like to express
our appreciation to Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of the Office of
Counter-Terrorism, for their comprehensive briefings,
and to Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, for his statement. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2018/539).
Addressing the challenges to establishing sustained
peace, stability and security in Afghanistan remains
a central issue. We were pleased that the temporary
ceasefire in Afghanistan during Eid Al-Fitr was
respected. It was unprecedented, and images from all
over Afghanistan testified to the Afghan people’s desire
for peace. In addition, the civic peace-tent movement is
another illustration of our Afghan brothers and sisters’
demand for peace. We call once again for an end to the
violence. Turkey continues to stand ready to contribute
to Afghan-led and -owned peace and reconciliation
efforts. Access to education for Afghan women and
girls is critical to promoting a culture of peace in
Afghanistan and plays a central role in Turkey’s
assistance efforts there.
We take note of the findings of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the efforts to ensure an inclusive
and credible electoral process in Afghanistan. Ensuring
that the upcoming elections are held successfully will
be important to all of our efforts to help Afghanistan
achieve stability, security and prosperity. But the low
and uneven voter-registration turnout in the provinces
is worrying, and swift and effective measures should be
taken to rectify the situation. The fragmented political
environment in Afghanistan is another area of concern.
We join the Secretary-General in his call to all Afghan
political stakeholders to act in a spirit of unity and work
together to ensure credible elections and advance the
peace process.
Enhancing collaboration among the countries
of the region continues to be crucial, which is why
26/38

26/06/2018

Turkey continues to contribute to regional cooperation
efforts for Afghanistan. This year, in line with our
continued support for the country, we are co-chairing
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process. During the
meeting for senior officials of the Process held in
Istanbul in April, participating countries highlighted
the importance of reviewing the implementation of
confidence-building measures.
We also want to note the successful finalization of
the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and
Solidarity, and hope that its expeditious implementation
through working groups will help both countries deal
with their numerous challenges.
We cannot overemphasize the importance for
Afghanistan of consolidating the achievements of the
past 17 years, which requires sustained support on
the part of the international community for President
Ashraf Ghani and the Afghan Government and people.
We commend the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan for its efforts to assist the Government
and the people of Afghanistan in their endeavours to
achieve a stable, peaceful and prosperous country.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Turkey’s
commitment to continuing to stand by the Afghan
people in their quest for a better future for as long as
our help is needed.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Biagini (Italy): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Yamamoto, Executive Director Fedotov
and Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for their
comprehensive briefings.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the European Union.
The events of the past few days and weeks have
highlighted the fact that Afghanistan’s security
challenges remain extremely complex. International
support, through the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission in Afghanistan, in which Italy participates and
contributes as a Framework Nation, is therefore still
essential. However, as many Council members have
already noted in today’s debate, we have recently been
witnessing some truly encouraging developments. We
welcome the courageous peace offer that President Ghani
extended in February, as well as the announcement of a
unilateral ceasefire for the last part of Ramadan and the
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

decision to extend it. For the first time since 2001, the
ceasefire was also initially reciprocated by the Taliban.
The political significance of these events is amplified
by the unanimously positive reactions from both the
Afghan population and the international community. In
that regard, I would like to reiterate Italy’s unqualified
support for these initiatives, which we hope can serve
as a catalyst for the peace and reconciliation process.
We encourage all actors and stakeholders to
interpret these developments with the necessary caution
but without losing sight of the hope for a peaceful future
they have generated. This phase requires a heightened
sense of responsibility from all sides, and we therefore
urge the Taliban to react positively to President Ghani’s
peace offer. We have a window of opportunity that
is manifest in the Afghan people’s clear longing for
sustainable peace, which can gain further momentum
if all relevant regional and international actors work
together constructively to remove the remaining
obstacles to peace. Concrete cooperation among
neighbours on confronting terrorism, drug trafficking
and organized-crime networks remains essential. In
that context, we welcome the bilateral dialogue between
Kabul and Islamabad. Effective cooperation on issues of
common interest can also help to significantly improve
the prospects for peace.
Afghanistan is rapidly approaching a long election
season, culminating in the presidential election
scheduled to take place in 2019. The holding of free,
fair, credible and inclusive parliamentary and district
elections this October will be a crucial milestone for
Afghanistan’s democratic institutions, as well as in
terms of delivering results for the Afghan people
and will also be a tangible demonstration of the
Government’s commitment to reform in the run-up to
the Geneva conference.
We appreciate the efforts that the Afghan
Government and the relevant electoral institutions have
made over the past few weeks to produce a noteworthy
increase in voter registration, and it is encouraging
that almost one third of those who have registered are
women. In that context, I would like to reiterate the
crucial importance of protecting and promoting women’s
rights. We encourage the Government to continue its
efforts in that regard, since the gains made so far cannot
be taken for granted, as shown in UNICEF’s recent data
on declining primary-school participation, while also
taking into account the difficult security situation in
many parts of the country.

S/PV. 8294

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our sincere
appreciation for the important role and contribution
that the Special Representative and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan provide in the
framework of the international community’s efforts to
bring peace, stability and development to Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to start
where my Italian colleague just ended, by thanking
Mr. Yamamoto for his work and his very comprehensive
briefings. I fully endorse his assessments in the matter
before us today. He has Germany’s support for his
work. Listening to the discussions this morning, I get
the impression that there is a general convergence of
opinions. In terms of the assessment, everybody here
seems to share the view that, to summarize it, the glass
is both half full and half empty.
With regard to the half-full part of the glass, the
clear highlight of recent days and weeks has been the
initiative taken by the President of Afghanistan and the
Afghan Government to propose a ceasefire during the
Eid festivities. This was a grass-roots movement, and
the images circulated of people longing for peace were
noteworthy. Another positive development is that the
President continues to say that he is ready to engage in
peace talks with the Taliban without preconditions. Also
on the positive side, as many have highlighted, is the
encouraging improvement in cooperation with Pakistan,
and we welcome the finalization of the AfghanistanPakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity. Now,
of course, we need that dialogue to continue and be
implemented so that it actually bears fruit.
Also, with regard to the glass half-full, the election
registration process is very encouraging in some areas.
Yes, it is a positive development that, as my Italian
colleague just said, one third of registered voters are
women, but our goal must be 50 per cent.
An example of the glass half-empty is the ruthless
behaviour by the Taliban to stop this ceasefire. Like
our American colleagues, we condemn this behaviour.
We think it is very cynical and brutal behaviour by
the Taliban. It must reconsider, so I hope that the
Government will remain prepared to discuss this.
The two briefings we heard this morning were
also more on the half-empty side. Mr. Fedotov gave an
alarming account of the opium-production situation.

18-1977627/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

This is terrible, given everything that drug production
has as a consequence. Mr. Voronkov also gave a
very depressing account of the figures involved in
terrorist attacks.
Also, on the elections, we have to ensure that all
posts in the Independent Election Commission are
filled, that everything is done to remedy the regional
imbalances in voter registration and that the elections
go ahead as planned.
I want to highlight, with respect to the glass halfempty, what Mr. Yamamoto said with regard to women
and violence against women. This was highlighted
by several representatives, including our French and
British colleagues. More has to be done in that respect.
I urge the Government to put this issue high on the
agenda. The representative of Afghanistan said in his
intervention that they are working on it, but I think that
more has to be done to ensure the inclusion of women in
the political process and address the issue of crime. This
must not happen, so maybe the presidency in charge of
the next debate could think about additional briefers.
We have addressed the issues of terrorism and drugs, so
maybe we could focus on the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, or
children and armed conflict, and the Security Council
could concentrate on these issues.
What we need, of course, is economic development
and investment in the country. We need to create jobs
so that there is an alternative to drugs. For this to
work, there is one recipe: good governance. It is very
important that the Afghan leadership and President and
all involved work together as a team. We must continue
to build institutions and an independent judiciary. We
also must work very hard to end corruption, and we
urge the Afghan Government once again to implement
the recommendations contained in the recent report.
This, I think, is what needs to be done. The Afghan
Government bears a great deal of responsibility.
We are, of course, aware that it cannot shoulder
this alone, but I think that it has to assume the
corresponding responsibility.
Germany will continue to support the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the United
Nations agencies working in Afghanistan. I do not have
the figures on how much we spend, but we have from the
very beginning had at least 1,000 soldiers there. We are
in Mazar-e-Sharif with many other countries. We have
for many years provided economic support totalling
28/38

26/06/2018

hundreds of millions of euros — billions, probably,
by now — so we will continue to provide support in
close cooperation with the Afghan Government and
our international partners. When Germany comes into
the Security Council next year, it will continue to pay
special attention to Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
thanks the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan for its ongoing work in the country.
We also thank Special Representative Yamamoto,
Executive Director Fedotov and Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov for their very enlightening briefings.
Today I will address three main points: the
empowerment and rights of women and girls in
Afghanistan, the upcoming elections, and Canada’s
commitment to the peace and reconciliation process.
(spoke in English)
First and foremost, Canada is committed to
advancing gender equality and empowering women
and girls in Afghanistan. In May, Canada’s Minister
of Status of Women, Maryam Monsef, spoke via
video at the fifth Afghan Women Symposium about
our approach. I echo Minister Monsef in stating that
Afghanistan has made considerable progress on gender
equality. Canada welcomes the work of the Afghan
Government to ensure the full implementation of the
2009 Elimination of Violence against Women Law.
Still, there is much work to be done to enable the full
participation of women and girls in social and political
affairs. Canada directly supports education, healthcare and human rights programmes in Afghanistan. In
all of these programmes we place primacy on ensuring
that women’s and girls’ rights are advanced through
them. For example, we have established more than
9,200 community-based schools in rural and remote
areas of Afghanistan so as to increase girls’ access to
basic education. More than 80 per cent of the 273,000
students in those schools are girls. In Afghanistan, it
is crucial that women and girls be included as equal
participants in all decision-making processes.
This brings me to my second point: the need for fair
and peaceful elections. Canada supports the meaningful
inclusion of women as both candidates and voters in
October’s elections. However, we are deeply concerned
by the security situation and the effect it has on the
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

ability of citizens to exercise their democratic rights.
In many cases, election-related security incidents
are occurring at schools and mosques used for voter
registration. This is simply unacceptable.
The credibility of the elections process is dependent
on the ability of voters and candidates, regardless
of gender, to participate without being subjected to
violence and harassment. We ask that all parties to
this conflict respect the right of everyday citizens to
participate in the election process. Canada supports the
efforts of the Afghan Government and looks forward to
democratic, transparent and peaceful elections in the
coming months.
Finally, it is important to address the need for
peace and reconciliation, and the inclusion of women
in this process. I would particularly like to recognize
Uzbekistan’s efforts to promote peace through the
Tashkent conference. Afghan-owned and Afghan-led
efforts towards peace that are bolstered by regional
support will benefit the stability and prosperity of us
all. Canada also applauds President Ghani’s courageous
announcement on 16 June that the Afghan Government
intends to extend its ceasefire. We support the Afghan
Government’s call to the Taliban to agree to another
ceasefire and to join peace talks.
Canada supports Afghan-led efforts towards peace
and regional stability. We commend Afghanistan and
its partners for their work to increase gender equality,
ensure fair and peaceful elections, and promote peace
and reconciliation initiatives.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this debate on Afghanistan following
the first ceasefire in the last 17 years. We welcomed this
development and expressed our hope that this would
lead to lasting peace. I thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
for his informative briefing and tireless efforts at the
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, and I also thank Mr. Yury Fedotov and
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov for their briefings.
Japan welcomes the steady implementation of the
Secretary- General’s strategic review, which was issued
in August last year and endorsed by the Council in its
resolution 2405 (2018). The strategic review’s insightful
findings provide a path forward for UNAMA to help

S/PV. 8294

create a future for Afghanistan where sufficient stability
exists to allow for a focus on institution-building and
development activities. Japan looks forward to actively
taking part in the forthcoming Geneva ministerial
conference on Afghanistan to be co-hosted by the
Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations,
where we will discuss the strategy towards sustainable
peace and self-reliance in the country.
The Government of Japan welcomed the recent
announcement by President Ashraf Ghani regarding
the ceasefire with the Taliban. Even if temporary, a
cessation of hostilities is a positive step for peace. Longstanding instability and conflict have left Afghanistan
unable to realize its full potential.
Japan, together with key stakeholders, took part
in the second Kabul process meeting and the Tashkent
conference, and expressed support for the Government
of Afghanistan offering to the Taliban its plans for talks
without preconditions.
Despite the recent ceasefire announcements,
regrettably, we have not observed any concrete step
toward such talks. The international community must
keep urging both sides to extend their ceasefires for
the sake of the Afghan people and to engage with each
other on starting a more formal process.
Parliamentary and district council elections, to
be held on 20 October, will be a critical test for the
Government of Afghanistan. While we are aware of
the ongoing preparation process by the Independent
Election Commission and of strong support by
UNAMA, there remain administrative and security
challenges. The international community awaits the
outcome of credible and inclusive elections, and we
are ready to extend assistance. However, the most
important thing is that elections must be Afghan-led,
Afghan-owned. I appreciate the update provided today
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mr. Yamamoto, and ask him to keep us informed and
to provide the international community with concrete
suggestions as to how we can support the ultimate goal
of inclusive elections.
Japan reiterates its commitment to assisting
Afghanistan on its path toward a peaceful, stable and
self-reliant future. The ceasefire offered a brief vision
of what the future would look like. Achieving that vision
is our goal, and we should not miss any opportunity to
get there.

18-1977629/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by thanking
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2018/539) and
Special Representative Tadamichi Yamamoto for his
very insightful briefing this morning.
The Secretary-General’s report notes that
Afghanistan continues to face multiple political
economic and security challenges in an uncertain
and fraught environment in which the humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate. It also underscores
the risks posed to the forthcoming elections by declining
public confidence in a fragmented political landscape.
But despite that bleak picture, this month has seen a ray
of hope emerge for peace in the country. A three-day
see a ceasefire between Afghan security forces and
the Taliban on Eid al-Fitr resulted in an unprecedented
pause in a war that has raged for almost 17 years. Even
if the ceasefire lasted only a few days, it marked a
moment of hope and opportunity. Eid saw extraordinary
and moving scenes of reconciliation in some places
between those who for years had fought a bloody war
against each other. The comprehensive observance of
the ceasefire by the Taliban also demonstrated that its
leadership has control of the movement and is cohesive
enough to negotiate a political settlement.
It is also significant that both President Ashraf
Ghani and the United States Secretary of State
have indicated that foreign forces can be a topic of
negotiations in any talks with the Taliban. This could
open the door for real dialogue.
My country has consistently advocated over the years
that a negotiated settlement is the only viable solution
to the decades of conflict and suffering in Afghanistan.
We have therefore welcome President Ashraf Ghani’s
offer to talk to the Taliban without preconditions and
the United States support for a negotiated settlement.
The ceasefire earlier this month has demonstrated that
negotiations are not only possible, but can actually
produce a positive outcome. The opportunity that has
opened up by recent developments must now be seized
and translated into serious and sustained efforts to
promote a political settlement and durable peace and
stability in Afghanistan.
While the onus for seizing the moment rests on the
parties directly involved in the Afghan conflict, Pakistan
for its part will continue to do what it can to support all
efforts to launch a credible peace process. My country’s
30/38

26/06/2018

participation in all regional and international forums on
peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan, including the
Moscow format, is a reflection of our commitment and
unflinching support for the peace process that brings
all the parties together to work for a political settlement.
Pakistan can support any agreed format for
negotiations that enables all directly engaged parties
to talk to each other. We feel that the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group, consisting of Pakistan,
Afghanistan, China and the United States, remains
a useful format to pursue a negotiated settlement. A
Quadrilateral Coordination Group+ format can also be
considered that brings all of Afghanistan’s neighbours
into the process.
A negotiated peace and national reconciliation
are all the more vital to preventing the threat posed to
Afghanistan, its neighbours and the global community
by the presence of Da’esh and a conglomerate of
terrorists, including the Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan,
the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement, the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan and other groups that have
adopted the umbrella of Da’esh. They need to be
defeated decisively and urgently. We must not allow
those groups to drive Afghanistan into another vortex
of violence and instability, which would compound the
threat to the region’s stability.
Pakistan has extended all assistance at the political
level, as well as through our robust counter-terrorism
operations, to help promote peace and stability in
Afghanistan. Pakistan’s security is inextricably linked
to peace and stability in Afghanistan. Pakistan has a
vital interest in a peaceful, stable, united and prosperous
Afghanistan. We stand ready to support Afghanistan in
addressing the multiple challenges it faces, and in that
spirit, Pakistan is engaged with the Afghan Government
in a comprehensive manner in all political, economic
and military spheres. A series of high-level visits by
both our political and military leadership have taken
place in recent months. Those exchanges have helped
to create an environment of trust and inject a positive
impetus in our bilateral relations.
The recently concluded Afghanistan-Pakistan
Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity will provide
a structured platform for engagement between our
two countries. Its five working groups on political,
economic, refugee, military and intelligence issues
envision a abroad and sustained dialogue between
our two nations. To strengthen defence cooperation,
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

Pakistan has offered support, including to equip Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces, gratis training
in Pakistan, as well as financing and supporting the
construction of the border management infrastructure.
For my country border management remains the highest
priority, we are working with the Afghan Government
on modalities to deploy military liaison officers on
either side to coordinate counter-terrorism efforts and
complement action against terrorist outfits on our side
of the border. We must secure our border to prevent
the cross-border movement of militants and terrorists.
That can be achieved only through constant vigilance,
effective management and real-time communications.
Terrorists should not be allowed to provoke clashes
between our border security forces.
Earlier this year, the ulema — our religious
leaders in Pakistan — issued a religious edict, or
fatwa, entitled “Message of peace from Pakistan”,
which unequivocally denounced terrorism and suicide
bombings throughout the world. Religious leaders from
my country also participated in the ulema conference
that was held this past month in Indonesia, and we will
participate in ulema conference of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation this coming month.
In conclusion, let me say that the international
community has long been unanimous in its view
that sustainable peace is achievable only through a
negotiated end to this long-running war. Almost 17
years of the conflict waged by the world’s most powerful
military forces have not yielded a military solution. The
path to peace in Afghanistan will be arduous, but it is
achievable. As a first step, all the parties concerned
must commit to a negotiated solution to the conflict,
which offers the best chance to end the suffering of
the Afghan people and restore peace to Afghanistan
and stability to the region. We hope that the search for
peace through a dialogue process will be the highest
priority for the Afghan Government, the Taliban, the
coalition forces, Afghanistan’s neighbours and the
international community.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Van Den Akker: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28
member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia

S/PV. 8294

and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
First of all, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2018/539) and
the strategic review. Our thanks also go to Special
Representative Yamamoto, Mr. Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, and Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for
their respective briefings.
As stated previously on several occasions, the EU
strongly acknowledges the crucial role played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and all the relevant United Nations agencies
in supporting the Afghan people, while encouraging
peace and reconciliation, monitoring and promoting
human rights and coordinating the international
community’s assistance. The EU wishes to have the
closest possible relationship with UNAMA in a spirit
of transparent and open cooperation on the ground
and in international formats for the ultimate benefit
of Afghanistan.
The EU supports President Ghani’s peace offer
to the Taliban extended at the February meeting of
the Kabul process for peace and security. The recent
historic ceasefires between the Afghan Government
and the Taliban during Eid Al-Fitr have given the
Afghan people much-needed respite from too many
years of conflict. Popular support for that initiative
was overwhelming. The gathering of Afghans from all
sides — with Government officials, soldiers, members
of the Taliban exchanging Eid Al-Fitr greetings and
attending prayers together — has given a sense of what
peace in Afghanistan could look like. The European
Union commends both parties for honouring their
commitments. President Ghani’s decision to offer a 10day extension of the ceasefire was another courageous
step to make way for peace negotiations, and we call on
the Taliban to reciprocate.
Meaningful and enduring peace in Afghanistan
requires continuous and inclusive dialogue and
engagement, and the EU is ready to support that process.
In that light, the European Union supports the Kabul
process for peace and security. High Representative
of the European Union Mogherini, at the Tashkent
conference on peace, security and regional development
held on 28 March, offered EU support for peace
negotiations and increased EU assistance for women’s

18-1977631/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

empowerment, regional economic development and the
reintegration of refugees and former fighters. The EU
reiterates the importance of the Afghan Government
and the Taliban moving towards a political settlement,
which has to be Afghan-led and Afghan owned.
Therefore, the Kabul process on peace and security
should be the main international forum and vehicle to
support such talks. Regional actors have an important
role to play in facilitating the process.
The next ministerial conference on Afghanistan,
to be held in late November in Geneva, will be an
important opportunity to highlight linkages between
a future reconciliation process and broader political,
economic and social challenges. The conference will
also take stock of the implementation of the Afghan
Government’s reform package committed to at the
Brussels conference on Afghanistan in October 2016.
We support NATO-led Resolute Support Mission
efforts to provide further training, advice and assistance
to the Afghan security forces and institutions.
Respect for human rights and democratic elections
continue to be a focus for the EU’s dialogue with
the Afghan authorities and the EU’s actions in the
country. Human rights form an integral part of the
structured dialogue between the EU and Afghanistan
under the Cooperation Agreement for Partnership
and Development. In that context, the first meeting
of the special working group on human rights, good
governance and migration was held on 5 May in Kabul,
during which we held a substantial and open discussion
about a wide range of topics in the area of human rights
and good governance. The discussions confirmed
that Afghanistan has sound legislation in place in
various areas, or is about to adopt such legislation
in the near future. What is still lacking, however, is
effective implementation. There is definitely room for
improvement in many areas. During our dialogue, we
identified some of the actions that need to be taken to
ensure progress. Tangible measures against corruption
demonstrating the political will to address the issue are
of particular importance. Likewise, efforts to protect
and further expand girls and women’s rights and
enhance their empowerment must continue.
The application of capital punishment remains
a great concern for us, and the EU has underlined its
principled opposition to any form of the death penalty.
It has continued to call for an outright abolition of
the death penalty in due course, beginning with an
32/38

26/06/2018

immediate moratorium as a first step. On the other
hand, it is positive that the new Afghan penal code
significantly limits the number of crimes to which the
death penalty can be applied.
The upcoming parliamentary and district elections
in October are of vital importance for the stability of
Afghanistan. It is imperative that the elections take place
according to schedule and in a credible, transparent and
inclusive manner, in view of ensuring the credibility
of Government reforms that will be presented at the
ministerial conference in Geneva. The EU notes with
some concern that actions remain to be taken to address
delays in preparation for the elections and that there is
a lack of outreach to the provinces and delays in setting
up fully functional electoral institutions. All efforts
must be deployed now to resolve those difficulties and
make the holding of the elections possible within the
announced time frame. The successful organization of
the elections will be an important prelude to next year’s
presidential elections and can provide a firm foundation
on which to begin preparations for that event. The
EU and its States members remain committed to
supporting the Afghan electoral process, and the EU
has pledged €15.5 million to assist the parliamentary
and district elections, together with other members of
the international community under the coordination
of UNAMA.
The EU and Afghanistan are continuing their
comprehensive dialogue on migration. The latest
discussion on the Afghanistan Joint Way Forward took
place on 6 May, at which Afghanistan reiterated its
commitment to the implementation of the Joint Way
Forward and underlined the importance of dignified,
safe and orderly returns and for special attention to be
paid to vulnerable groups. That is something the EU
and its States members agree upon, and we reiterated
the fact that the implementation of the Joint Way
Forward must be continued in a spirit of partnership,
while taking into account each party’s sensitivities.
At the same time, the regional dimension of
migration remains high on the EU’s agenda and is
being addressed in the political dialogue, as well as
through financial assistance. The EU has made a strong
commitment to address the key challenges of irregular
migration and forced displacement in Afghanistan,
as well as in the region, and to work towards finding
a comprehensive regional solution, while focusing
on the root causes of migration and ensuring the
sustainable reintegration of returned Afghan nationals
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

within the country. To that end, the EU has continued
the implementation of the two regional programmes
targeting migration and regional displacement in Asia.
From 1 January to 31 March, UNAMA recorded
2,258 civilian casualties in Afghanistan, reflecting
a similarly high casualty toll as compared to the
first three months of 2016 and 2017. The persistently
high levels of violence and its corresponding impact
on civilians remains a deep concern for the EU. It is
extremely worrying that the proportion of women and
children killed and injured remains high. We call on
all parties to protect the civilian population, especially
women and children. Conflict-related violence also
destroys livelihoods, homes and property, displaces
families and limits access to education, health and other
services. We need to continue to protect the vital role
of humanitarian agencies and respect their impartiality
and the humanitarian space in addressing the most
urgent needs of the most vulnerable.
In conclusion, it is important that the international
community remain strongly committed to supporting
Afghanistan in its pursuit of long-term peace, security
and stability. The EU expects that the recent initiatives
of President Ghani and of the Afghan Government will
lead to the establishment of a genuine peace process.
The EU continues to consider UNAMA a key partner
in achieving lasting peace in Afghanistan. UNAMA
has an invaluable role in ensuring the broadest possible
international support for an Afghan-led and -owned
process. The EU will continue to support those efforts
with all the means at its disposal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia takes this
opportunity to congratulate the Government of
Afghanistan on President Ghani’s 16 June decision to
extend the unilateral ceasefire for the remainder of
the holy month of Ramadan and for Eid Al-Fitr. The
Afghan people overwhelmingly supported the cessation
of hostilities, and the ceasefire has given hope that a
lasting peace may be possible.
Australia has also welcomed President Ghani’s
invitation to the Taliban at the 28 February meeting of
the Kabul process for peace and security cooperation
to engage in negotiations without preconditions and
without the threat of violence. President Ghani’s offer
and the ceasefire in June are bold steps that reflect the
aspirations of the Afghan people. Australia underscores

S/PV. 8294

its disappointment that the Taliban thus far has chosen
not to match President Ghani’s bold thinking.
We deeply regret the continuing violence outlined
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/539) and
the role of the Taliban and other insurgent groups in
engaging in a series of heinous and cowardly attacks
targeting Afghanistan’s civilian population. We
condemn the brutal attacks by insurgent groups and the
actions of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
and ISIS-inspired groups, Al-Qaida, its affiliates and
other terrorist groups in Afghanistan. Together with our
allies and partners in the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission, Australia remains committed to supporting
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces to
meet the challenges presented by those groups.
Throughout the years of conflict, the Afghan
people have demonstrated their steadfast commitment
to building a better society in which the voices of all of
its members can be heard. The parliamentary elections,
now scheduled for October, will be another important
step in that process. We are encouraged that, despite
ongoing violence and intimidation, voter registration
has been increasing. Conducting parliamentary
elections in October will be crucial for political
credibility. We encourage the Afghan Government to
maintain its efforts to hold inclusive elections, and
we welcome the commitment of the United Nations to
supporting those elections.
We also look forward to further discussing
the Afghan Government’s plans for the upcoming
November ministerial conference in Geneva to advance
Afghanistan’s economic and social prosperity.
In addition to its many other challenges, we note
Afghanistan is facing a crisis, an imminent drought that
could affect two thirds of the country. An estimated
1.4 million people are likely to need emergency food
and nutrition assistance. Australia will continue to help
respond to that challenge.
International efforts in Afghanistan are supported
by a strong United Nations presence. Australia values
the role that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, ably led by Special Representative
Yamamoto, plays in guiding and coordinating
international support in Afghanistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

18-1977633/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to thank the Russian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this meeting, Ambassador
Saikal of Afghanistan for his statement and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Yamamoto, for presenting
his report (S/2018/539).
Unfortunately, as the report indicates, security
continues to remain Afghanistan’s major challenge.
Improving its security is one of the main requirements
for long-term stability and socioeconomic development.
In order to confront that challenge, the National Unity
Government of Afghanistan needs the robust and
sustained support of the international community. That
is of the utmost importance if we are to establish lasting
peace and stability in that part of the world.
As a neighbouring country, Iran has been steadfast
in supporting and promoting Afghanistan’s security
and stability, as well as its socioeconomic development,
which are all very closely interlinked. Our support for
the Afghan National Unity Government is unrelenting.
We welcome any progress on the path to an Afghanowned and -led peace process leading to lasting and
comprehensive peace. It is in that context that Iran
welcomes and participates in the Kabul process for
peace and security cooperation and similar processes
to help bring peace and security to Afghanistan.
Iran welcomed the recent temporary ceasefire
announced between the Government and the Taliban,
as well as the Government’s good faith efforts to ensure
its continuation. We also welcome the recent positive
developments in relations between our two neighbours
Afghanistan and Pakistan. We hope they will continue
and that the relations will be further strengthened.
Terrorism and extremism are not only a threat to
Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries, but also to
regional and international peace and security. Counterterrorism efforts must be given the highest priority.
In the same vein, supporting Afghanistan’s counterterrorism measures advances regional and international
peace and security. In that regard, we believe that the
growing threat of Da’esh and its affiliates in Afghanistan
should not be underestimated.
As we approach the elections in Afghanistan and
take into account the role that successful elections
could play in strengthening the political institutions
34/38

26/06/2018

and national unity in the country, improved security
conditions become more relevant and essential.
Iran also attaches great importance to promoting
regional cooperation in support of peace, stability
and development in Afghanistan. We welcome the
continued work of the joint committees entrusted with
formulating a comprehensive framework agreement
for bilateral cooperation. We hope that will soon lead
to the agreement’s conclusion, ensuring sustained and
increasing cooperation between the two countries.
The ongoing efforts in the port of Chabahar will have
a significant impact on promoting trade and economic
cooperation with Afghanistan. Any attempt to disrupt
that vital project will play into the hands of those who
do not want peace and progress for the Afghan people.
We need unconditional international support for such
innovative projects.
We believe that special attention should be paid
to combating the interlinked sources of insecurity and
instability in Afghanistan, particularly the production
of, and trade in, narcotic drugs as a major source of
income for terrorists, extremists and illegal armed
groups. Accordingly, the international community must
support the relevant international and regional projects
and activities, especially the tripartite initiatives by
Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan, to fight the menace
of narcotics.
We continue to support the dedicated work of
UNAMA and United Nations agencies in providing
reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan. Sustained
ownership and partnership with the Afghan Government
are needed in order to utilize the best potential of
UNAMA and the United Nations system to deliver the
necessary services in priority areas, as requested by the
national Government.
As always, I would like to conclude my statement
by expressing Iran’s solidarity with the fraternal people
of Afghanistan and by reassuring them of our full
support in their challenging endeavour to achieve peace
and prosperity in their country.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this timely consideration
of the situation in Afghanistan.
The focus of the international community on
Afghanistan has been unremitting since the start of
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

this year. The Security Council visited Afghanistan
in January. A ministerial debate on Afghanistan and
regional connectivity was organized by Kazakhstan
in the Security Council (see S/PV.8162). Several
international and regional conferences have been held
to address aspects of the issue. We therefore hope
that this debate will continue to reflect the unceasing
commitment of the international community to
Afghanistan. We thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mr. Yamamoto for sharing his
insights, Mr. Fedotov for providing the perspective on
drugs and crimes and Mr. Voronkov for emphasizing
the counter-terrorism dimensions. We also express our
sincere appreciation of Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal’s
articulation of the challenges with which Afghanistan
is confronted.
Listening to the briefings, it is obvious that the
events of hope that are being discerned need to transform
into a process if the situation in Afghanistan is to take
a turn for the better. Sadly, the markers of progress
on fundamental concerns about the situation strike a
sombre note, whether in terms of the suffering of the
ordinary people of Afghanistan, the senseless orgy of
heinous killings by terrorists or the displacement of a
conflict-weary people. Those aspects have a sobering
impact by bringing us in touch with the harsh realities
that the millions of people of Afghanistan face on a
day-to-day basis.
Despite the much-appreciated peace offer of the
Afghan Government, the offensive by the Taliban
has taken many lives. Such offensives cannot but be
planned and launched without the existence of safe
havens in the neighbourhood of Afghanistan. Those
supporting the terrorists targeting Afghanistan have
not been deterred. Notwithstanding the efforts of the
international community, there are still those that
provide sanctuaries to support the dark agendas of
terrorist organizations, such as the Taliban, the Haqqani
network, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
Al-Qaida, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed.
The same safe havens that sheltered Mullah Omar
also sheltered Osama Bin Laden. Lest we forget, the
terrorism problem in Afghanistan is not a local one.
We do not need a catastrophe again to remind us that
Afghanistan requires strong and steady international
support in the elimination of the scourge of terrorism,
which is a threat to global peace and security.
Mr. Fedotov’s presentation of the Taliban’s involvement
in virtually all aspects of the opium trade suggest that

S/PV. 8294

it is not only a political or terrorism problem but also
one of organized crime. The Security Council therefore
needs to build on the reference in resolution 2405 (2018)
to the linkages between extremism, terrorism, drug
production and the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of Afghanistan. It is time for the Council
to look at options to better utilize the range of tools
available to it to deal with those transnational networks
of drugs, terrorism and crime.
For its part, India is aware of the resilience of
the friendly people of Afghanistan. On the basis of
Afghanistan’s desire for robust, reliable and year-round
connectivity and to improve trade and investment
relations with prominent markets in the region and
beyond, India has tailored its support as a development
partner of Afghanistan to meet such requirements. In
recent months, there have been significant developments
as far as connectivity is concerned. Chabahar port in
Iran was inaugurated in December 2017. The Indian
grant assistance of 170,000 tons of wheat supplies to
Afghanistan recently transited through Chabahar,
highlighting the benefits of improved connectivity.
The India-Afghanistan air freight corridor, established
last year, has gained momentum in the first year of its
operation. There are now cargo flights between Kabul,
Kandahar, New Delhi and Mumbai. Thus far, such
flights have carried more than 2,000 tons of exports
from Afghanistan to India worth more than tens of
millions of dollars. Encouraged by that, we have plans
to expand the air freight corridor network to various
other cities in Afghanistan and India.
Looking at the football on the table and the
importance that you, Mr. President, have placed on the
power of sport, I believe it important to mention the
role of sportspersons from Afghanistan. The Persian
poet and Sufi mystic Rumi once said that where there
was ruin, there was hope for treasure. That seems
to have been the case with the sportspersons from
Afghanistan. They have left behind the memories of a
time when sport was explicitly banned by the Taliban
in Afghanistan. The national team of Afghanistan
is the new sensation on cricket pitches globally. A
few months ago, Afghanistan qualified for the next
Cricket World Cup. They made their first foray as a test
cricket-playing nation earlier this month, ensuring their
presence among the best cricket-playing countries in
the world. While having made cricket grounds in India
their home base, Afghan cricketers have flourished.

18-1977635/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

However, we look forward to the day when we, too, can
play cricket with them on their soil.
We appreciate the efforts of our Central Asian
friends in assisting Afghanistan in the most difficult
times. The efforts of Uzbekistan in organizing the
recent Tashkent conference on Afghanistan and the
continuous tireless efforts of Kazakhstan in working on
Afghanistan-related issues in the Security Council are
indeed significant and crucial to our collective efforts
in the region. We will work with all those in the region
that also believe that the interests of the Afghans are
paramount in bringing about a lasting solution to the
security situation through an Afghan-led and Afghanowned process.
Such efforts and those of partners from beyond our
region all contribute to the indomitable spirit with which
the friendly Afghan people are building their country
despite the difficulties that they face. The Council, too,
must incessantly contribute to that noble cause.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Belgium associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union.
At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Representative Yamamoto not only for his briefing
but also for his tireless efforts towards lasting peace
in Afghanistan.
In the most recent debate on Afghanistan in the
Security Council (see S/PV.8199), Belgium welcomed
and supported the historic peace offer made by President
Ghani and his National Unity Government. That offer
was supported by the countries of the region, as well as
the international community, including at the Tashkent
conference on 27 March. Despite the annual launch of
the Taliban’s spring offensive, the offer has found deep
resonance across the country in a civic movement for
peace and reconciliation. Another essential contribution
to peace was made on 14 May with the agreement on
the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and
Solidarity between those two countries.
Belgium notes with satisfaction the announcement
that parliamentary and district council elections will
be held on 20 October. It is important that that date
be kept. Belgium notes the significant efforts of the
Government, as well as the courage of the population, to
register for the elections. It is also essential that women
36/38

26/06/2018

have an opportunity to participate in the elections both
as voters and as candidates. The process leading to
the holding of elections must be inclusive, transparent
and credible.
It is also very important to underscore that necessary
reforms must continue in Afghanistan, as outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/539). Belgium
welcomes the fact that the effectiveness of the law to
combat violence against women is being strengthened
and encourages the Afghan Government to redouble its
efforts in the fight against impunity. In that context,
the implementation of the existing legal framework is
key. The anti-harassment of women and children law,
enacted on 31 December 2017, is a step forward in
improving complaints procedures and clarifying what
constitutes harassment in public spaces.
Since the beginning of the year, Belgium has been
working alongside Afghanistan in the Human Rights
Council. We welcome Afghanistan’s accession to the
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture,
which is a strong sign of its commitment to human
rights. I believe that we should underscore that fact as
we mark the International Day in Support of Victims
of Torture. We welcome the offer of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to assist
the Government in the practical operationalization of
the commitments set out in the Protocol.
Belgium deplores the increase in the recruitment
and use of children by parties to the conflict and
supports the Secretary-General’s call on all parties to
put an immediate stop to such grave violations. They
cannot go unpunished. We call on the Government to
bring the perpetrators to justice and to assess how return
and rehabilitation mechanisms can be strengthened.
Attacks on schools and medical centres continue.
We thank UNAMA for the careful monitoring of those
gross violations of international humanitarian law.
Such attacks remind us that the efforts of all parties
concerned to implement resolution 2286 (2016), on
conflict and health care, must be intensified.
In conclusion, Belgium commends President Ghani
and his Government on their unwavering commitment
to peace despite myriad challenges. The ball is indeed
in the Taliban’s court.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uzbekistan.
18-19776

26/06/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s quarterly
debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Yamamoto,
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Mr. Fedotov, for their informative briefings.
It is obvious that prospects for sustainable
development in Central Asia are closely linked to
the achievement of durable peace in Afghanistan.
Therefore, Uzbekistan continues efforts aimed at
contributing to the stabilization of the situation in
Afghanistan and its social and economic development,
in accordance with the agreements reached at the
international conference on Afghanistan held in
Tashkent on 27 March. The event was convened at
the joint initiative of the leaders of Uzbekistan and
Afghanistan and attended by high-ranking officials
from 21 States and leading international organizations,
such as the United Nations, the European Union,
NATO and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
Representatives of the five permanent members of the
Security Council, members of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, as well as Afghanistan’s neighbours
and key regional countries that are actively involved
in rendering assistance in economic recovery of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan were present at the
Tashkent forum. The Tashkent declaration was adopted
at the end of conference. I would like to mention some
of its highlights.
First, the declaration demonstrates a consolidated
position at the regional and global levels on the need
for an early launch of direct negotiations between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Afghan Islamic
Movement of Taliban without preliminary conditions.
Secondly, the declaration defines the obligations of
the opposing parties in the peace process. In particular,
the document includes an appeal to the Government
in Kabul to guarantee the integration of the armed
opposition into the political life of Afghanistan and
recognize it as a legitimate political force. In turn,
the Movement of Taliban must recognize its own
responsibility for peace and stability in the country,
renounce violence, cut ties with international terrorist
groups and respect the equal rights of all Afghans, in
accordance with the main provisions of the Constitution.

S/PV. 8294

Thirdly, the importance of the full support of
the Afghan Government in combating terrorism,
drug production and trafficking, as well as in taking
resolute steps against all forms and manifestations of
terrorism without any differentiation, was underscored
by all participants.
Fourthly, all countries showed their respect for
the sovereignty of Afghanistan and adherence to
non-interference in its internal affairs.
Fifthly, the declaration also includes a separate
paragraph devoted to regional economic cooperation.
In particular, all participants underlined that, by
promoting economic ties with Kabul, the countries of
the region make their own contribution to ensuring
stability and sustainable development in Afghanistan.
Based on the declaration, Uzbekistan is taking its
own steps. The President of Uzbekistan has proposed
to develop and implement efforts at the intra-Afghan,
regional and global levels by developing a comprehensive
peace programme for Afghanistan. At the intra-Afghan
level, it is necessary to ensure the early launch, without
preliminary conditions, of direct dialogue between the
central Government and the main forces of the armed
opposition, first and foremost the Movement of Taliban.
Uzbekistan is ready to provide a platform for direct
talks between the Afghan Government and the Taliban
in its territory at any stage of their development. In that
context, the Uzbek side has held a series of consultative
meetings and negotiations with the Government of
Afghanistan and representatives of the United States,
China, Russia, member States of the International
Contact Group, States of the Eurasian region, South
Asia, the Middle East and the Near East.
At the same time, the Uzbek side established
appropriate contacts and held working meetings with
high-ranking representatives of the Taliban Movement,
during which prospects for dialogue and interaction to
establish long-term peace and stability in Afghanistan
and its economic development were discussed so as
to realize the consolidated position of the participants
of the Tashkent conference. On that basis, Uzbekistan
welcomes the mutual introduction of a ceasefire
between the Government of Afghanistan and the
Taliban Movement in connection with the celebration
of Eid Al-Fitr. The Uzbek side also welcomes the
announcement by the President of Afghanistan, Ashraf
Ghani, of the extension of the ceasefire.

18-1977637/38

S/PV.8294

The situation in Afghanistan

At the regional level, it is necessary to ensure that
a firm regional consensus is reached, primarily with
the support of key regional players, including Central
Asian States. That is critically important given that
solving a number of key issues pertaining to economic
development and security and stability in Afghanistan
to a large extent depends upon neighbouring countries
and their goodwill, firm determination and readiness
to actively facilitate national reconciliation and end
violence in Afghanistan. The efforts of all neighbouring
countries and partners should not substitute but, rather,
complement each other. It is important to develop
and implement concerted measures, approaches and
practical mechanisms to solve the problem.
At the global level, it is important that leading
world Powers and donor organizations provide political
support to the peace process and financial assistance
for the socioeconomic rehabilitation of Afghanistan.
Uzbekistan is making its own contribution to the process
by expanding trade and implementing various projects.
As a result, in 2017 the volume of trade increased by
15 per cent to a total of approximately $600 million. In
the near future we intend to increase that number several
times over and bring it to $1.5 billion. Uzbekistan has
also initiated a number of joint infrastructure projects,
such as the new Mazar-e-Sharif-Herat railway project,
a project to construct the new 500-kilowatt SurkhanPuli-Khumri power transmission line and the training

38/38

26/06/2018

of qualified national personnel for Afghanistan. An
educational centre for the training of Afghan citizens
has been in operation since last January in the Uzbek
border city of Termez. In order to expand cooperation
in the field of education, the President of Uzbekistan
has proposed to establish a special international fund
for supporting education in Afghanistan. The main goal
of the fund is to assist Afghans in training national staff
in in-demand professions, while providing scholarships
and grants to talented students and young scientists.
In Uzbekistan we strongly believe that ultimately
peace on Afghan soil will open up new opportunities and
bring real benefits to all States of the greater Eurasian
continent. It will advance common security and stability
and create favourable conditions for the construction
of highways and railroads, the laying of pipelines and
the development of regional and trans-regional trade,
thereby contributing to ensuring peace and stability
in this vast region. Uzbekistan remains committed to
continuing close cooperation with all stakeholders to
resolve the conflict in Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I would like to thank the members of the Security
Council and the Secretariat for their participation.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

18-19776
