THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

th

MEETING:

24 MAY

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. . . . .. . . . , . . ,. . .. ., , . , ., . . . . . . ,. . . .. .

I

Adoption of the agenda . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . , . , , . . . . . , . . . , , . . , . . . . . . . , . .

I

Question concerning the situation in the region of the Falkland Islands (Islas
Malvinas):
(a) Letter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permanent Representative
of Ireland
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15037);
(h) better dated 20 May 1982 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15099);
(c) Letter dated 21 May 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Panama
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(s/lsloo).....~..............................,,..,...........,....,

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2364)

SIPV.2364

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol 9. . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~rppl~i~e~tts of the Qj”cial Records qf the Security Corrncil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, arc published in yearly volumes of Rrsoluriorzs and
Decisions of rhc Swurity Col~~cil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

2364th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
Presidctzt: Mr. LING

and Barbuda, Australia,
Belgium,
Bolivia,
Brazil,
Canada, Colombia,
Cuba, Ecuador,
El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Guatemala, Honduras, Indonesia,
Mexico, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Paraguay, Peru,
Uruguay and Venezuela to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

Qing (China).

Prcsenr: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

1. Adoption
2.

At the invitalion of the Presid~nr, Mr. Rocn (Argem
tina) rook n placr ut tlzr Council tubie; Mr. Jac:obs
(AtItigrfcr LrMd Barbudcr),
Mr. Strcel (Austruliu),
Miss Dover (Belgium),
Mr. Orriz Sanz (Bolivicr),
Mr. Cot-t&r da Costa (Brazil), Mr. Pelletier (Canuda),
Mr. Sunz do’ Scrtuamario (Colombia),
Mr. Rou Kouri
(Cuba), Mr. Albornoz (Ec~~aclo~-),
Mr. Rosulrs-Riwra
(El Salv~tdor), Mr. Mayr Ela (Equutoriul
Guinea),
Mr. Delpr&-Crespo
(GLtcrtetmrlu), Mr. Lobo (HOIZ~LII’NS), Mr. Kumil
(1~7dor?csia), Mr. Mutioz Ledo
(Mexico), Mr. Francis (New Zealund), Mr. Chatnorro
Mora (Nicarcrgua), Mr. Go17zcilez Arias (Paraguuy),
Mr. Calle y Cable (Pc>ru), Mr. Am,- Gotnez (Uruguay)
ut7d Mr. Mctrtini Ut.daI1C1u (V~~nezr~ela) took the pluces
wserwd for them ut rhr side qf’rhe Council chamber.

agenda (SlAgendaJ2364)

of the agenda

Question concerning the situation in the region of
the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
(n) Letter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15037);
(b) Letter dated 20 May 1982 from the SecretaryGenera1 addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15099);
(c) Letter dated 21 May 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Panama to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15100)

Adoption

24 May 1982, at 10.30 a.m.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
j?otn Chinese):
I wish to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Greece,
Kenya, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic and
Liberia requesting to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite them to participate in the discussion without the right to vote. in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

of the agenda

Question concerning the situation in the region of the
Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
(a) Letter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

(S/15037);
(b) Letter dated 20 May 1982 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15099);
(c) Letter dated 21 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Panama to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15100)

The PRESIDENT (itlto^r~rclatior? ,fiotn Chinrse):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/15104, which contains the text of a letter dated
23 May from the representative
of the United Kingdom to the President of the Council.

3.

1. The PRESIDENT
(intr~p~ctotiofl
,fivm Chitrrsc~):
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings [236&h. 2362th und 2363/v/ mrrtings]. I invite
the representative of Argentina to take a seat at the
Council table; 1 invite the representatives of Antigua

MP. OTUNNU
(Uganda): Mr. President,
the
month of May has proved to be a very difficult and
trying period for the Council and for international
peace. But thanks to your committed
and judicious
leadership. the Council has been able to play a very

4.

1

responsible

United Nations was founded in order “to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war”.

5. I take this opportunity to pay a very special and
well-deserved tribute to my good friend and neighbour, Mr, Kamanda wa Kamanda, the repreSentatiVe
of Zaire, for the dynamic and able manner in which
he conducted the affairs of the Council during the
I
month of April.

13. Thirdly, we have listened very carefully to the
points of view of the two parties. We understand well
the issues of principles and national honour involved
for the parties in conflict. But, as a member of the
Security Council, Uganda is very concerned about the
greater danger that this conflict poses for international
peace and security. Moreover, we are deeply touched
by the tragedy of many innocent lives being lost, needlessly lost, in a war that could have been avoided.
For these reasons, we call upon the parties to the conflict, namely, the Argentine Republic and the United
Kingdom, to cease all hostilities and resume negotiations.

and
leading role. MY delegation is truly
delighted to see you, the representative of the People’s
Republic of China, a country with which Uganda
enjoys
very cordial and fruitful relations, presiding
over the Council during this crucial month.

6. On 3 April [235&h /nrering]; I addressed the Council on the question under consideration now. On that
occasion I referred to the position of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries on the dispute between the
Argentine Republic and the United Kingdom over
the Malvinas Islands, Both the unequivocal commitment of my country to the path of non-alignment and
the important role that the Non-Aligned Movement
continues to play in contemporary international
relations lead me to refer once again to that position.

14. Fourthly,
we commend the Secretary-General
for his tireless peace efforts, which enjoyed the
strong and full support of my delegation. It is clear
from the Secretary-General’s
report of 21 May
[,736&h sneering] that substantial progress had been
made before the negotiations broke down. It is c?
matter for deep regret that this progress could not
be pressed to full fruition.

7. The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has
consistently maintained a two-pronged approach to
the dispute over the Malvinas Islands. On the substance of the dispute, the Movement has consistently
recognized the just claim of the Argentine Republic
in the special and particular case of the Malvinas
Islands, without prejudice to the general principle of
self-determination, Regarding the means to be used in
resolving the dispute, the Movement has always called
for negotiations leading to a peaceful and just settlement of the dispute.

15. Fifthly, my delegation is of the view that the
Secretary-General
should be mandated by the Council
to continue his peace efforts within the framework of
resolution 502 (1982).
16. Finally, it is our firm conviction that there is no
alternative to negotiations.
Only through the mechanism of negotiation
can a just settlement emerge, a
settlement which will preserve the national honour and
prestige of each party to the conflict.

8. As I stated on 3 April-and I reaffirm it todayUganda, as a member of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, fully subscribes to both aspects of the
Movement’s position on the dispute over the Malvinas Islands.

17. Uganda, for its part, will spare no effort to con
tribute to the achievement of this goal.
18. Mr. KAMANDA

wa KAMANDA

(Zaire) (inter-

pretcrtion.fiwn French): First ofall, Sir, I wish to extend
to you my warm and sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of May. The skill, experience and wisdom you
have demonstrated since the beginning of the month in
presiding over the Council’s debates indeed reflect
China’s age-old qualities of wisdom and finesse. We
are convinced that, at so critical a time as this in the
history of international
relations, and particularly in
the recent history of the Falklands/MaIvinas
war, we
need a man of your ability at the head of the Council.

9. On 3 April my delegation also voted in favour of
the draft resolution which became Council resolution SO2(1982). We did so solely because of our wellknown view on the use of force in international relations, a view on which I elaborated in some detail at
the time.
10. Since 3 April, the situation in and around the
Malvinas Islands has deteriorated dramatically.
The
crisis has expanded in proportion and dimensions. In
the light of these developments, I should like to take
this opportunity to indicate the attitude of my delegation, as follows.

19. I should also like to pay a well-deserved tribute
to the Secretary-General
for the commendable efforts
he has made and for the outstanding devotion he has
demonstrated in the search for a negotiated solution
to the conflict in the Falkland/Malvinas
Islands, iu
accordance with the unanimous wish of the members
of the Council.

‘I. First. we reaffirm resolution 502 (1982), which
>mains valid in all its aspects.
Secondly, we cannot accept the use of force and
mechanism of war as a method of resolving interional disputes. We are mindful of the fact that the

20. Two fundamental
principles that are seriouslY
jeopardized
in this case guide our approach to this
2

problem which pits against each other two countries
with which Zaire has excellent relations of friendship
and co-operation: the non-use of force or the threat of
force in relations between nations; and the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

28. But in this fight-1 do not know if it is a case of
David and Goliath-everyone
should pay due attention to the fact that one party is living completely in
the age of nuclear war, while the other is still trying
to acquire and master the means to live fully in the age
of conventional war, and this in a nuclear era.

21. We are faced here with a very serious crisis that
crystallizes the interests of groups V~S-&V~S other
groups and thereby exacerbates tensions in international relations, with all the consequences which
that implies, both foreseeable and unforeseeable.

29. All this makes us think of a giant whose huge
hand cannot get through the hole in a thick wall to seize
from the hands of an adversary cowering behind the
wall what he believes is his without destroying the wall
itself. First, he attempts to slip his finger through the
hole, hoping to grab his adversary and recover what
belongs to him. If, however, frustrated by the ineffectiveness of his attempts, he forces his hand into the
hole, the wall, in collapsing, could cause damage out
of all proportion to the value of what is regained,

22. Who will agree to lose face? Who will step down
in favour of the other? Who, in the final analysis, will
mak:e concessions to the other, and at what price?
23. It has been said that one can wage war on the
basis of calculation, but after that the dynamics of war
take over and are incalculable.

30. It is difficult for us not to remember, not to
remember situations in which cities with a glorious
past, with their inhabitants and their cultural treasures,
have been reduced to ashes from one day to the next.

24. As regards international relations, after the Falklands/Malvinas war things will never be the same. I do
not know whether they will be better or worse, but
I hope and pray they will be better.

3 I. We feel sorrow also because it is written somewhere that history offers many examples of the
inability or inaptitude of the international community
effectively to prevent the use of force and breaches of
the peace, which often lead to crises much more
serious than the actions that provoked them.

25. It is with deep sorrow and with renewed faith in
the primary mission of the United Nations that we
come today to this meeting of the Council.
26. We come with sorrow because the message of the
repeated appeals of both the Secretary-General and
the Council to the parties to show the utmost moderation and restraint in their use of force in the interests
of international peace and security did not elicit the
necessary response from the parties concerned and
because resolution 502 (1982), the operative part of
which was designed to create conditions favourable
to a negotiated settlement of the problem, has to date
not been implemented and has not enabled the parties
to overcome all their differences; sorrow because the
negotiations undertaken
by the Secretary-General
have not yet made it possible to put an end to the
crisis or even to prevent an intensification of the conflict, because today the Falklands/Malvinas
war seems
to have entered a new and critical phase whose consequences no one can yet determine; sorrow because
history has often demonstrated that it is a series of
little incidents that causes major catastrophes and
sorrolw because in this Falklands/Malvinas
affair it is
hard for us not to remember the past, since we have a
vivid impression that we have seen this all before and
the certainty of a repetition of history, as has been
said in another
debate,
.

32. When the time comes for future generations to
justify such actions, no matter what history may
record, the dead cannot be brought back, the damage
cannot be repaired.
33. During another debate in the Council, I had occasion to recall that in the interest of the cause of humanity, particularly
the cause of peace, an imperfect
out-of-court settlement, with a minimum of ambiguity,
is better in some circumstances than a good trial.
34. Clearly we must put an end to the cycle ofviolence
in the world and apply to disputes that give rise to
violence the methods and principles of peaceful settlement and dialogue provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations.
35. Of course, no one can deny that an attack gives
rise to acts of self-defence. But it is equally true that
destruction of any kind, loss of life and property,
infringements of dignity and the resultant damage to
values held dear by individuals and peoples, result in
a buildup of frustration and produce violent reactions.
36. In this particular case, nobody has any interest,
direct or indirect, in freezing the evolution of the situation that existed in the Falkland/Malvinas
Islands
before I April, when vigorous efforts to achieve a
peaceful settlement existed.

27. We took note with satisfaction and, indeed, with
some relief of the assurances given, the day before
yesterday, by my friend and colleague Sir Anthony
Parsons when he said: “it is absolutely inconceivable
that Britain would use nuclear weapons in the dispute
with .Argentina over the Falklands” [2362nd meeting,
pL~fX. 3731. We would expect no less from the United
Kingdom.

37. The spirit of dialogue and peace must replace the
spirit of confrontation. I have said that it is also with
3

antees of sovereignty,
integrity.

renewed faith in the primary missjon of the United
Nations that we are taking part in this debate, because
the peop]es and nations of the world have placed and
are placing great confidence in the Council to find a
solution of crises such as the Present one and because
lhc members of the Council are aware-and this justices this meeting-that the inability of the United
Nations to find an appropriate so]UtiOn
to this crisis
could lead to tragic deve]opments.

independence

and territorial

43. Therefore, the principles of equity and justice
must, in re-balancing the law which was the basis of
the old order and in adapting it to new requirements,
enable us to move towards a new international political and economic order by means of the democratization of international
relations.
44. It is here, we feel, that the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, contained in
General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), and all the
normative work of the United Nations, take on their
importance. While there are various interpretations of
it today, no one can deny that General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, was certainly not designed to confirm situations of conflict, situations that are not within the
perspective of decolonization,
but to redress them.
Thus, in cases such as these, common sense, realism
and fairness must come to the aid of law.

38. The rea] question that Concerns
the rest of us
here Is that of knowing what is the real nleaning Of the
Ma]vjnas/Fa]k]ands war. IS it a matter of law, of
dignity, of honour or of interests? The origins of certain
crisis situations in the world today have therr roots
deep
In time. and also undoubtedly in the conquests
ofthe last century and of centuries past, whereas today
these crises can be resolved only by recourse to Positive international law, even if such positive law has
not yet succeeded in this troubled world in enriching
itself over the years with the experience
and the
genius of many peoples of the world who have not
committed that experience and geniUS t0 Writing.
BUt
that international law is and remains one of the surest
guarantees of the sovereignty. independence, territorial integrity and preservation of the identity of those
who cannot defend themselves alone: the small and
medium-sized nations. Everyone recognizes that the
situations arising from the conquests of the last century
are not necessarily equitable ones, and that is why the
international community, through the United Nations,
has set up rules and procedures to resolve the problems
resulting from such situations.

45. The United Kingdom, a friend of Zaire, has been
scrupulous in acting to decolonize in the world and
those actions will be noted in the annals of mankind.
46. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that its current
problem is not so much having to decolonize at the
other end of the world, but rather seeing its hand forced
militarily by a young third-world nation which turned
to the use of force, prohibited by the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, to resolve aquestion which has been in negotiation for many years in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly; the United Nations itself has noted
those negotiations
with satisfaction and encouraged
them.

39. International law was conceived to govern and
resolve relations among States, and not to crystallize
conflict situations,
40. Thus. to give the impression, rightly or wrongly,
that international law, in certain of its highly honourable principles, could have been drafted to confirm
certain
Situations
arising from crises is not intended
to Placate
those
who believe themselves to have been
deeply hiured. It poses for everyone unending problem
Of interPretatiOn,
which are themselves the
source of conflicts between nations at a time when a]]
of us aspire to Peace. Peace within our nations, peace
within continents, peace between nations and throughOut the world. for Progress, security and the survival
of mankind,

47. Is this a question of national pride? Some might
think so, even understand it.
48. Argentina, a young third-world nation, its power
emerging, a friend of Zaire. wishes and is determined
to renew its ties with its history and to recover lands
over which it lost control over a century and a half
ago. Its emotions are those felt when a lost child
returns to its parents’ house. But is this a question of
law, of sovereignty, of dignity, of honour or of pride?
Some might think it is all of that, no doubt, and even
understand it.

41* In the present state of international relations, and
in the absence of an authority, an international public
Power responsible for sanctioning international ]aw
hat law, it is true, is necessarily imperfect and reflect:
be wor]d’s power struggles,

49. Thus, among so many differences, there are two
points of agreement: first, to save the pride and national
dignity of all parties to the conflict while establishing
conditions for a peaceful settlement of the substantive
problems; and secondly, not to involve the world in a
cycle of violence by uncurbed recourse to the use of
force. We know how conflicts begin, but we do nol
know how they will end.

!. The differences of interpretation given rise to by
‘? situation,
in View
of the clash of State interests,
mse’ves become a source of conflict, But, ] repeat
It this ]aw is for the nations and peoples Who cannot
fend themse1ves alone and is one of the surest guar4

50. That is certainly why the Council adopted resolutiam 502 (1982). That is why the two parties rightly and
publicly declared their acceptance of its terms. That
resolution did not prejudge the substance of the
problem.
51, In my statement on 3 April [235&h meeri/q].
I clearly stated: first, that the invasion and military
occupation of the Falkland/Malvinas
Islands by Argentina, which some have described as a historical mistake, was not likely to create conditions propitious to
a negotiated settlement and ran counter to the principle
of non-recourse to the threat or use of force in international relations; and. secondly, that the adoption of
a resolution by the Council whose terms would prejudge the substance of the dispute would not be conducive to the search for a negotiated settlement either.
52. The delegation of Zaire took note of the formal
assurances given by Argentina that it would join in
negotiations, and of its commitment
to consider with
great open-mindedness the rights and interests of the
inhabitants of the islands as well as the interests and
rights of Great Britain in that region. As a non-aligned
country, we supported and continue to support Argentina’s legitimate claims regarding sovereignty, which
fall into the category of a decolonization problem. But
at the same time we believe that it would be a dangerous precedent, harmful to international relations,
to try to settle by recourse to force a problem on which
negotiations are under way.
53. Accordingly, while lending our support to resolution 502 (1982), we felt obliged to emphasize that for
us the adoption of that resolution would in no way prejudge the substance of the problem and that the demand
for the immediate withdrawal of all Argentine forces
from the islands did not imply and could not imply that
the claims of Argentina over the islands were affected
or rejected by the Council, but that that demand
emerged only from a desire to create conditions
propitious to the negotiated settlement of this problem
and to lead the two friendly parties concerned to the
negotiating table.
54. The time has therefore come for the Council to
take action, on the one hand. to stop the war and, on
the other, to create favourable conditions and to take
effective measures to ensure the implementation
of
its resolution 502 (1982) in the interests of one and
all.
55. The United Nations has vast experience and
resources in this sphere; clearly, the parties could
benefit from that, if they demonstrated good faith and
genuine political will to succeed through negotiations
and if they maintained a sense of proportion in this
matter.
56, The important thing in this matter is found in
Article 25 of the Charter, which stipulates that

“The Members of the United Nations agree to
accept and carry out the decisions of the Security
Council in accordance with the present Charter”,
and in Article 24, paragraph I, which states that
“In order to ensure prompt and effective action
by the United Nations, its Members confer on the
Security Council primary responsibility
for the
maintenance of international
peace and security,
and agree that in carrying out its duties under this
responsibility
the Security Council acts on their
behalf.”
57. In the report he presented to us [2360th mectingl,
the Secretary-General-to
whom we would once again
pay a tribute for his lucidity, his ability and his impa,rtiality-recalls
the six points on which in his view the
parties basically agreed and the four points on which
fundamental differences still seem to exist.
58. The Council should now give a formal mandate
to the Secretary-General to continue his efforts on the
basis of resolution 502 (1982) in order to bring about
agreement on the differences that still remain, and the
Council should call upon the parties concerned to cooperate with the Secretary-General and to demonstrate
both good faith and the political will to arrive at a
negotiated settlement in the true interests of the parties
involved and of international peace and security.
59. It is in that spirit that we would make a friendly
appeal to the two parties to put an end to the war and
the hostilities and to return to the negotiating table to
continue the negotiations that were so well begun
under the auspices of the Secretary-General.
60. The PRESIDENT
(inteqmlution
jkmz ChimsP):
The next speaker is the representative of Kenya,
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
61. Mr. MAINA (Kenya): Mr. President, I wish to
express our thanks to you and to the Council for giving
us this opportunity to address it on the grave matters
now before it. Before I do so, however, I should like
to pay a tribute to you on the way in which you have
conducted the affairs of the Council since you
assumed the presidency at the beginning of the month,
You have brought to the onerous job of President of
the Council your well-demonstrated
wisdom and
dedication to duty, which we trust will contribute
greatly to the solution of the highly explosive and
dangerous problem in the Falkland islands.
62. I wish also to pay a tribute to your predecessor,
Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda, of the friendly Republic
of Zaire, who so ably presided over the work of the
Council during the month of April. He handled many
intractable problems during his presidency with great
dignity and wisdom. Indeed, the steps the Council took
to contain the present problem immediately
when it

arose would have been adequate if those concerned
had acted correctly and wisely in accordance with
their obligations
under the Charter of the United
Nations.

violence and occupation of the rest of the Americas,
from the north to the south. The peopling of the two
continents is the result of colonial history. We do not
have to be lovers of colonialism to say that it is part
of our unfortunate past. Others, including those who
like to rewrite history, claim it to be part of their
national heritage.

63. May I also place on record our admiration of the
Secretary-General,
who has done everything he could
to avert the crisis in the last two weeks. His acceptance
of the challenge after the unsuccessful efforts of the
United States Secretary of State, Mr. Alexander Haig,
showed commendable courage and determination.
We
know the Secretary-General
cancelled long-planned
appointments
in Africa, and in particular in my country, in order to undertake those efforts. We look
forward to the return of normal times and to fulfilment
of those other important commitments.
The international community
is grateful to him for what he has
tried to do in the last two weeks.

69. No Argentine, living or dead, could claim to have
lived under colonial rule over the last one hundred
years. We were born and bred under colonialism,
which we struggled to eliminate. Our own people and
part of our continent are still under the vilest form of
colonialism. Viewed this way, Argentina is engaged in
a pure territorial
claim against the United Kingdom
based on history, in total disregard of the people who
now live on the Falkland Islands. I am not qualified
to state whether or not the claims are valid, but if we
accept that they are, they should not be settled at the
expense of people who now live in the Falkland
Islands. They are paramount, and in our view thei
interests are paramount,
Whatever claims Argentina
may have against the British, based on history and the
imperialism of the past, may be settled without treating
the people of the FalkIand Islands like chattels in real
estate. We have said the same thing before in similar
situations, but it may be invidious to name all the cases
in our records similar to Argentina’s claim.

64. The grave breaches of international
peace and
security in t‘he Falkland Islands have created an
emergency requiring urgent action by the Council.
The problem of the Falkland Islands is not new, but
the breaches of international
peace started by Argentina’s aggression on 2 April are new. There is no need
to recount the history of the two problems, as they
are already well known at the United Nations.
65. In the case of the historical claims of Argentina
regarding the Falkland Islands, the records of the General Assembly debates fully show what those claims
are, and one can make an informed judgement on the
merits or demerits of the claims. On the current crisis
brought about by Argentina’s armed aggression. the
debate of 3 April [L?jUth mcvfiug]
and the current
debate have already provided the facts and opinions
necessary to facilitate the search for a solution to the
problem.

70. If we bend the principle of decolonization
of
peoples to look like the redistribution
of territories,
the United Nations is in real trouble. One has only to
look at any map of one’s choice to see why. We do
not even have to go back 149 years, as in the case of
the Falkland Islands, to realize that any attempt to
redraw the map of the world would lead this planet to
endless war and destruction. This is mainly why the
Charter of the United Nations was framed as it was.

66. Some of those who have spoken here, particularly those who feel obliged to support Argentina right
‘or wrong, have tried to treat these two problems as
one and inseparable.
This view is unjustified
and
unsupportable
by those States Members
of the
United Nations that are friends of both Argentina and
the United Kingdom and, like my own country, Kenya,
who adhere to the Charter of the United Nations.

71. The peaceful settlement of disputes between
nations is a basic undertaking for all members of the
United Nations. This principle has been brushed aside
by our friends in Argentina. No reason has been given
for the sudden change on the part of Argentina on such
a basic principle. which it has been promoting in the
United Nations for many years.

67. May I state once more. to avoid any doubt, that
my country maintains very friendly relations with both
Argentina and the United Kingdom. Nevertheless, our
obligations to the United Nations and our policy of
non-alignment
require us to speak out in the overriding
interests of international
peace and security even if
what we say does not please some of our friends.

72. The most recent instance, which I should like to
quote, in which Argentina took a stand against the use
of force in solving international disputes was the representative of Argentina’s recorded reservation on the
communiquC of the Meeting of the Ministers of Foreign
Affairs and Heads of Delegations of the Non-Aligned
Countries to the thirty-sixth
session of the General
Assembly, held in New York from 25 to 28 September 1981, That reservation reads, in part:

68. A lot has been said on the issue of the, colonization
of the Falkland Islands by the British in the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries. Most of what is said is true
and difficult to dispute. Unfortunately,
it is equally
true of ail South and North America. Nothing said on
the current crisis or the historical claims of Argentina
sets the Falkland Islands apart from the history of

“The Government
of the Argentine Republic reserves its position with regard to expressions of
support for armed struggle as a means of resolving
conflicts or controversies.
It is not considered
acceptable to resort to force, for resorting to force
6

is incompatible
Nations.”

with the Charter

the International Court of Justice. Territories
bought or sold. People cannot be.

of the United

may be

76. The present case is being watched keenly by
many States, big and small. The Charter and the United
Nations itself are on trial. Concerted action is called
for under the Charter to stop this crisis and to prevent
the wrong conclusion from being drawn-that aggression pays.

73. We are entitled to ask what happened between
September 1981 and April 1982, a mere six months, to
transform Argentina from a peace-loving country upholding the principles of the Charter to a violent Member of the United Nations committing naked aggression against its neighbours. Argentina cannot claim
tlhat the support given by the non-aligned countries in
negotiations with the Government of the United Kingdom for the settlement of its claims could be interpreted as support for aggression, The same non-aligned
countries support settlement of similar claims in Latin
America, but that support cannot be invoked as support for military settlement of existing disputes.

77. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinew):
The next speaker .i,s the representative of the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, I invite him to take a
place at the Counciltable and to make his statement.
78. Mr. SRITHIRATH
(Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) (interpretation from French): The delegation of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic wishes
first to express its gratitude to the Council for allowing
it to take part in.the debate on the question of the
Malvinas Islands. At the same time, we wish to take
this opportunity to pay a well-deserved tribute to the
Secretary-General
for his intensive and ceaseless
efforts to bring the parties to the conflict to a peaceful
settlement of the problem.

74. I am referring to these matters, which might
appear to be remote from the urgent problem of
stopping war between two Members of the United
Nations, for one important reason. In a number of
speeches since this debate started, a deliberate campaign of distortion is discernible. The question of possible aggression by Argentina was reported to the
Council by the United Kingdom on 1 April [2345t/z
meeting], when an appeal to Argentina and the United
Kingdom to refrain from the threat or use of force was
issued in the name of the Council by the President. A
similar appeal to Argentina was reported to have been
made by President Reagan of the United States. These
appeals were not heeded, and the aggression against
tlhe Falkland Islands took place the following day. The
Council, on 3 April, adopted resolution 502 (1982),
calling on Argentina to withdraw its invading forces
from the Falkland Islands. Through some perverted
r’easoning, aggression started when the British forces
moved to the Falkland Islands. A lot of play has also
b’een made about colonialism and the decolonization
of the Falkland Islands contrary to the letter and spirit
o’f General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), whose
tlhrust is the granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples, not, as some would have us
blelieve, the settlement of territorial claims. But we
have already emphasized the fact that Argentina,
which is itself a product of colonialism, cannot claim
any right to impose its own form of colonialism on
the people of the Falkland Islands.

79. The bloody colonial aggression of unprecedented
scope launched by the United Kingdom against Argentina, a non-aligned country of Latin America, has
clearly demonstrated the extent to which the British
Government has striven to revive colonialism, which
has already had its day, because in 1960 the General
Assembly by an overwhelming
majority adopted
resolution 1.514 (XV), which expressly proclaims the
absolute necessity to eliminate once and for all colonialism in all its forms and manifestations. It is not
surprising today to note that it is the very people
who fiercely objected to the adoption of that famous
resolution who are guilty of this aggression and of
complicity in this criminal act against Argentina. This
anachronistic war, perpetrated by an extra-continental
colonial Power to prevent the legitimate reintegration
within the national sovereignty of Argentina of a part
of its territory subjected for centuries to foreign
occupation, represents an expression of total disdain
for the broad consensus expressed by major international bodies, including the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. It is therefore clear that the United Kingdom has chosen armed force to perpetuate its colonial
domination and despoliation of these islands, That
choice of violence has unfortunately taken the form of
bloody attacks by the British fleet against Argentina.
The scope of those attacks and the loss of human life
they have entailed have aroused profound amazement
and indignation throughout the world.

75. An effort has also been made to create a division
between the people who live in this hemisphere on
the basis of their origins. God knows their origins are
in all continents and countries. It is a very backward
philosophy,
and must be rejected by the United
Nations. Indeed, the issue, shorn of all the emotionalism that has been imported into the debate, is
whether the Organization can condone aggression by
one of its Members. Argentina has committed aggression and has defied the call of the Council to wihhdraw its forces from the Falkland Islands and to return
t’o the negotiating table with the Government of the
TJnited Kingdom in pursuit of its claims. Whethet
these claims are real or imaginary can be decided in

80. If the United Kingdom has been able to unleash
a large-scale aggression against Argentina, which is
almost 14,000 kilometres away from its coasts, that is
because it has benefited from the formal and active
support of the Government of the United States. That
Government, which constantly repeats that it is the
7

profound gratitude to the Secretary-General,
who has
spared no effort to halt the crisis and who continues
to do so.

sincere friend of the peoples of Latin America, did
not for an instant hesitate to give arms to Great Britain
to kill Latin Americans, or to betray its regional agreements by aligning itself with Great Britain, its principal
ally, against Argentina. The mediation mission of the
United States Secretary of State, Mr. Alexander
Haig, was doomed to failure precisely because of its
policy of applying a double standard.

86. When our world finds itself in trouble, as in the
present world situation, it is a great comfort, Mr. President, to find a grandfather of world civilization
as
captain of the ship, and we sincerely hope you will
bring us safely into port. The FaIkIands/Malvinas
crisis will indeed require both of you and of the Council the wisdom and judgement of Solomon, as it seems
that a good case is being presented by each Member
party to the crisis, even the silent Member.

81, If ever the question of Gibralter were to be on
the agenda, we should have no doubt about the position that the Government of the United States would
take in that regard. It would certainly sacrifice its
second-class ally for the benefit of its first-class ally.
That is the nature of American imperialism.
That is
the way-and the only way-that the United States will
conduct its foreign policy. We should not be surprised
at this turn-about on the part of the imperialists when
their vital interests are threatened.

87. My delegation has therefore asked to speak,
because we see, in what appears to be a no-win, nolose situation, that a matter of national honour is deeply
involved, and we therefore see this as a case where
preservation of the national honour of each party is
paramount and must be satisfactorily handled, however delicate or painful that exercise will be. Whether
one is large or small, strong or weak, rich or poor,
one’s honour must be defended, whether with
missiles or with bows and arrows.

82. The Lao people, like all the peoples of Asia,
Africa and Latin America that have attained national
independence by armed struggle against colonialism
and imperialism, know perfectly well the cost of war
and of peace. That is why the military escalation so
resolutely carried out by Great Britain has aroused
my Government’s grave concern about the incalculable effects ‘it could have on peace and security in
the region and the world. Accordingly, it has launched
an appeal, contained in the statement by the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs of 12 May, which reads as follows:

88. Accordingly,
when my Government
became
aware of the growing escalation of the Falklandsl
Malvinas crisis, it made its position known in letters
addressed to both Argentina and the United Kingdom on 5 May, indicating its deep concern and its
desire that the crisis be handled within the rule of law.
The conflict continues to cause all States Members of
the United Nations discomfort,
as we witness two
Christian and friendly Member States laying aside all
their Christian values and principles and resorting to
the use of force to settle an issue that could have been
settled in a bloodless manner.

“The Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic
vigorously
condemns the threatening and aggressive acts of the
British Government,
supported
by the United
States of America, and demands that it immediately
cease its military operations in the Malvinas, respect the independence and sovereignty
of the
Argentine Republic and settle this question peacefully” [S/lSOSS, nfz/lex].

89. The world has shrunk to one small neighbourhood because of modern technology and advances in
communications
and transportation, thereby removing
all barriers of distance and time. That achievement
makes us all not only our brothers’ keepers, but
neighbours as well, and the slightest noise or quarrel
in the neighbourhood
immediately
raises concern and
alarm, so that we must rush to see whether we cannot
bring peace to the quarreling neighbours.

83. In that spirit, my delegation believes that the
continuing good offices of the Secretary-General,
with
a view to ordering an immediate cease-fire, would be
beneficial to the two parties to the conflict and to
peace in the region.
84. The PRESIDENT (interp~ctntio/a~,orn
Chinese):
The next speaker is the representative
of Liberia.
I invite her to take a place at the Council table and to
make her statement.

90. My delegation, however, is optimistic that in the
long run all parties to the FalklandslMalvinas
crisis
will stand to gain from the islands. For the immediate
restoration of peace and return to the rule of law, a
carefully balanced timetable should be arranged on 8
short-, medium and long-term basis. Utilizing
this
formula, we appeal to the friendly nations of Argentina
and the United Kingdom to use the collective wisdom
of the world, which is at present at their disposal in the
Council, to seek to obtain justice and peace in the
current crisis.

85. Mrs. JONES (Liberia): Liberia, a smatl, peaceful,
non-aligned nation, considers the Falklands/Malvinas
crisis to be regrettable indeed. The delegation of
Liberia is therefore pleased to see you, Sir, presiding
over the work of the Council during its current session
on the grave and delicate situation
in the Falkland/
Malvinas Islands. We also extend our appreciation to
your predecessor, the representative of Zaire, for his
contribution to solving the crisis. The world also owes

91. My delegation further requests that the mandate
of the Secretary-General
be renewed to enable him to
8

continue peaceful negotiation in the FalklandslMalvinas crisis, without any pre-conditions, for the solution
of the problems at hand and the implementation
of
Council resolution 502 (1982). in keeping with the
principle of the Charter of the United Nations that
force should not be used by Member States to solve
disputes. The two nations are bound by the Charter
and their membership in the United Nations family
not to use force. It would appear that the United
States is being accused of having committed an act of
polygamy with Argentina and the United Kingdom.
Therefore, it should continue its peace efforts, to
balance its love in a delicate manner so as to determine
who is the head wife and who is the beloved wife.
I am sure the African members of the Council can give
it some useful and kindly advice on a matter in which
Africa is not lacking in experience and does quite
well with a minimum of conflict.
92. With every passing day of the escalation of the
crisis and the human and material losses, the world
becomes poorer, and the poor nations see destroyed
in a m;atter of hours valuable resources that could be
used for their development.
So many potential
doctoris, engineers, lawyers, so many hospitals, telephones and schools and thousands of miles of road
networks are lost.
93. We also observe that the islands of the world are
in danger and that present trends point to the escalation of this danger around the globe in the years
immediately ahead. We further note that the twentieth
century is fast dying, and yet the ghosts of the cavedwellers haunt us still. Crises such as the Falklandsl
Malvinas crisis attest to the ability or inability of
twentieth-century
men to behave like human beings
with a tradition of more than 6,000 years of civilization
and committed to the rule of law.
94. Finally, we regret the improper reference made
yesterday [2363rd n7reti~gl
to female glands, but we
have no regret that those very female glands nearly
500 years ago brought into existence what we now call
the New World on the two American continents,
representing today an expression of man’s eternal
quest for freedom and justice,

the problems of substance concerning the dispute over
the Malvinas/Falkland
Islands.
97. Although my country is very far from the centre
of this crisis, my delegation felt compelled to intervene
in the debate because this conflict involves loss of
lives and also because the events which have developed in recent weeks with regard to this dispute are
related closely to the very basic provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, to respect for which
my country is deeply sensitive.
Needless to say, I am referring to the principle
of non-use of force, which has been flagrantly violated
by the sad events in the South Atlantic area. I am also
referring, with particular emphasis, to the views
expressed by many delegations before the Council,
which my Government completely shares, namely,
that all forces should be withdrawn as soon as possible
and that a provisional United Nations administration
should be installed in order to facilitate the conduct of
meaningful negotiations. Without a final withdrawal
of forces, it seems to us inconceivable indeed to have
meaningful, fair and free negotiations between the
parties. Nobody can negotiate freely and in fairness
any international dispute under the pressure of military
presence. On no occasion should a military invasion
be condoned.
98.

99. It should be stressed, in this context, that my Government is not taking any position with regard to the
substance of the matter. In this respect, the General
Assembly has adopted well-known resolutions which
could serve as guidelines in the search for a final settlement. As for the modalities, we cannot think of better
guidance than Council resolution 502 (1982) and the
ideas set forth in the report, excellent for its objectivity, clarity and wisdom, that the Secretary-General
presented to the Council on 21 May [2.36&h meeti~7gl.

95. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtion Jhm Chinese):
The next speaker is the representative of Greece.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

100. We sincerely hope that the Council will be able
to help the parties in settling their differences. It is
imperative for the cause of peace that the Council
succeed in its efforts. The world needs a Security Council with enhanced prestige. The Council’s prestige will
be strengthened only if it firmly and consistently continues to follow the pattern of unequivocal condemnation of all invasions and breaches of the fundamental
provisions of the Charter.

96. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece): Mr. President, I wish
to thank you for acceding to my request and inviting
me to participate in this debate. I should like at the
outset to express the satisfaction of my Government
at the fact that a person with your skill and wisdom
is presiding over the deliberations of the Council,
I fervently hope that under your guidance the Council will be able to achieve a successful settlement
which will restore peace and will permit the opening
of negotiations between the parties for the solution of

101. In concluding my statement, I should like, in all
candour, to express the highest esteem of my Government for the untiring and wise efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, whose many rare qualities, being brought to
bear in the highest international office, constitute a
guarantee of the best possible efforts for ensuring
respect for the Charter and the pursuance of the
cause of peace. We hope that the Council will entrust
the Secretary-General with a new mandate to facilitate
his highly delicate mission.

conferences of heads of State or foreign ministers of
the non-aligned countries have also adopted resolutions on more than one occasion clearly supporting
Argentina’s claim to sovereignty over the Malvinas
Islands and calling on both sides to accelerate the
process of negotiations,

102. The PRESIDENT
(iu~ferp~~fcrlion j’OJ71
ChiIT~~~L~):I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as representative of CHINA.

103. The Secretary-General’s efforts to mediate in
the dispute between the United Kingdom and Argentina have failed to achieve the desired result. British
troops have now landed on the Malvinas Islands. The
armed conflict is rapidly escalating and there is a
danger of its continued expansion. The Chinese delegation deeply deplores this turn of events, which not
only has heightened tension in the South Atlantic
region, but is also gravely threatening international
peace and security.

108. The Chinese Government
and people have
always firmly supported the struggle of the nations of
the third world to safeguard their sovereignty and
territorial
integrity.
The national aspiration of the
Argentine people to safeguard their sovereign right
is understandable.
In our view, the Council should
respect the recent decisions of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries [SCP SllSOOJ
crnc! S//.5048] and of the Twentieth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Organization of American
States (S//.5008] and support
Argentina’s claim to sovereignty over the Malvinas
Islands.

104. For two weeks the Secretary-General
undertook the difficult task of mediation to seek a peaceful
settlement of the dispute with the support of the Council and of the entire international community,
The
Chinese delegation takes this opportunity
to pay a
high tribute to him in appreciatian of the- enormous
efforts he has made. It is regrettable that negotiations
can go no further because of the gap between the positions of the two parties, and particularly because the
party with superior military strength has taken a tough
stand.

109. Any escalation of the military conflict between
the United Kingdom and Argentina not only gravely
threatens peace and security in the South Atlantic
region, but is also against the interests of the peoples
of both countries. WC believe that, given good will
and such mutual concessions as are necessary on the
part of both sides. they can achieve through peaceful
negotiations a fair and reasonable settlement of this
dispute.

105. We appeal once again to the United Kingdom
and Argentina to cease their military actions immediately and resume negotiations in order to seek a
peaceful settlement of their dispute,

110. The first imperative now is to halt the hostilities
as to create the conditions for the resumption of
negotiations.
We hope that the Secretary-General
will continue to use his influence and play an active
role in this matter. The Council, on its part, should
continue to render him full support and co-operation
in this endeavour.

106. The question of the Malvinas Islands is essentially a legacy of colonialism. The dispute between
Argentina and Britain over the ownership of the Malvinas has lasted one and a half centuries, They have
been engaged in protracted negotiations since the end
of the Second World War.

SO

107. The United Nations has adopted resolutions
relevant to the decolonization of these islands. The

Litho

in United

N:ltim\.

Now

York

00x10

XX-6098Y-October

1989~-3.050
