III.

Having in mind the objectives of the World Disarmament
Campaign, solemnly launched by the General Assembly at
its twelfth special session, 3 which is intehded to promote
public interest in, and support for, reaching agreements on
measures of arms limitation and disarmament,
Recalling further paragraph 93 (c) of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,4 the
first special session devoted to disarmament, in which it is
provided that the Secretary-General shall periodically sub­
mit reports to the Assembly on the economic and social
consequences of the armaments race and its extremely harm­
ful effects on world peace and security,
Considering that the elaboration of such reports should
be viewed as a measure aimed at building confidence among
States.
1. Welcomes with satisfaction the updated report of the
Secretary-General on the economic and social consequences
of the arms race and of military expenditures; 5
2. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General and to
the Group of Consultant Experts on the Economic and Social
Consequences of the Arms Race and of Military Expendi­
tures, as well as to the Governments and international or­
ganizations that have rendered assistance in updating the
report;
3. Recommends that the conclusions of the updated re­
port should be brought to the attention of public opinion
and also taken into account in future action by the United
Nations in the field of disarmament;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make the neces­
sary arrangements for the reproduction of the report as a
United Nations publication5 and to give it publicity in the
framework of the World Disarmament Campaign, taking
also into account the views expressed on the report by Mem­
ber States not later than 1 March 1983;
5. Recommends that all Governments should ensure the
widest possible distribution of the report, including, where
appropriate, its translation into the respective national
languages;
6. Invites the specialized agencies as well as intergov­
ernmental, national and non-governmental organizations to
use their facilities to make the report widely known;
7. Reaffirms its decision to keep the item entitled ''Eco­
nomic and social consequences of the armaments race and
its extremely harmful effects on world peace and security"
under constant review, and decides to include it in the pro­
visional agenda of its fortieth session.
98th plenary meeting
9 December 1982

Implementation of General Assembly resolution
36/83 concerning the signature and ratification
of Additional Protocol I of the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin Amer­
ica (Treaty of Tlatelolco)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967,

3262 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, 3473 (XXX) of
11 December 1975, 32/76 of 12 December 1977, S-10/2 of
30 June 1978, 33/58 of 14 December 1978, 34/71 of
'Ibid., document A/S-12/32, annex V.
4

5

53

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Resolution S-10/2.
A/37/386. The report was subsequently issued with the title Economic

and Social Consequences of the Arms Race and of Military Expenditures

(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.83.IX.2).

11 December 1979, 351143 of 12 December 1980 and 36/83
of 9 December 1981 concerning the signature and ratifi­
cation of Additional Protocol I of the Treaty for the Pro­
hibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of
Tlatelolco),6
Taking into account that within the zone of application
of that Treaty, to which twenty-two sovereign States are
already parties, there are some territories which, in spite of
not being sovereign political entities, are nevertheless in a
position to receive the benefits deriving from the Treaty
through its Additional Protocol I, to which the States that
de Jure or de facto are internationally responsible for those
territories may become parties,
Recalling that the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
United States of America became parties to Additional Pro­
tocol I in 1969, 1971 and 1981, respectively,
1. Regrets that the signature of Additional Protocol I
by France, which took place on 2 March 1979, has not yet
been followed by the corresponding ratification, notwith­
standing the time already elapsed and the pressing invita­
tions which the General Assembly has addressed to it;
2. Urges France not to delay any further such ratifi­
cation, which has been requested so many times;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session an item entitled "Implementation of
General Assembly resolution 37/71 concerning the signature
and ratification of Additional Protocol I of the Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty
of Tlatelolco)''.
98th plenary meeting
9 December I 982

37n2. Cessation of all test explosions of nuclear weapons
The General Assembly.
Bearing in mind that the complete cessation of nuclear­

weapon tests, which has been examined for more than twenty­
five years and on which the General Assembly has adopted
more than forty resolutions, is a basic objective of the United
Nations in the sphere of disarmament, to the attainment of
which it has repeatedly assigned the highest priority,
Stressing that on seven different occasions it has con­
demned such tests in the strongest terms and that, since
1974, it has stated its conviction that the continuance of
nuclear-weapon testing will intensify the arms race, thus
increasing the danger of nuclear war,
Reiterating the assertion made in several previous reso­
lutions that, whatever may be the differences on the question
of verification, there is no valid reason for delaying the
conclusion of an agreement on a comprehensive test ban,
Recalling that since 1972 the Secretary-General has de­
clared that all the technical and scientific aspects of the
problem have been so fully explored that only a political
decision is now necessary in order to achieve final agree­
ment, that when the existing means of verification are taken
into account it is difficult to understand further delay in
achieving agreement on an underground test ban, and that
the potential risks of continuing underground nuclear-weapon
tests would far outweigh any possible risks from ending
such tests,
Recalling also that the Secretary-General, in his foreword
to the report entitled "Comprehensive nuclear-test ban", 7
submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session
6
7

United Nations. Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068, p. 326.
N35/257.
